For example, an operating room nurse assigned to a forward surgical team in Iraq had an unexpected medical situation and was evacuated out of theater. It was critical that this personnel requirement be filled in a timely manner. Theater officials requested a replacement, but the individual identified as a replacement could not deploy for at least 30 days. Task Force Task Force recognized the high priority need for a forward medical team to have an operating rooms nurse. The team was able to fill the position in a matter of days. Task Force 1st Medical Brigade identified an operating room nurse that it could borrow from another unit in theater until the replacement arrived. After the replacement nurse arrived in theater, the nurse on loan returned to the unit the individual came from. Personnel gaps that occur in theater cannot always be prevented and when gaps do occur, theater commanders assess the risk associated with the gap and decide on an appropriate course of action. Cross-leveling in particular requires the assessment of Cross-Leveling in particularly requires the Assessment of Backfilling involves the identification and deployment of medical personnel into theater from the United States or elsewhere. Cross-leveling involves deploying medical personnel who were not originally scheduled to deploy overseas at that time. For example, a dentist assigned to a brigade combat team in southern Iraq was evacuated out of theater for medical reasons. Given the backlog of needed dental work, commanders expressed concern about losing a dentist. In response, Army Forces Command initiated an effort to identify and deploy medical personnel from the U.S. and elsewhere. Cross-leveling involves the temporary relocation of personnel from one unit in theater to another. It is often used as an interim measure to minimize risk when a gap in medical personnel coverage occurs. For example, an operating room nurse assigned to a forward unit may not be able to perform her duties. DOD officials told us that selecting and deploying an active component medical provider to backfill a position typically takes about 45 days. The Army Forces Command initiated an effort to identify another dentist not in Iraq who was eligible to deploy to fill this need. Cross-leveling can present risk to medical operations in theater, especially when conducted on a recurring basis. Army officials told us that they are willing to accept some risks in order to mitigate other risks they believe are higher. "We recognize that risk cannot be eliminated; it can only be managed," said 1st Medical Brigade commander, Lt. Gen. James C. "Jim" Ritchie. "Cross- leveling in particular requires the assessment of risk associated with the personnel gap and the gap that would be created" The 9l5th Forward Surgical Team was authorized to deploy to Iraq in September 2009 with three general surgeons. Instead, it deployed with only one surgeon for the first 90-day rotation. The Army Reserve identified a doctor to fill one of the two vacancies; however this individual could not deploy due to an inability to be credentialed as a general surgeon. As a result of the personnel gaps, Task Force Task Force is trying to retain medical personnel.medical personnel and help retain them—has presented some challenges for the Army. As a result of the personnel gaps, Task Force 1st Medical Brigade temporarily relocated medical personnel already in theater from other medical units. Army data show the magnitude of these unfilled gaps or late arrivals for the reserve components ranged from about 3 percent to 7 percent from January 2008 to July 2010. About 4 percent of mobilized troops were missing medical personnel, Army data showed. The 915th Forward Surgical Team was temporarily relocated so it could meet its mission. The team was based at the Walter Reed Army Medical Center. About 4 percent of mobilized Army reserve component 90-day medical rotators did not deploy to theater or arrive in theater on time for 2008. In 2009, that figure reached 7 percent (38 medical providers out of 519) and through the first 6 months of 2010, this figure was over 3 percent. Unfilled reserve component personnel requirements can have serious consequences depending on the needed medical specialty. Medical commanders in theater typically cross-level to fill short-term temporary personnel gaps, although medical officials in needs arose. It can take 120 to 180 days to identify, notify, and then mobilize an Army reservist to fill an unfilled requirement. The Army’s 90-day rotation policy is intended to ease the financial burden of deploying reserve medical personnel and help retain them. It can be challenging to fill the gap before the start of the next 90- day rotation. To mitigate other risks they believe are higher, the Army is taking steps to mitigate the risk of injury or death to reservists. DOD has established five levels of medical care to treat injured or sick military personnel. Each level provides progressively more intensive treatment. Level 3 facilities provide significant preventative and curative health care. Level 4 – Overseas definitive care provides the full range of preventative, curative, and preventative care for wounded soldiers and sailors. Service at the end of July 2010. Service in Iraq and Afghanistan began in 2003. Service is in Iraq, Afghanistan, and the United States. Service ends in December 2010. distances to better save lives. Splitting medical units, such as level 3 combat support hospitals and level 2 forward surgical teams, in order to locate them in more areas increases the opportunities to provide advanced emergency care quicker and could save more lives. DOD has stated that by providing advanced life-saving emergency medical care quicker, generally within 60 minutes of injury, survival rates increase significantly. In fact, the number of surgical sites has increased due to the emphasis on providing troops access to surgical care within 60 Minutes of being injured. 2 illustrates the different levels of medical care that may be provided to U.S. servicemembers who become ill or injured while in theater. Level 1 – First responder care. Care can be provided by the wounded soldiers, medics or corpsmen, or battalion aid stations. Level 2 – Forward resuscitative care. This level provides advanced emergency medical treatment as close to the point of injury as possible to attain stabilization of the patient. In addition, it can provide treatment of common acute minor illnesses. Level 4 provides the full range of preventative, curative, acute, convalescent, restorative and rehabilitative care. An example of a level 4 facility is Landstuhl Regional Medical Center in Germany. Level 5 – U.S. definitive care. This level provides the same level of care as alevel 4 facility, but most typically is located in the continental United States. Examples include Walter Reed Army Medical. Center in Washington, D.C.; National Naval Medical Center. in Bethesda, Maryland. Not all patients progress through all five levels of care. Joint and service definitions for each level of care vary marginally. For purposes of this report, we focused primarily on level 2 and level 3 facilities and their personnel. The U.S. command structure in Iraq and Afghanistan has evolved over time. In 2009, the designation of level 2 was established. The designation was changed to level 3 in 2011. The level 2 facilities provide the most comprehensive and advanced medical care in Iraq, the report says. and the degree to which current practice of splitting medical units has filtered into medical doctrine has been limited. Army planners have adjusted medical personnel requirements for forward surgical teams to account for changes in these smaller nonstandard medical unit reconfigurations. The Army would benefit by fully updating the organization of medical units concerning their size, composition and use, as applicable, to incorporate current practice, the authors say. They note that the Army continues to capture lessons learned and input from the commanders, and we noted in our report the Army Medical Department Center and School has updated its forward surgical team field manual. Officials with the Task Force 1st Medical Brigade told us that they were concerned about outdated policies, guidance, doctrine, and field manuals related to the determination of medical personnel requirements. The medical brigade’s report also went on to note that personnel with these smaller combat support hospitals are spread so thinly that when personnel take leave or are evacuated out of theater due to injury, the medical brigade has to make difficult decisions on where to find needed personnel to mitigate coverage gaps. As such, they now have to continuously use what is referred to as specialized personnel documents to manage staffing rather than staff. Report, the Task Force 1st Medical Brigade—the medical unit that provided oversight over medical units in Iraq before being replaced by Task Force 807th Medical Brigade. Report: The organization for combat support hospitals, including the list of needed medical specialties, should be redesigned to reflect the actual use of combat support hospital across multiple locations. Officials with the U.S. Forces-Iraq Surgeon Office told us in a separate interview that medical doctrine, specifically that of the Army, is not to be changed. The Army has not fully incorporated these current practices into Army doctrine and organizational documents. Army could benefit from incorporating its lessons learned, where appropriate, and be better assured the current practice of splitting medical units does not lead to unnecessary staffing challenges. When medical personnel gaps unexpectedly arise in Iraq or Afghanistan, Army units are better able to achieve their goal of providing advanced emergency medical care within 60 minutes of injury to increase survival rates. The Army maintains a lessons learned program to update Army doctrine to enhance the Army’s preparedness to conduct current and future operations. 60 minutes of injury, survival rates increase significantly. Studies show that for those severely injured or wounded, 90 percent do not survive if advanced medical care is not provided within 60 minutes. Medical officials in Iraq acknowledged that Army doctrine and the organizational design of medical units were top issues. For example, in a December 2009 Mid-Tour Report, the Task Force 1st Medical Brigade—the medical unit that treats the wounded in Iraq— acknowledged that it needed to be updated to better reflect the current practice of splitting medical units. told us in a separate interview that medical doctrine, specifically the organizational design for both personnel and equipment, should be assessed and updated. These officials said that the splitting of combat support hospitals and forward surgical teams has gained acceptance over time but should be examined given how counterinsurgency doctrine is implemented in Iraq. Officials with the Surgeon Office in Iraq said that flexibility in the doctrine is critical, but that doctrine needs to reflect the realities of operations on the ground and the degree to which current practice of splitting medical teams is accepted. Army doctrine, which is the starting point for defining and planning a unit’s capabilities, has not been updated fully to reflect these changes in theater. Army theater commanders have reconfigured the composition of field hospitals and forward surgical teams by breaking them down into smaller stand-alone units. By being in more geographical areas, these critical life-saving medical units are better able to achieve their goal of providing advanced emergency medical care.areas to save lives. For example, as of December guidance could have if there were a sizeable increase in the number of DOD deployed civilians. DOD has also had to adjust the number and mix of medical personnel in those units as well. Army medical officials have been developing specialized personnel documents to staff these medical units. The process is difficult and it came about because current doctrine and organizational design were not sufficient to address the capabilities needed for splitting medical units such as combat support hospitals and area support medical companies. Although the Armymedical officials we spoke with said that they believe splitting and reconfiguring units in theater is necessary and helps to increase survival rates. As of December 2009 the Task Force 28th Combat Support Hospital in Iraq was split to be at three separate sites in Iraq. Theater medical commanders split these units because they found that the field hospital’s standard design configuration was no longer suitable for the model of care that has evolved in Iraq, which requires access to more advanced medical care. Splitting medical units, such as the U.S. Army's Medical Corps, can help save lives by providing care over a wider geographical area. their size, composition and use, as applicable, to incorporate current practices of splitting and reconfiguring deployed medical units in theater. DOD also provided technical comments that we incorporated as appropriate. We are sending copies of this report to the Secretary of Defense and appropriate DOD organizations. In addition, this report will be available at no charge on the GAO’s Web site at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staffs have any questions about this report, please contact me at (202) 512-3604. DOD used the emergent force management process extensively to meet requirements through requests for forces. Requests for forces are generated by combatant commanders and submitted to the Joint Staff for validation, and then to the joint and service force providers to identify potential sourcing solutions. While emergent requirements are not known in advance, requirements are prioritized according to a force allocation decision model. In sourcing requests through theEmergent process, requirements were prioritized based on the force allocation model. The emergent process was used to meet the needs of U.S. military units that were not known to be in existence in advance. to a force allocation decision model. emergent requirements are considered within the model’s general framework. Each request for forces is individually evaluated as it is received, meaning that officials focus on whether or not forces are ready and available to fill the request. As part of providing and evaluating potential solutions, the services’ force providers often conduct risk assessments to provide information on the availability and readiness of both active and reserve forces. The Global Force Management Boards for rotational requirements consider the relative priority of the request, as is done at the Global Force management boards. its requirements, including those for medical personnel and units. For the rotational force management process, requirements are identified 2 years in advance. In both Iraq and Afghanistan, medical. personnel and unit requirements are included in the Global Force Management Allocation Plan. The plan provides an approach for U.S. Central Command, the services, and the services’ force providers to manage the sourcing of. rotational requirements, such as the Balad Theater Hospital in Iraq or a combat support hospital in Afghanistan. facilitated through Global Force Management Boards, which are typically held on a quarterly basis. The product of these Global Force management boards is the Global Forcemanagement Allocation Plan, a document that is approved by the Secretary of Defense. The plan lays out known requirements, review and endorse sourcing recommendations and associated risk and risk mitigation options, and then to prioritize and meet the requirements as appropriate. It authorizes force allocations, and the plan is the product of a quarterly meeting of general officers from interested parties. organizations and offices we contacted, see table 1. We conducted this performance audit from August 2009 through January 2011 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. The Department of Defense (DOD) uses its Global Force Management process to meet its requirements, including those for medical personnel and units. For more information, visit the Defense Department’s website at: http://www.dod.mil/. DOD directive and theater guidance differ with regard to their eligibility for routine medical care. Theater guidance for Iraq and Afghanistan states that DOD civilians are eligible for emergency care but most routine care for them is subject to availability. Medical officials in Afghanistan told us that they provide routine care to U.S. federal civilians on a space-available basis, and that they would not turn away any person with injuries that presented a danger to life. The previous version of DOD Directive 1404.10 indicated civilians designated as emergency essential employees would be eligible for care at the same scope provided to military personnel. It is unclear what level of care deployed DOD civilian employees can expect in theater. A DOD directive governing medical care for DOD deployed civilians is inconsistent with in-theater guidance. DOD relies on its own deployed civilians to carry out or support a range of essential missions. With each new mission, the need for new civilian skills has resulted in an increase in the number of deployed civilians and that these civilians are in need of medical care. In response to congressional interest, DOD reviewed the department’s existing policies for medical care and reported to Congress. any person with injuries that presented a danger to life, limb, or eyesight, regardless of the employment status of an individual. This issue has received continuing congressional interest. For example, in April 2008 the House Armed Services Committee issued a report on deploying federal civilians and addressed the medical care provided to them when they are wounded, ill, or injured while in a war zone. Furthermore, DOD’s report to Congress on deployed DOD civilians stated that the department believes it is imperative that each federal civilian understands where, when, and how they can receive medical care. The extent of routine medical care available to DOD deployed civilians is unclear due to inconsistent guidance. Theater commanders in Iraq and Afghanistan are providing quicker access to advanced emergency medical care by placing more medical units in more geographical areas to save lives. Inconsistent guidance could potentially impact the medical personnel requirements planning process if medical officials in theater are uncertain about deployed DOD civilian employees’ access to routine care. The Army official agreed that if there is an inconsistency between departmental guidance and theater guidance, it should be examined. at the same level and scope provided to military personnel. In addition, we found that the theater guidance document for care in Afghanistan provided additional guidance that is inconsistent with both the DOD directive and with guidance provided elsewhere in the document. One section of the guidance stated routine care for all civilians was to be provided subject to availability. The other section said routine care would be provided for deployed DOD civilians in accordance with a previous issuance of DOD guidance. We found that this guidance was inconsistent with the previous DOD directive. With each new mission, the need for new civilian skills have resulted in an increase in the number of deployed civilians. These civilians are not immune to the dangers associated with contingency operations. Although we did not learn of any deployed DOD civilians being turned away from receiving routine care in theater during the time of our review, officials in theater said it could be a concern. Theater medical officials would assess the impact of any increase on the planning process for determining medical personnel requirements. However, if theater officials concluded that they needed more medical personnel due to increases in numbers of DOD deployed civilians, we recognize that. the medical needs of deployed civilians are being met. DOD agreed that the Commander of U.S. Central Command should revise its guidance to clarify the level of care that deployed civilians should receive. Theater operational and medical officials determine how many and the types of medical personnel needed to support operations in Iraq and Afghanistan through an ongoing assessment. DOD has continued to assess its need for medical personnel in theater based on the requirements of the mission and a variety of medical data and has made adjustments to meet specific theater needs. medical care given different potential scenarios and the associated risks. This ongoing assessment takes place in theater and allows theater officials to identify new medical personnel requirements. Further, theater operational and medical officials also consider operational limitations when developing their medical personnel requirement. These limitations include the limit on the total number of forces in theater, and shortages of and high demand for certain medical personnel. In determining the number of military medical personnel and the medical specialties needed, theater officials begin by evaluating various mission planning factors, including the mission planning factor. theater, medical officials analyze data from the Joint Theater Trauma Registry, the Joint Medical Work Station, and service and joint data on disease and non-battle injuries. Officials use this information to increase or decrease the number of medical personnel in line with demand for medical services. For example, DOD medical officials conducted an analysis to determine the need for cardiovascular specialists in Iraq and Afghanistan based on the volume of cardiovascular-related medical evacuations in theater. Officials also analyze gaps and risks in the medical care structure under different possible scenarios. medical care to the increased number of U.S. military personnel in theater, including a theater hospital and a preventative medicine unit. During the offensive in Bastion, Afghanistan, officials relocated some mental health providers in Afghanistan to Bastion for the duration of the heightened operational tempo. To further assess the need for specific types of medical specialists in a given unit and across the theater, medical officials analyze data from the Joint Theater Trauma Trauma database. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. information on the availability and readiness of both active and reserve forces. Risk assessments include violations of the services’ rotation policies regarding the required time at home for servicemembers. In addition, each of the Services maintains a list of specialties that are in high demand relative to available personnel. All of theServices identified critical care nurse, physician assistant, psychiatry, and clinical psychology as high-demand specialties. The U.S. military has a long history of hiring women and minorities. the processes attempt to distribute the burden of deployments within and across medical specialties. To comply with service guidelines, such as required time at home for servicemembers, to maintain a healthy inventory of medical specialists. The processes also attempt to comply with Service Guidelines, including those for critical care nurses, orthopedic surgeons, and psychiatrists. The process also attempts to distribute burden of deployed medical specialists across and across specialties (e.g., critical care Nurses, Orthopedic Surgeons, Psychiatrists) its Global Force Management process. Once the Secretary of Defense designates a service to meet a medical requirement, that service identifies and selects units and personnel to fill the requirement. Medical officials in theater continually assess the number and the types of military medical personnel they need to support ongoing contingency operations in the theater. More information on the Global Force management process and the services’ personnel filling processes can be found in appendix II. The process was designed to provide insight into the availability of U.S. military forces to deploy. physician assistant, psychiatry, and clinical psychology as high-demand specialties. The services use unique yet similar processes to identify and select medical units and personnel to fill requirements for Iraq and Afghanistan. Each service’s medical personnel processes allow for the deployment of medical personnel from fixed military treatment facilities to support contingency operations. In addition, the processes attempt to distribute the burden of deployments within the services to help ease the burden on the armed forces in Iraq andAfghanistan. The processes for filling requirements all result in a unit and its personnel deploying to an operational theater to carry out a mission. benefit from integrating these lessons systematically into Army doctrine and the design of medical units. Updating doctrine and organizational design of these split medical units used in theater could help to assure that these units will be resourced with the needed number and mix of medical personnel. To better understand the extent to which deployed DOD civilian employees have access to needed medical care, as appropriate, we recommend that the Secretary of Defense direct the Combatant Commander of U.S. Central Command to clarify the level of care. response to a draft of this report, DOD generally concurred with our findings and recommendations. DOD noted that there is an unquestionable need to formally update doctrinal publications. The department also noted that the Army continues to capture lessons learned and input from commanders to ensure use of medical personnel meets requirements. We recognize that the army continues to captured lessons learned, input and lessons learned to ensure that medical personnel are used to the best of their ability, the report says. The report concludes with a recommendation that DOD clarify the level of care that deployed DOD civilian employees can expect in theater. military medical personnel in Iraq and Afghanistan to support ongoing operations. We analyzed DOD and service policies and processes that govern the determination of medical personnel requirements. We compared a current DOD directive regarding medical care for DOD civilian employees and theater-level guidance regarding medical Care for U.S. federal civilians. We interviewed officials, including officials with the medical task forces and Surgeons’ offices in Iraq, Afghanistan about the current use and composition of medical units in theater. For the third objective, we reviewed the approaches used by Army theater medical commanders to meet medical Personnel requirements when gaps in needed personnel coverage occurred. GAO examined the Department of Defense’s efforts to identify and fill its military medical personnel requirements in support of operations in Iraq and Afghanistan. We interviewed officials with the Joint Staff, U.S. Joint Forces Command, and the military services’ force providers. We obtained information on DOD’S Global Force Management process and how the services identify medical units and personnel to fill these requirements. We assessed the reliability of the data by interviewing the agency official responsible for collecting and summarizing the data. The theater commanding general can submit a request for forces through DOD’s Global Force Management process. Two Army sustainment brigades deployed to Afghanistan with their authorized medical personnel but did not have enough medical personnel to provide full support to their convoys and forward locations. In response, Task Force 62nd Medical Command in Afghanistan requested additional forces for these two brigades. Officials told us that DOD met this requirement by deploying 22 Air Force medics to Afghanistan. Medical officials in Iraq and Afghanistan said they must consider two operational limitations which affect how many medical personnel they formally request. Commanding generals of U.S. Forces-Iraq and United States Forces-Afghanistan are advised by a lead surgeon on medical policy and procedures. Each theater also has a medical task force that consist of professional staff members who coordinate care in theater. The theater surgeon and medical task forces command mostly Army medical facilities. For example, the Air Force operates a theater hospital in Balad, Iraq but coordinates closely with the task force medical brigade in Iraq. The positions of United States forces- Afghanistan Surgeon and the commander of the task Force medical command in Afghanistan are filled by the same individual. determine if the request for additional medical forces takes precedence over the need for other types of personnel already in theater. If so, they decide which personnel will redeploy out of theater to stay within the authorized force cap. High demand for medical personnel in certain specialties also plays a role in decisions about whether to request medical forces. For example, officials in Iraq determined that 16 additional veterinary food inspectors were needed for food safety inspections. But they did not formally initiate that request due to the current shortage of these specialists. Gaps in medical capabilities can occur when medical providers do not deploy as expected for reasons such as resignation. Medical personnel gaps can also occur when individual medical personnel need to leave the unit. According to medical officials in theater, when these gaps occur, Army commanders use two approaches to fill those gaps. The Army is using two approaches in Iraq and Afghanistan to fill medical personnel gaps, officials say. The military is also using a combination of approaches in Afghanistan and Iraq to fill gaps in medical personnel. The cap on the total number of U.S. forces allowed in Iraq and Afghanistan requires theater commanders to balance the number of medical personnel they request. For instance, officials in Afghanistan told us that when they initiate requests for additional personnel, the requesting unit is asked to offset the increase in forces on a one-to-one basis within the unit. An increase of about 800 to 1500 civilians would have to occur before they would consider revising military medical personnel requirements, an Army official said. U.S. Central Command requested additional medical personnel to provide medical care to the increased number of military personnel in Afghanistan. Officials said that this information allows them to determine the level and structure of medical care they expect to need to support missions throughout the theater of operations. For example, in planning for the increase of U.s. forces in Afghanistan beginning in early 2010, officials with the U.S.-led coalition requested extra medical personnel. For more information, go to: http://www.centralcommons.us. About 4,000 medical personnel were in Iraq and about 6,000 were in Afghanistan at the end of July 2010. The United States’ military presence in Iraq is scheduled to end no later than December 31, 2011. As of September 2010, about 104,000 U.S. military personnel were deployed in Afghanistan, according to administration estimates. Figure 1 shows the breakdown of all military medical personnel inIraq and Afghanistan by service at the start of July. The DOD has established a database of medical personnel by service.