As of February 2016, U.S. government assistance was reaching 4 million people inside Syria per month. USAID provides funds to UN organizations and also works through nongovernmental organizations (NGO) While State works through three main partners—two UN Organizations and one public international organization. The United States provided more than a quarter of the total international funding for the 2015 Syria humanitarian response. Since 2013, the United States has consistently led global funding efforts for the Syrian conflict. The top ten international donors to this effort in 2015. According to the UN, the number of people in need of humanitarian assistance inside Syria has risen steadily since 2012. U.S. funding obligated for humanitarian assistance for people affected by the conflict in Syria began in fiscal year 2012 and totaled just over $5 billion, as of February 2016. Food, shelter, nonfood items, health and nutrition, and water, sanitation and hygiene are among the main types of assistance provided inside Syria. The U.N. estimates that more than 4.8 million people have fled as refugees to neighboring countries. Administrative procedures put in place by the Syrian government have delayed or limited the delivery of humanitarian assistance. According to the UNSG reports, international NGOs face restrictions, limiting their ability to partner with national humanitarian organizations, open suboffices, conduct missions, join interagency convoys, and undertake independent needs assessments. One organization told us that the Syriangovernment has effectively prohibited it from undertaking more permanent activities for displaced persons inside Syria, such as renovating and repairing community centers and other buildings. In early 2016 State reported that since the beginning of 2015, the Syrian Government had received 113 requests from the UN to deliver humanitarian aid, of which 13 had been approved. The increasingly violent and widespread Syrian conflict has hindered effective delivery of humanitarian assistance. Humanitarian assistance is routinely prevented or delayed from reaching its intended target due to shifting conflict lines, attacks on aid facilities and workers, and other factors related to active conflict. The years of Secretary General (UNSG) reports on the humanitarian situation in Syria from March 2014, when the reports began, through December 2015, to categorize and summarize observations contained in the reports. The reports, which are submitted to the Security Council pursuant to Resolution 2139 (2014), provide information. The report will be available at no charge on the GAO website at http://www.gao.gov. Contact points for our Offices of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of this report. GAO staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix IV. You asked us to review U.S. efforts to provide humanitarian assistance to individuals affected by the conflict in Syria. In this report we examine humanitarian assistance provided by the United States. USAID says its NGO implementing partners rarely utilize cross- line deliveries. Financial oversight in humanitarian assistance programs includes managing program funds. Management is responsible for developing the detailed policies, procedures, and practices to fit the entity’s operations. Effective delivery of U.S. humanitarian assistance to people inside Syria is complicated by three related factors—a dangerous operating environment, access issues, and remote management of programs. issues, such as increasing the opportunity for fraud and losses due to theft and diversion. The UN reported that in 2015, only 10 percent of all requests for UN inter-agency convoys to hard-to-reach and besieged areas were approved and delivered. In addition, according to implementing partner officials based in Damascus, even when these convoys were approved, the officials participating in delivering the assistance were sometimes subjected to hours-long delays, stretching into the middle of the night. State's and USAID’s implementing partners also told us that they rarely operate inside ISIS controlled areas. The UN cannot ensure that they will be able to operate within the humanitarian principles of humanity, impartiality, neutrality, and operational independence. The UN reports contain multiple instances of ISIS blocking humanitarian and commercial access into and through areas under its control. For example, in November 2015, the UN reported that ISIS controlled and blocked humanitarian access to a stretch of highway leading to the western parts of Aleppo city. Due to restrictions, USAID and State staff were unable to deliver assistance to over 220,000 people. The years of conflict have led to shifting areas of control as armed groups claim and lose territory. In late May 2015, for example, after ISIS took over the city of Palmyra, it reportedly seized the Syrian Arab Red Crescent warehouse, which contained food assistance for 35,000 people. According to USAID officials, this represented the largest loss USAID has experienced delivering aid inside Syria. In addition, the proliferation of armed actors has made the conflict extremely complex, according to one NGO based in Amman and operating in Syria. By 2015, USAID had awarded roughly $50 million to an international NGO to deliver emergency food items to beneficiaries in southern Syria. Officials randomly select parcels for inspection to verify the quantity and quality of the contents. USAID awarded about $16 million in fiscal year 2015 to deliver medical supplies and equipment to support health-related infrastructure, such as clinics, among other types of aid and services. In Jordan, we visited their warehouse and observed officials randomly select items for inspection. of the types of controls implemented. The U.S. government closed its embassy in Damascus in 2012 due to security conditions and the safety of personnel. The inability to access Syria limits the visibility that staff have over the provision of humanitarian assistance. USAID officials noted, for instance, that unlike humanitarian responses conducted in other countries, including those in conflict situations like Afghanistan or Iraq, USAID staff are unable to provide assistance in Syria. Over 220,000 people have been affected by the violence in Syria, including more than 20,000 children. The resumption of active conflict in several governorates has hindered the effective delivery of humanitarian assistance. State's and USAID’s implementing partners contend with the multitude of actors as well as shifting conflict lines. In general, implementing partners operating out of neighboring countries, mainly Jordan and Turkey, cross the border into Syria to deliver assistance into opposition controlled areas. All UNSG reports from 2014 and 2015 include descriptions of indiscriminate aerial bombardment by government forces and indiscriminate shelling by armed opposition groups. Humanitarian workers inside Syria must work within the insecure operating environment, affecting their ability to carry out. Response Teams manage humanitarian programs for Syria in partnership with UN agencies, international NGOs, and national organizations. Humanitarian assistance operations on the ground inside Syria are heavily influenced by the ongoing conflict. The conflict began in March 2011 when demonstrations turned into protests against the government of Bashar al-Assad. Over the past 5 years, the conflict has grown more complex as the number of participating armed actors has proliferated; they now include the Syrian government, non-state opposition groups, the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS), and the al-Nusrah Front. addition, a number of other countries, including Russia, Saudi Arabia, and Iran, have strategic interests in Syria. In February 2016, the United States and Russia brokered a cessation of hostilities, excluding ISIS and the al-Nusrah Front. According to the UN, the reduction in violence allowed for increased humanitarian assistance deliveries to hard-to-reach and besieged locations in Syria during the months of March and April 2016. However, according to State and USAID, persistent armed conflict and aerial attacks, including attacks on medical facilities, continue to. Aid facilities are often indirectly impacted or directly targeted, leading to widespread damage. There are frequent instances of gunfire, car bombs, barrel bombs, rocket strikes, and mortar attacks near aid facilities. In one instance, an air strike hit the Syrian Arab Red Crescent offices in Idlib, destroying ambulances and vehicles. The UN reported that, as a result of the violence, many aid workers are missing or detained humanitarian workers; and injury or death of humanitarian workers. In addition, aid workers have been forced to leave their homes. destroying ambulances and vehicles. The UN reported that, as a result, the capacity of the Red Crescent to provide first aid services in the city was curtailed. Medical facilities have also been attacked (see figure 7). Physicians for Human Rights reported that as of November 2015, there had been 336 attacks on 240 separate medical facilities and 697 medical personnel killed inside Syria. In addition, as of the April 2016 UNSG Report, a total of 87 humanitarian workers have been killed in Syria in the conflict. The ongoing conflict in Syria has created a serious humanitarian challenge. Syrians, as well as Palestinian and Iraqi refugees residing in Syria, have become increasingly vulnerable due to high levels of violence and insecurity. As of May 2016, the UN reported that more than 4.8 million Syrians had fled the country and registered as refugees, 6.5 million people were internally displaced, and 13.5million people inside Syria were in need of humanitarian assistance. In addition, millions of people remain trapped in besieged and other hard-to-reach areas of the country where delivery of aid is difficult. As of May 2016, the UN reported that 4.6 million people inside Syria are located in hard-to-reach areas. More than 500,000 of those remain besieged by ISIS, the government of Syria, or non-State armed opposition groups. Parties to the conflict heavily restrict or deny humanitarian access to besieged areas, and people risk infectious disease, malnutrition, poor sanitation, and lack of medical care. The UN estimated that the lives of roughly 42,000 people remained besieged by government forces in the towns of Madaya and Buqayn. contains guidelines for field monitors to document their assessment of the project at the completion of a site visit. However, it lacks specific guidelines to identify potential fraud risks during site visits. For example, the guidelines in the monitoring plan instruct field monitor to use color-coded indicators. While fraud is mentioned with the indicator, it is presented as one of several examples of highly concerning findings to document, and could potentially be a fraud risk. For more information, visit www.projectmonitoring.com. of highly concerning findings to document, and could potentially be overlooked by the field monitor. Additionally, the templates created by the third party monitoring organization to document site visits instruct monitors to verify the presence or absence of supplies, and the quality of them. For example, templates related to water and sanitation projects instructed field monitors to verification that water was delivered to a location, and that water quality tests had been conducted, when applicable. However, the template lacks specific indicators to alert field monitor to collect information on and identify potential potential problems. We agree that the field monitors do not audit the program, but they provide a crucial on the ground presence in areas unavailable to U.S. government employees. We are sending copies of this report to appropriate congressional committees, the Secretary of State, the Administrator of USAID, and other interested parties. In addition, the report will be available at auditing function or investigate allegations of fraud, but noted that USAID could work with the third party monitor to ensure that its field monitors are trained in methods to identify fraud risks. The monitoring plan and site visit templates do not contain specific guidance on how to recognize fraud. Field monitors have not received the USAID OIG fraud awareness training. Leading practices in fraud risk management suggest evaluating outcomes using a risk-based approach and adapting activities to improve fraud risk Management. The monitoring plan associated with the contract contains guidelines for field monitors to document their assessment of their assessment. This includes using the results to improve prevention, detection, and response, USAID officials said in a statement. alert field monitors to collect information on and identify potential fraud. The monitoring plan contains a training curriculum for field monitors, which has several objectives designed to familiarize them with the protocols, procedures, and instruments used for data collection and reporting. However, the curriculum lacks specific courses for recognizing potential or actual instances of fraud that may occur on site. USAID officials told us that the field monitors supporting the third party will be trained to spot potential fraud and report it to the appropriate authorities, such as the U.S. government. Four ongoing investigations of allegations of fraud and mismanagement related to programs for delivering humanitarian assistance to people inside Syria. Two of the investigations involve allegations of procurement fraud, bribery, and product substitution in USAID funded humanitarian cross-border programs related to procurements of non-food items. In May 2016, USAID OIG reported the identification of bid-rigging and multiple bribery and kickback schemes related to contracts to deliver humanitarian aid in Syria, investigations of which resulted in the suspension of 14 entities and individuals. situations like Afghanistan or Iraq, USAID staff are unable to visit project sites in Syria and speak with program beneficiaries. USAID officials in the region explained to us that while partners provide data and information, their inability to consistently access project sites limited the extent to which partners could obtain and verify progress. Past audit work has shown challenges to such an approach, past audit work shows challenges to this approach, says the report. But USAID risks such as fraud, theft, diversion, and loss can be mitigated, it says. measures to mitigate risks and operate in a hazardous environment such as Syria. USAID officials in the region maintain regular contact with partners, attend monthly meetings with them, conduct random spot checks of aid packages at warehouse facilities. They also receive quarterly reports from partners to monitor progress before submitting them to USAID headquarters for additional review. The agency also noted that it has implemented an informal biweekly reporting system for all partners to provide reports notifying USAID of any problems with the aid effort in Syria. October 2015, USAID’s OFDA hired a third party monitoring organization to review its projects in Syria. By February 2016, field monitors had conducted site visits and submitted monitoring reports to USAID. The monitoring plan and site visit templates do not from July 2015 to July 2016 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards, the report says. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives, according to the report. The report concludes that USAID should provide field monitors with training to identify potential fraud risks.  USAID may be missing an opportunity to assist in its activities to mitigate fraud risks and design appropriate controls. The ongoing conflict in Syria has created a risks and implementing appropriate controls is elevated. USAID noted that its third party monitoring in Syria is not intended to serve an auditing function or investigate allegations of fraud. In the absence of such activities, fraudulent practices may go unnoticed or take longer to detect. In addition, State and USAid may not have visibility into areas of has in place with its implementing partners. U.S. humanitarian assistance programs in Syria have experienced instances of fraud. Without documented risk assessments, implementing partners may not have all of the information needed to design appropriate controls to mitigate fraud risks. Neither USAID nor State requires implementing partners which resulted in the suspension of 14 entities and individuals involved with aid programs from Turkey. Despite these controls, the inability of some partners to consistently access areas in Syria and directly monitor programs has created challenges for oversight, the authors say. The authors conclude that opportunities to assess and mitigate the potential impact of fraud risks remain. Field monitors in Syria are trained on assessing and identifying potential fraud risks. Instruct the third party monitoring organization monitoring OFDA programs in Syria to modify the site visit forms to include specific guidance for documenting incidents of potential fraud. Include in its voluntary.oversight activities, for example, using information from assessments to ensure that control activities for programs are. designed to mitigate identified risks. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. USAID does not have Syria-specific policies and guidance regarding risk assessments related to fraud. USAID OIG received 47 complaints reporting waste, fraud, and abuse in USAID programs related to the crises in Syria and Iraq. Although most of the implementing partners in our sample did not conduct assessments of the risk of fraud, there are elevated risks for fraud in U.S. funded humanitarian assistance projects for people inside Syria. According to USAID officials, USAID has also implemented a process for documenting risks associated with programs in Syria. Past audit work has shown challenges to such an approach, including cases of partners not fully implementing monitoring practices, resulting in limited project accountability. USAID Office of Inspector General (OIG) has reported that assistance projects implemented in developing countries are at significant risk of fraud, waste, and abuse. Those risks are multiplied when projects unfold during a disaster or military contingency, the OIG said. The USAID OIG has noted that aid organizations providing life-saving assistance in Syria and the surrounding region face an extremely high-risk environment. The ongoing conflict in Syria has created a complex humanitarian emergency. Neither USAID nor State requires implementing partners to conduct comprehensive risk assessments for humanitarian assistance to people inside Syria. USAID Administrator should update guidance to require non-governmental organizations to conduct risk assessments addressing the risk of fraud. Use risk assessments submitted by partners to inform USAID oversight activities, for example, using information from assessments to ensure in Syria. The U.S. has taken a leading role in providing humanitarian aid to alleviate the suffering of individuals inside Syria who are affected by the conflict. the results of our review of funding instruments cannot be generalized to the entire list, they present a mix of instrument dollar values, implementing partners and their locations. Using these funding instruments, as well as the Standards for Internal Control in the Federal Government and the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (COSO) internal control framework, we analyzed relevant documents from each of the organizations related to risk assessment. We also requested and reviewed risk assessments related to delivery of assistance to people inside Syria. State and USAID do not require implementing partners to conduct comprehensive risk assessments for humanitarian assistance delivered to people inside Syria. While most partners assessed safety and security risks associated with such programs, most did not assess financial risks, such as the risk of fraud. In the absence of such a requirement, USAID drafts memoranda highlighting potential risks for material support to terrorist groups and identifies the mitigation strategies implementing partners will use to reduce those risks. The absence of adequate internal controls can jeopardize the integrity of these relief efforts and deny critical aid to those in need. assistance programs to people inside Syria to assess certain types of risk. USAID’s Office of Food for Peace (FFP) and Office of U.S. Foreign Disaster Assistance (OFDA) require some implementing partners to create a Safety and Security Plan. All of the implementing partners in our sample have policies, procedures, or guidance related to conducting risk assessment for their programs to provide humanitarian assistance into Syria, including safety and security. State has agreements with its implementing partners, called enhanced monitoring plans, asking them to provide information on current conditions. funding instruments, as well as the Standards for Internal Control in the Federal Government and the COSO internal control framework. To determine the extent to which U.S. agencies are overseeing the activities of implementing partners, we interviewed officials from State and USAID in Washington, D.C. and Amman, Jordan. We also reviewed USAID’s contract with the third party monitoring organization, and supporting documentation, such as the monitoring plan, site visit template, and a complete monitoring report for February 2016. complete monitoring report for February 2016. We interviewed officials from State, and USAID in Washington, DC. We also conducted site visits to warehouses in Jordan maintained by two of the implementing partners. We conducted this performance audit from July 2015 to July 2016 in accordance with Generally Accepted Accounting Standards for Food and Drugs (GASF) for food production and storage. We met with officials from. State, USAID, and implementing partner organizations in Amman, Jordan; and conducted telephone interviews with officials. from USAID and. implementing partner Organizations in Ankara and Antakya. We interviewed officials from State (Population, Refugees, and Migration), and USAID (the Office of U.S. Foreign Disaster Assistance and Food for Peace), in Washington, D.C. We also interviewed USAID and implementing partner officials based in Antakya and Ankara, Turkey. To determine the extent to which State, USAID, and their partners have assessed risks to the programs, we selected a nongeneralizable sample of 12 fiscal year 2015 State andUSAID funding instruments. The Southern Syria Assistance Platform and the Syria Transition Assistance Response Team coordinate between themselves and with other State and USAID representatives. The teams are based in the U.S. embassy in Jordan and 3 other locations in Turkey. State officials, USAID Disaster Assistance Response Teams manage humanitarian programs for Syria in partnership with other regional and international entities. For more information, go to: http://www.samaritans.org/syrian-humanitarian-assistance-programs-and-coordination. types of aid and services. State and USAID have taken steps to oversee partner programs delivering humanitarian assistance inside Syria. State officials in the region conduct quarterly meetings with partners and collect information on programmatic objectives and on partner programs. State also has enhanced monitoring plans in place with its implementing partners to augment quarterly reporting with information on risks of risks of humanitarian aid. In Jordan, we visited their warehouse where supplies were received, checked for quality, affixed with quick response (QR) codes, and packaged. intended destinations. According to one of the partners, the shift of liability to the transporter has limited the instances of diversion, although we did not confirm this. Partners also implemented controls to mitigate fraud risks during the distribution process. For example, partners developed criteria for identifying and selecting eligible beneficiaries, and compiled this information into beneficiary lists to assist the process. Examples of people meeting selection criteria included internally displaced people, people with disabilities, and female heads of household. In addition, partners mentioned working with local councils to develop beneficiary lists. lists. Staff crosschecked the names of beneficiaries on the list with identification provided by the beneficiary, and then relayed that information to the partner’s field office in Jordan for verification. Officials added that this method for verifying beneficiaries was an ongoing process, as the lists sometimes changed due to the movement of people. Two implementing partners that we visited in Jordan, who delivered food and medical supplies, among other types of assistance in southern Syria, provide examples of the types of controls implemented. Emergency food items. fleeing to safety. Partners in our sample had also implemented controls to mitigate risks of fraud and loss within their operations. However, the majority of these efforts were not informed by a risk assessment. Four of the nine partners conducted cross-border delivery operations from neighboring countries such as Turkey or Jordan and procured goods in the host country or the region and warehoused them prior to transport into Syria. Officials from two implementing partners we interviewed in Amman stated that they conducted spot checks of assistance packages in warehouses to confirm the quantity of the contents. packages in warehouses to confirm the quantity of the contents and ensure that the quality of the items complied with the terms of the contract. According to another implementing partner, officials from its organization visit the vendor warehouses before signing contracts to verify that U.S. government commodity safety and quality assurance guidelines are met. partners used documentation such as packing slips and waybills to verify the contents of shipments. Once parcels arrived at warehouses in Syria, partners we interviewed stated that staff used technology, such as geotagged photographs, to document the arrival and contents of the shipment. implemented controls to account for safety and security risks to their personnel and beneficiaries receiving assistance in Syria. For example, some implementing partners identified aerial targeting of humanitarian aid workers and beneficiaries at distribution points as a major vulnerability. Another partner with field sites in Damascus identified the risk of ambush as a vulnerability and provided its drivers with instructions on taking evasive actions and fleeing to safety. Partners in our sample had also implemented controls to mitigate this risk such as distributing goods to beneficiaries on overcast days and making door to door deliveries of aid packages. to document the arrival and contents of the shipment. The partners stated that the lack of visibility over the assistance while in transit in Syria, and managing the projects remotely from Jordan, were risks to their operations and therefore required mitigating actions. Some partners shifted liability to the transporter and only paid for parcels that were delivered to the intended destinations. According to one of the partners, the shift reduced the risk of loss due to theft by the Syrian Army or armed opposition groups at checkpoints by 50 percent. partners to augment quarterly reporting with information on risks of diversion of assistance. State officials also told us that they ask partners to notify them upon discovering incidents of diversion. For example, one implementing partner provided frequent updates to State on losses it sustained from its transporters until the issue was resolved. Similarly, USAID officials provided information on several measures taken to oversee programs implemented by partners. for example, officials screen proposals from prospective partners to identify those that have appropriate measures to mitigate risks and operate in a hazardous environment. of State take the following action: Include in its voluntary contribution agreements with implementing partners a requirement that the partner conduct risk assessments addressing the risk of fraud. We provided a draft of this report to State and the USAID for review and comment. State and USAID provided written comments that are reproduced in appendix II and appendix III. In its written comments on our report, State concurred with our recommendation. State noted risk assessment initiatives that it has in place with its implementing partners, and indicated that. the partner to internal controls, including risk management. State officials noted that the framework agreement for one of its implementing partners is updated every two years. According to State, the basis of State’s funding arrangements is that partner organizations should follow their own internal requirements for risk assessments. However, the voluntary contribution agreements between State and these implementing partners do not reference the framework agreements or require comprehensive risk assessments, officials said. Moreover, acknowledging the need for additional risk management, State acknowledged that it may need to make changes to its funding arrangements. to provide humanitarian assistance into Syria, including safety and security checklists, risk registers, and other tools for conducting various types of risk assessments. Nearly all of implementing partners in our sample (seven of nine) have policies, procedures or guidance specifically aimed at assessing risks of fraud. Most of the implementing partners have conducted formal risk assessments for at least one type of risk, and several maintain risk registers that assess a wide variety of risks. One partner based in Damascus has a risk register which, according to the partner, assesses 28 different risks. FFP updated its program guidance in March 2015 to state that partners applying to conduct cash transfer and voucher-based food assistance programs should include in their applications an assessment of the risk of fraud or diversion. According to USAID, this represents a requirement that cashTransfer and vouchers-based programs conduct a fraud risk assessment. But it does not apply to all types of food assistance or to assistance provided through OFDA. In the absence of a requirement for all implementing partners to conduct comprehensive risk assessments, effective fraud risk management involves fully considering the specific fraud risks the agency or program faces. Risk assessment is essential for ensuring that partners design appropriate and effective control activities. Control activities to mitigate the risk of fraud should be directly connected to the fraud risk assessments. Over time, managers may adjust the control activities if they determine that the risk has been mitigated. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org for details. theft and diversion. Standards for Internal Control in the Federal Government provides the overall framework for establishing and maintaining internal control in the federal programs. The Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (COSO) has issued an internal control framework that, according to COSO, has gained broad acceptance and is widely used around the world. Both frameworks include the five components of internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities, information and communication, and monitoring. Internal control generally serves as a first line of defense in safeguarding assets, such as food and nonfood items. CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery. Visit CNN.com/Travel each week for a new gallery of snapshots from around the world. Visit iReport.com for more travel snapshots from the world of travel and the U.S. East Coast for a weekly gallery of photos from across the globe. Follow us on Twitter @CNNTravel and @cnnireport for weekly snapshots of the world around us. For more travel news, visit CNN.co/Travel.