Baghdad owed Moscow $7-$8billion for Soviet-era arms sales during the Iran-Iraq War. Adjusted for inflation, this debt may total $10-12 billiontoday. Russian oil companies have contracts that could beworth as much as $30 billion over 20 years to develop Iraqi oil fields. In addition, Russian firms have contractsworth billions to helpmodernize Iraq's economic infrastructure. In the 1990s, Russia regularly took Iraq's side in U.N. debates over liftingsanctions. assessment. Russia's economic interests in Iraq will receive due consideration. However, Iraq owes money to manycountries. Its debtto Russia ought not be put in a special category in preference to all others. U.S. oil companies, among others,have been shut out ofIraq for years. Why should Russian firms be guaranteed a special privileged place in post-Saddam Iraq, possiblyat the expense ofU.S.-based firms? Contrary to persistent Russian belief, the United States does not control the price of oil. firms have contractsworth billions to helpmodernize Iraq's economic infrastructure. In August 2002, Iraq announced that Russian firms would receivecontracts worth $40billion over 5 years. Another Russian interest is the price of oil. In 2000,Russia's oil exports earned $25.3 billion. The price ofoil peaked near $40per barrel ($/bbl) in early March 2003. Russia profits greatly from high oil prices, the biggest single factor behindRussian economicgrowth today. But Russian leaders don't want to see the country lose its oil wealth. reassessed its Iraq policy. Iraq's announcement (August 16, 2002) of the $40 billion agreement for Russian firms to modernize Iraq'sinfrastructure may have been an attempt to ensure Russian political support. However, in December 2002, Iraqi authorities cancelled a $3.7billion contract with Lukoil, Russia's largest oil company to develop the huge West Qurna oil. (5) These discussions werereported in the Russian and U.S. press and undoubtedly were detected in Baghdad. Most discussions of Russian interests in Iraq focus on economic factors. Moscow has cultivated friendly relations with Baghdad since the 1960s. U.S.R. was Saddam's main arms supplier during Iraq's 1980-1988 war with Iran. Russia stillperceives itself ashaving strategic interests and an historic role in that region and does not want to be seen as betraying a long-timefriend. Back to Mail Online home. Backto the page you came from. Back To The page you come from. largest oil company to develop the huge West Qurna oil field. Many analysts viewed this asretaliation againstLukoil, whose CEO, Vagit Alekperov, reportedly held discussions with U.S. Energy Secretary Spencer Abraham. Moscow can also be seen trying to balance its interest in preserving a major role for itself in a multi-polar world in cooperation withFrance, Germany, and China, on one hand, against its desire to avoid conflict with the United States on an issueWashington views as vital. Russian leaders fear that a post-Saddam Iraq mightmaximize its oil output, dramatically driving down the price of oil. A sharper price drop, below $18/bbl, would severely impact Moscow's ability to pay salaries and pensions and to fund its already meagersocial expenditures. With a Duma (lower legislative chamber) election in December 2003 and Putin expected to seek reelection in March 2004, such adevelopment could be in jeopardy. Some analysts estimated that a $6/ bbl fall couldcut Russia's projected economic growth in 2003 in half. as the majority of the national security establishment were hostile to the prospect of a U.S.war in Iraq. Over90% of Russians also strongly opposed the war. Putin may feel that he cannot appear completely to ignore the opinions of hisgenerals and diplomats, the political establishment, and the voters. By early April, the demonstration - yet again - of America's unrivaled military capability must have been very disturbing to manyRussians, especially in view of Moscow's miserable experiences in Chechnya. Russia may have an interest inprinciple in opposing "unilateral" U.S. military action in Iraq. Putin does not seek to project Russia into theforefront of ananti-American coalition. He seeks, in cooperation with traditional U.s. allies France and Germany as well as withRussian partnerssuch as China. Against Russia's economic interests in Iraq and its interest in restraining American global domination, is the strategic decision Putinmade in 2001 to reorient Russia. The decision to change the way Russia sees the world was made in 2001. domination, is the strategic decision Putinmade in 2001 to reorient Russian foreign and defense policy toward broad cooperation with the United States. Putin sees Russia'seconomic reconstruction and revitalization proceeding from its integration in the global economic system dominated by the advancedindustrial democracies. Putin therefore shifted Russian national security policy toward integration with the Westand cooperation withthe United States in 2003. Most observers believe thisremains the basis of Putin's nationalSecurity policy. By February 2003, Russian experts concluded that war in Iraq was virtually inevitable and Russia began. Many observers believe that Russian policy is also motivated by a desire to restrain U.S. global domination. The idea of a multi-polar world not totallydominated by asingle "hyper-power" still has strong appeal in Russia. Although Putin hasadopted a generally cooperative stance toward the United States, he does not want to be perceived at home as anAmerican "vassal"nor to give the Bush Administration a free pass on its foreign policy. (2) Such adevelopment is dreaded in the Kremlin and Putin is expected to seek reelection in March 2004. Russian public opinion overwhelminglyopposed whatmost Russians saw as U.S. aggression. There were large anti-war rallies in major cities and spontaneousmanifestations ofanti-Americanism. InRussia, however,the Kremlin exercises very strong influence over the media, especially TV. "There is something slightly alarming in Russia's new, more hard-line stance toward the United States over Iraq," observed the Moscow Times editorial page on February 27. "President Vladimir Putin changed the tone ... when hewarned of the dangers of U.s.and British warmongering," the paper said. the military to be ready to defend Russia's interests. Then ... Russia, whichhad beenstraddling both sides, jumped firmly into the French and German camp." Moscow's shift suggests two questions: why the more hard-line stance toward U.S. policy on Iraq; and has Putin irrevocably "jumpedinto the French or German camp"? There are probably multiple factors behind Putin's more hard line stance toward the United States. There is Russia's interest inpromoting a "multi-polar world" and bolstering the stature and authority of the U.N. vis-a-vis the United states. 6, the Senate unanimously approved the Strategic Offensive Reductions Treaty. On March 10, SenLugar introduced a bill ( S. 580 ) to exempt Russia from the provisions of the Jackson-Vanik amendment. None of thesemoves are directly related to Iraq, except perhaps in their timing. U.S. Ambassador to Russia Alexander Vershbow reportedly toldRussian reporters on March 12 that a Russian veto of the U.s.-backed Security Council resolution on Iraq woulddamage bilateralrelations. domestically popularopposition to theUnited States against the costs of incurring the enmity of the Bush Administration. The two presidents spoke by telephone on March 18 and reportedly agreed that despitedifferences on Iraq,bilateral cooperation on other issues would be increased. On March 20, Putin criticized the U.S. attack as a"political blunder" thatcould jeopardize the international security system. Other Russian officials emphasized theimportance ofminimizing the damage in bilateral relations. 20,also said thatU.S.-Russian tension over Iraq would soon pass. The Russian Duma postponed action on the Strategic OffensiveReductions Treaty,citing the Iraq conflict. Several legislative leaders close to Putin, however, criticized this action as against Russianinterests andpredicted Russian approval of the treaty soon. (18), 20, also said that U.S-Russian tensions over Iraq will soon pass, and that the Russian government would approve the treaty in the near future. that war in Iraq was virtually inevitable and Russia began evacuating its citizens. Although Russia opposed U.S. military action, it hoped to prevent this disagreement from damaging broaderbilateral relations. On March 12, Deputy Foreign Minister Georgi Mamedov said that if war erupts, Russia "will cooperate with the UnitedStates for anearly resolution" of the conflict. "We will strive to minimize negative effects and bring the situation back topolitical and diplomaticarenas," he said. (4) interfere with thedomestic affairs of any country in order to change its regime. (15) On March10, Foreign Minister Ivanov declared that if the U.S.-backed resolutionauthorizing war was submitted to the UNSC, Russia would vote against it. Putin called the attack "a big mistake," "unjustified," and insistedthat military action be ended quickly. Russian media, like that in many other European countries, took a generallynegative attitudetoward coalition military action. and the spaceprogram as areasthat could be adversely affected by a Russian veto of the resolution. In February 2003, Putin traveled to Berlin and Parisand joined French President Chirac and German Chancellor Schroeder in a joint declaration. On March 2, Putin rejected regime change as a legitimate goal in Iraq. "[T]he international community cannot interfere with thedomestic affairs of any country in order to order to go to war," he said. He also said that Russia, France, and Germany were determined to work together to complete disarmament in Iraqpeacefully. was demonstrated in the negotiations leading up the U.N. Security Council's (UNSC)approval of Resolution1441 (November 8, 2002), in which France took the lead in pressing the United States for concessions. Many observers believed that the conclusion of Putin's balancing act would be a deal with Washington whereby Russia would agreenot to use its UNSC veto in return for U.S. guarantees of Russian economic interests in Iraq. A Russian parliamentary leader close to Putin suggested such a deal in October 2002. Premier and now leader of a liberalpolitical party, wrote that, "If the Americans and British can reassure Moscow that a future Iraqi regime will not beprejudicial toRussian economic interests, they will be better placed to secure its acquiescence" Putin sent his chief of staff, Aleksandr Voloshin,to Washington (February 24-25, 2003), where he met with the President, Secretary of State, and National Security Advisor. TheRussian press reported his trip as, "an attempt to seal concrete economic deals in return for Russia's support orabstention on theSecurity Council" U.S. sources made a similar assessment. Russian belief, the United States does not control the price of oil and cannotguarantee specificprice levels. U.S. officials reportedly suggested an informal "gentleman's agreement" to respect Russian economic interests in Iraq. (10) Russiawanted concrete, unequivocal guarantees. On February 28, 2003, the State Department designated three Chechen groups with alleged links to Al Qaeda as terroristorganizations. On March 6, the Senate unanimously approved the Strategic Offensive Reductions Treaty.