The FCC was required, within 180 days of enactment, to establish a voluntary code of "Subscriber Protection Practices" The code would govern changes in a subscriber's telephone exchange and/or toll services. Failure to comply with or withdrawal from the voluntary code would result in a carrier being subject to FCC regulation. H.R. 3888 also detailed specific, more stringent, minimum requirements to be incorporated into the code. The code was required to review the code every two years to ensure that its requirements "adequately protect consumers" FCC rules require a long distance company to obtain a subscriber's authorization before a switch can occur. Authorization can be obtained in writing or can be confirmed orally. If a subscriber has been a victim of an unauthorized change, he/she is absolved of payment for up to 30 days. Refunds of charges are set at 150 percent, split between the authorized and the victim. The FCC rules protect consumers from paying potentially exorbitant rates. Received from state regulatory bodies, telecommunications carriers, and individual consumers. carrier must refund 150% of the charges to the authorized carrier. The authorized carrier is allowed to keep an amount equal to 100 percent of the consumer's bill with the remaining 50% returned to the consumer. Primary enforcement responsibility has been given to the states with the FCC assuming responsibility in those states unwilling or unable to undertake this role or if a complainant expressly indicates it wishes the FCC to resolve the matter. According to the FCC, 37 states, the District of Columbia, and Puerto Rico have chosen to take on this responsibility. The FCC's requirement that the telecommunications carrier verify that the actual subscriber, and not just the person answering the line and claiming to have authority to authorize a carrier switch, exceeded the FCC's statutory authority. The court stated that the statue does not require actual authorization but only requires that the carrier get verification. Furthermore the court said that the requirement for the carrier to obtain "actual authorization" gives carriers "a free pass" to switch providers without the carrier's knowledge. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. Verification procedures used to confirm carrier switches are strengthened and extended to include a number of circumstances. These verification methods are applied to both inbound calls (that is, calls initiated by consumers) as well as telemarketing calls. These methods include a consumer signature on an authorization paper form (i.e., a Letter of Agency; LOA), an electronic authorization (usually a customer initiated call to a toll-free number), a verification by an independent third party, and the more recently approved use of an Internet-based LOA. The FCC has also applied verification procedures to the practice of implementing carrier freeze requests. The rules require that solicitations for such freezes be clear and that the consumer be informed as to how such a freeze may be lifted. Verification rules are also applied to changes in local as well as long distance carriers, but wireless carriers are exempt. The FCC also noted that these verification procedures do not preempt state law. These verification methods are to be used as a state minimum, the FCC said in a statement. Section 258(a) prohibited telecommunications carriers from changing a subscriber's selection of both telephone exchange (local) and toll (long distance) service. The section expanded the FCC's authority over such activity to include local as well as long distance service. State utility commissions are also permitted to enforce the procedures with respect to services within their state boundaries. Section 258(b) created a new penalty, in addition to already existing penalties contained in law, for those who violate FCC verification procedures. Any telecommunications carrier that violates those procedures will be fined up to $100,000. S. 1618 also applied to the unauthorized initiation of long distance service as well as unauthorized switching. The local telephone company was prohibited from changing a consumer's long distance provider, unless the change is accompanied by a verbal, written, or electronic verification from the subscriber. The long distance company or reseller was required to send a verification to the local phone company. Furthermore, the bill required that the verification be retained. The bill also required the verification to be retained, and that the change be accompanied by an explanation of the reason for the change. long distance company or reseller was required to send a written confirmation of the switch that includes the name of the new carrier. The use of negative option marketing, whereby a consumer must take some action to prevent a switch from occurring, was banned. The bill also strengthened the complaint procedure by requiring a company charged with slamming to resolve the complaint within 120 days; absent resolution of the complaint, the company would be required to give the consumer the information within 15 days of the change of service. It was signed into law by President Barack Obama on Tuesday. a notice of proposed rulemaking to examine primary interexchange (long distance) carrier (PIC) change charges, and in a February 10, 2005 action modified the rate structure that was set in 1984. The effectiveness of the new rules and their implementation is receiving continuing attention from Members of Congress, regulators, providers, and consumers. Since the development of competition in the provision of long distance telecommunications services, consumers have been able to select the carrier of their choice. A second further notice of proposal, issued on March 17, 2003, imposing additional requirements on third-party verification services became effective on July 21, 2003. and unfair billing practices." A number of issues not addressed in the April 13, 2000 reconsideration order were addressed in a subsequent FCC order adopted on July 21, 2000. These rules went into effect on April 2, 2001. These include permitting the use of Internet LOAs in compliance with provisions contained in the E-Sign Act ( P.L. 106-229 ), thereby allowing carrier changes to be made by consumers via the Internet. retaining the three-way call as a verification method but requiring the carrier's sales representative to drop off the call once the connection has been established. to protect consumers form the unauthorized switching of their long distance service. Introduced May 19, 1999; referred to Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation. Introduced to protect consumers from the unauthorized switch of long distance services. Referred to the Committee on commerce, science, and transportation. Introduced in May 1999; Referred to House of Representatives Committee on Transportation and Commerce. Introduced on May 20, 1999, referred to House Committee on transportation and commerce, and passed on May 21, 1999. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from. PIC change charges are borne by the customer, but are commonly picked up by the newly designated interexchange carrier. The FCC established safe harbors of $1.25 for electronically-processed PIC changes and $5.50 for manually processed PIC change. Local exchange carriers can charge more if they can document higher costs and less than the safe harbor rate if they choose. If a consumer switches intrastate long distance providers and interstate providers at the same time, the PIC charge for changing the interstate carrier is decreased by half, to 63 cents. Interstate carrier is decreased by half, to 63 cents, for electronically processed changes. FCC extended, for a second time, the effective date for the filing of revised PIC charge tariffs to be effective no later than January 1, 2006. The possible misuse of the PIC freeze through the implementation of an illegal or unauthorized PIC Freeze by the customer's local exchange carrier has also been raised. The extension of the freeze option, beyond the designation of the long distance carrier, to cover thedesignation of local exchange and long distance carriers. The Competitive Telecommunications Association felt that the $5 PIC change charge safe harbor, that was established in 1984, exceeded the actual cost and hampers competition. The FCC concluded that "significant industry and market changes have occurred since the implementation of the $ 5.00 safe harbor in 1984" and sought comment on FCC policies for regulating PICchange charges. In May 2004 the FCC initiated a probe of PICChange charges and issued a notice of proposed rulemaking (CC Docket No. 02-53) Exchange carriers have expressed some concerns that they should not be held liable for solely executing a change since short of confirming each switch, they cannot insure that each change is authorized by the consumer. Some support the elimination of local exchange carrier control over the processing of all carrier changes and freezes, and favor the establishment of an independent third party to administer and execute such changes. Local exchange carriers defend the use of the PIC freeze, arguing that it is an appropriate method to protect consumers against the growing problem of slamming. distance carrier, to cover the designation of local exchange and intrastate long distance (toll call) carriers. Some feel that the PIC freeze is being misused to protect the local exchange carriers market share in the face of growing competition. Some support the elimination of local. exchange carriers and support the introduction of a national long-distance carrier. Some see the expanded use of the P IC freeze option as unnecessary and feel that it is being used to protect local exchange carrier market share. taken to curb this practice. One concern has focused on the necessity for, or concern over specific provisions contained in, legislative proposals. Two other concerns addressed in legislation have also generated controversy. Some favor voluntary private-sector initiatives to combat slamming rather than the enactment of legislation. Others support vigorous enforcement of current FCC regulations and continued consumer education to combat the increase in slamming. The National Association of Broadcasters is a trade group that represents more than 2,000 carriers across the U.S. The methodology used by the FCC to develop slamming statistics has also been brought under question. Many local exchange carriers claim that they do not actively market the PIC freeze option but only offer it in response to customers who complain about slamming or who specifically inquire about it. The GAO criticized the FCC's methodology for developing slamming statistics. They also state that the manner in which the program is implemented varies from carrier to carrier and that many of the potential and perceived abuses, such as high charges or difficultly in switching, do not apply to most programs. S. 58 was referred to the Senate Commerce, Science, and Transportation Committee where no further action was taken. S. 1084 required the FCC, the Federal Trade Commission, and telecommunications carrier representatives to develop a code of practices to protect consumers. The code was required to contain, at a minimum, provisions that required companies to verify changes in a subscriber's service, restricted the use of "negative option marketing," required subscriber notification of any changes in service, and forbade the Use of unfair and deceptive practices. is prevented, since the customer's long distance carrier cannot be changed without express permission. Some see the potential for the PIC freeze to inhibit competition, if the means required to lift the freeze are perceived by the consumer as too burdensome or the charges to implement the change are excessive. The FCC, in a March 14, 2002 action, initiated a notice of proposed rulemaking (CC Docket No. 02-53) to change the way PIC freezes are applied. The PIC Freeze is an option to prevent slamming in the long distance market. because resellers are not required to, and generally do not, report their revenue to the FCC unless the revenue exceeds $109 million. LCI International Inc., a long distance carrier in the United States, has also expressed concern over the manner in which the FCC calculates. To enable the FCC to make comparisons, to list the top offenders, the FCC assumes that those resellers that have not provided revenue data, had revenues of $ 109 million. This assumption, the GAO states, may result in a significant overstatement of the reseller's revenue, resulting in a much lower revenue-to-complaint ratio. LCI expresses concern over the manner in which the FCC calculates yearly slamming rates. LCI claims that the FCC's current practice of dividing the number of slamming complaints by a company's annual telecommunications revenue favors larger carriers. This occurs, LCI states, because the larger a company its revenue the more consumers it can slam without appearing to be a major offender.LCI recommends that the Commission calculate its slamming rate ratio by dividing theNumber of slamming complaint by the number. of new long distance customers. The GAO criticized the methodology used by the FCC to determine the list of top slamming offenders. The FCC compares slamming offenders by citing the ratio of the number of complaints per million dollars of company revenue. That methodology, according to the GAO, is flawed because it can lead to a severe understatement of the revenue-to-complaint ratio for the smaller companies, or resellers. This occurs because resellers are not required to, and generally do not, report their revenue to the FCC. to further deter the practice of slamming by increasing consumer protections and strengthening enforcement at both the federal and state level. Included among the provisions to deter slamming contained in this measure were those that required extensive and written notification and verification requirements when a subscriber switches long distance carriers. The statement also advocated uniformity in state and federal slamming requirements, to lessen consumer confusion, and called for the levying of fines, but solely in cases where it has be proven that the carrier "has engaged in willful and intentional slamming...." to be subject to FCC investigation. Carriers found in violation of the voluntary code or found willfully and repeatedly slamming were subject to a fine of up to $1 million. Additional provisions in the bill included those that gave subscribers credit for charges incurred when using the slamming carrier's service; gave state attorneys general enforcement authority under the federal legislation; and directed the Commerce Department's National Telecommunications and Information Administration to report to Congress on "the feasibility and desirability" of establishing a neutral third party. FCC: 36,220 inquiries and 1,932 complaints filed in 2005. The potential for slamming is expected to increase as competition in the provision of intrastate long distance and local telecommunications services becomes more widespread. Since many consumers who are the victims of slamming may not file complaints, and over 50 million carrier selection changes are recorded each year, it is assumed that filed complaints represent a subset of the actual problem. The FCC's slamming team in 2004 resolved approximately 3,500 slamming complaints involving over 300 telephone carriers, resulting in consumer refunds totaling $800,000. to date. The industry is attempting to self-regulate and has put forth proposals to stop this activity. Some states have taken significant action to protect consumers from slamming, but others have taken little action or have no antislamming regulations. Information provided by all long distance carriers in compliance with FCC-required tariff filing procedures, is not reviewed and is no deterrent to a slammer. Consumers and the industry itself are becoming increasingly vulnerable as targets for large scale fraud, according to the report. Consumers have the right to choose the carrier of their choice from among approximately 500 companies. Unauthorized switching, known as "slamming," has a negative impact on both the consumers and suppliers of telecommunications services. Consumers often do not realize they have been slammed until they find unfamiliar names or charges on their telephone bills. The practice distorts the marketplace by increasing the customer base and revenues of the carrier that has illegally switched the consumer at the expense of the consumer. It can go undetected for months or even longer. Concern has been voiced by some that the consumer protections that were proposed were too extensive and may be overly burdensome and costly for smaller carriers. Mandatory third party verification is cited as an example of a proposal that would be costly for small carriers to implement. Proposals to require switchless resellers to post a "surety bond" with the FCC to pay for possible fines or penalties also came under criticism. The Telecommunications Resellers Association claims that such a provision not be necessary. The Telecommunications Resellers Association claims that such a provision not only discriminates against switchless resellers, but would also cause an "anticompetitive effect" in the marketplace. Additional concern has also been expressed over the content of other provisions contained in other measures. Provisions that give full reimbursement to consumers if they are slammed, instead of solely reimbursement of the overcharge, have generated concerns that it might possibly lead to consumers fraudulently claiming they have been slammed, to avoid paying any charges for long distance calls. AT&T: Proposals to require slammers to pay fines to consumers they harm could result in the creation of the "wrong incentive structure..." Some have expressed concerns that fines and punishments not be levied against the long distance carrier in all cases, since in some instances unwanted switches can be attributed to the local exchange carrier responsible for executing the switch. On the other hand, local exchange carriers have expressed some concerns that they should not be charged for long distance calls.charges for long-distance calls. The rules absolve slammed consumers of liability for charges incurred for the first 30-day period after an unauthorized switch. In cases where payment was made by the consumer, the unauthorized carrier must refund 150% of the charges to the authorized carrier. The requirement prevents violators from receiving financial rewards for the illegal switch. The rules, with the exception of the liability provisions, went into effect in April 1999. The liability provisions were stayed by the D.C. Court of Appeals. On May 3, 2000 the FCC issued revised liability rules which met court approval. AT&T v. FCC: FCC exceeded its statutory authority in enforcing certain of its slamming rules relating to customer verification. While not remanding the FCC's rules, the court did vacate fines totaling $80,000 imposed on AT&T. The FCC had imposed a fine on AT & T for slamming when, despite compliance with the FCC’s procedures, an anterograde change was made. The court did not remand the rules, but vacated the fines. charges are set at 150 percent, split between the authorized carrier (100%) and the subscriber (50%) Carriers proven to be in violation of FCC rules are subject to fines and penalties. From April 1994 to the end of 1999, the FCC imposed final forfeitures against 8 companies for $10.3 million, entered into consent decrees with 12 carriers with combined payments of $2.7 million and proposed $7.6 million in proposed notices of apparent liability against 5 companies. The FCC continues to take enforcement actions against violators. FCC action in 2004 resolved about 3500 slamming complaints involving more than 300 carriers resulting in $800,000 in consumer refunds. In its first joint federal/state effort, the FCC, working with 14 state agencies, filed on June 20, 2002, a $1.2 million fine against WebNet Communications Inc. of McLean, Va., for 20 alleged violations. In an April 21, 1998 action,. the FCC levied its most severe penalty for slamming to date. For the first The bill extended FCC authority over violators beyond telecommunications carriers to include others such as billing agents. First time "willful violators" would have faced up to a year in prison for a first offense with repeat offenders up to five years. The bill also allowed consumers to get refunds from unauthorized carriers; and protected consumer's rights to use the PIC freeze option. (See section on " PIC Freeze Programs and Charges ", below.) S.C. House passed the bill on Tuesday. most severe penalty for slamming to date. For the first time, it revoked the operating authority of a telecommunications provider for slamming violations and levied a multi-million dollar fine. This action was taken against the Fletcher Companies, a group of long distance telephone companies, for engaging in slamming and numerous other violations of the Communications Act and FCC rules. These companies, and their principals, are barred from providing interstate telecommunications services without the prior consent of the FCC. Furthermore, the FCC assessed forfeitures totaling $5.7 million but has never been able to collect. The FCC received more than 1,400 complaints against the Fletcher Companies. Although these companies stopped providing services in 1997, during the FCC's investigation, this action was taken. Provisions in the Telecommunications Act of 1996 (see discussion below) expand the scope of FCC's authority to address the problem of unauthorized switches. The FCC, in a December 17, 1998 order, took action to ensure that none of these companies can resume operation and "engage in slamming or other conduct ... harmful to consumers" The FCC was given the authority to award both compensatory and punitive damages. Minimum levels for fines were established, absent mitigating circumstances, with a fine of not less than $40,000 for first-time offenders. Individual subscribers could recover damages up to $500 from slammers and would not have had to pay the slamming carrier but could have elected to pay their designated carrier for those services. Those convicted of intentional slammers could face up to five years in prison. The FCC was also given the power to prosecute those who refuse to pay fines. Switchless resellers were required to post a bond with the FCC before they were able to offer long distance services. S. 1618 did not preclude or preempt state law or actions against slammers. slamming victims were given the option of pursuing slamming complaints through the courts, instead of the FCC, through a court system.who refuse to pay their fines. Those convicted of intentional slamming ("willful" slammers) would have been subject to criminal penalties and would have be prohibited from offering telecommunications services. S. 1618 established both a complaint process at the FCC and minimum monetary penalties for offenders. Any company that ignored a consumer's complaint was to be subject to a penalty for slamming. The FCC was given the authority to award both compensatory and punitive damages and to issue a decision on slamming complaints within 150 days of filing. The company was required to give the consumer a copy of the retained verification, information about how to pursue the complaint with the FCC, and all other available remedies. It was also required to establish streamlined complaint resolution procedures. The GAO undertook an investigation into the general issue of slamming, FCC and state regulatory efforts to curtail slamming. This report, Telephone Slamming and Its Harmful Effects, was released in conjunction with testimony given at Subcommittee hearings on April 23, 1998. Some of the major conclusions reached by the GAO, based on their three-month investigation into slamming practices and regulation, are as follows: "Neither the FCC, the FTC, nor the state regulators have taken action to curb slamming practices" are becoming increasingly vulnerable as targets for large scale fraud; Given [the present] environment, unscrupulous long-distance providers slam consumers, often with virtual impunity; and The most effective action that consumers can take to eliminate the chance of intentional slamming is to have their local exchange carrier freeze their choice of long distance providers. The conclusions reached in the GAO report regarding FCC efforts to deter slamming, were discussed during hearings held, on April 23, 1998, by the Senate Permanent Investigations Subcommittee. Some subcommittee members expressed concern over the findings to FCC Chairman Kennard, who was called to testify at the hearings. FCC Chairman Kennard was called to testify at the hearing. Kennard defended the FCC's actions stating that the tariff filing procedure was not developed as a deterrent to slamming. He also pointed to the severe punishment taken against Fletcher Companies to defend FCC actions. At the request of Senator Collins, the GAO undertook a second study examining the scope of and state and federal actions taken by the FCC. The GAO concluded that the FCC had taken the appropriate steps to combat slamming and that it was investigating the matter further. once the connection has been established between the subscriber and the third party verifier. New complaint reporting requirements for carriers which require carriers to submit semiannual reports to the FCC's Enforcement Bureau. Carrier registration requirements that prevent slammers from evading detection simply by changing their names. The Government Accountability Office (GAO), (known at that time as the General Accounting Office), at the request of Senator Collins, then Chairman of the Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations, Committee on Government Affairs, undertook an investigation into the practice. The report focused on two abuses, slamming and cramming. Cramming is the practice of placing unauthorized charges for services and products on a consumer's telephone bill. The report confirmed that, based on data from 1996 through 1998, "slamming continues to be a significant problem for consumers" The report contains information on the number of complaints filed, and state and federal regulations taken to protect consumers from these abuses. It was issued in July 1999, and details actions taken to combat abuses involving telephone services. the 106 th Congress relating to the slamming issue. Senator Susan Collins introduced the "Telephone Services Fraud Prevention and Enforcement Act of 1999" ( S. 58 ), on January 19, 1999. The bill also addresses the practice of cramming. However, that is the. practice of placing unauthorized, misleading, or deceptive charges on consumer's telephone bills goes beyond the scope. of the bill and is referred to as the "Slamming Act" by Senator Collins. The Act was passed by the Senate on January 20, 1999, and the House of Representatives on January 21, 1999,. The bill was referred to the Senate as "S. 58" by senator Collins. The FCC expanded upon and adopted more stringent rules to combat slamming. The Telecommunications Act of 1996, which was signed into law on February 8, 1996 ( P.L. 104-104 ), resulted in a major rewrite of the 1934 Communications Act (47 U.S.C. 151 et.seq.) Section 258 of the Telecommunications Act, as amended, expands jurisdiction over, and creates a new penalty for, any telecommunications carrier that illegally changes a subscriber's designated telecommunications carrier. Section 258(a) prohibited telecommunications carriers from illegally changing a customer's phone number. The 105 th Congress actively examined this issue, with each chamber passing its version of legislation to protect consumers against slamming. However, adjournment occurred before a final measure could be passed. Some Members of Congress felt that additional legislative action was needed to be taken to address slamming.filed, state and federal regulations taken to protection consumers from such abuses, industry initiatives taken to curb these abuses, as well as state andFederal enforcement actions taken against companies engaged in these practices. The 105th Congress was the first to examine this issue. Senator McCain introduced the "Telecommunications Competition and Consumer Protection Act of 1999" ( S. 1084 ) on May 19, 1999, one day after the court stay of FCC slamming liability rules. Citing the failure of the 105 th Congress to pass slamming legislation, court action to stay FCC liability rules, and his objection to the industry-proposed third party administrator, Senator McCain offered a comprehensive measure "to better protect consumers" S. 58 attempted to further deter the practice of slamming by increasing consumer protections. requirement that the carrier obtain "actual authorization" gives carriers "a virtually impossible task" New initiatives are established to ease the filing of consumer complaints and speed their resolution. The establishment of a toll-free number at the FCC to enable consumers to file complaints over the telephone. The FCC, in conjunction with CC docket 98-170, has also adopted rules that establish truth-in-billing and billing format principles to enhance a consumer's ability to detect slamming. The rules establish requirements that are "intended to protect consumers against inaccurate and unfair billing practices" complaints through the courts, instead of the FCC, through a state class action suit. Each telecommunications carrier or reseller was required to report slamming violations to the FCC on a quarterly basis. The FCC was also directed to issue a report, within 180 days of the bill's enactment, on telemarketing practices used to solicit service provider changes by subscribers. This was to be based on a ratio of the number of subscriber complaints to the total number of subscribers served. The bill also included a number of reporting requirements. S. 1084 was referred to the Senate Commerce, Science, and Transportation Committee and received no further action. Carriers were required to give subscribers who are victims of slamming credits for unauthorized charges and damages of $500. The bill required the FCC to compile and publish a report, every six months, listing slamming violations by carrier. Adherence to the code would have been voluntary, but those carriers that chose not to follow the codewould have been required to follow regulations prescribed by the FCC. The FCC was also required to compile and publish a report, on a semiannual basis, ranking carriers by the percentage of verified complaints, excluding those generated by the carrier's unaffiliated resellers. Carriers listed among the five worst performers in the semiann annual reports for three consecutive times were to be subject to FCC investigation. The FCC also required carriers not operating under the voluntary code to meet specific, more stringent, minimum requirements to be incorporated into FCC-developed regulations for carriers not under the code. S. 1740 (Collins) A measure to amend the Communications Act of 1934 to improve protections against the unauthorized change of subscribers from one telecommunications carrier to another, and for other purposes. S. 1084 (McCain) A bill to protect consumers form the unauthorized switching of their long-term telephone service. (McC McCain) S. 58 (Collins), A measure that would improve the protection against telephone service "slamming" and provide protections against telephone billing "cramming" vote, with amendment, October 12, 1998. S. 1051 (Campbell) A measure to enhance protections against unauthorized changes of telephone service subscribers from one telecommunications carrier to another. H.R. 4176 (Markey) a measure to protect consumers against 'spamming', 'slamming', and 'cramming' S. 1137 (Durbin) AMeasure to amend section 258 of the Communications Act of 1934 to establish additional protections against the unauthorized change of subscribers. H.R. 3050 (Dingell) A measure to establish procedures and remedies for the prevention of fraudulent and deceptive practices in the solicitation of telephone service subscribers. H. R. 3888 (Tauzin) a measure to amend the Communications Act of 1934 to improve the protection of consumers against slamming by telecommunications carriers, and for other purposes. Introduced April 29, 1998; referred to Committee on Commerce. Referred to Subcommittee on Telecommunications, Trade and Consumer Protection May 8, 1998. May 8, 1998. H.R. 3888 (Tauzin) A measure to amend the Communications Act of 1934 to improve the protection of consumers against slamming by telecommunications carriers, and for other purposes. Introduced May 14, 1998; referred to Committee on Commerce. Passed Telecommunications Subcommittee, as amended, by voice vote, August 6,1998. An amendment in the nature of a substitute offered by Representative Tauzin was adopted by voiceVote by the Commerce Committee, on September 24, 1998 ( H.Rept. 105-801 ). Passed House by voice Vote, with amendment, October 12, 1998, Received in the Senate. The enactment of additional legislative measures prescribing new regulations is seen, by some, as an action that is unnecessary. Others support the enactment of legislation. The release of a GAO report critical of current FCC efforts to reduce the occurrence of slamming gave supporters of legislation additional impetus in the 105 th and 106 th Congresses. It is up to the Congress, they state, to establish through law stronger measures and increased penalties to protect both consumers and suppliers of telecommunications services from slamming. The necessary, supporters claim, to enact legislation to curb slamming. by statute, versus FCC developed policies, are less susceptible to change and will better withstand scrutiny if challenged in the courts. The May 18, 1999 U.S. Appeals Court stay of the liability provisions of the FCC's slamming rules is cited as further proof in support of the need for enactment of legislation. Those supporting legislative action, however, are not necessarily united in the approach such legislation should take. Some have expressed concern over the breadth of the proposed regulations contained in the measures that were considered in the 105 th and 106 th Congresses. The 105 th Congress held several hearings and introduced many bills to address this issue, but adjourned without passing legislation. No legislation addressing slamming was introduced in either the 107 th or 108 th Congresses and none has been introduced in the 109 th Congress, to date. The industry is attempting to self-regulate and has adjournment occurred before a final measure could be passed. The FCC has revised its rules with an eye to strengthening its regulations and increasing penalties for violators. Whether the FCC's strengthened slamming rules will be a sufficient deterrent to stop the practice of slamming remains unclear. the 107 th or 108 th Congress and none has been introduced in the 109 th Congress, to date. The FCC continues to take actions to enforce and further strengthen its slamming rules. The last of these new rules went into effect on November 28, 2000. Under these revised rules, states have the option of processing slamming complaints, and numerous states have opted to do so. On March 14, 2002, the FCC initiated a notice of proposed rulemaking to examine primary interexchange (long range communications) The 105 th Congress held several hearings and introduced 11 bills to address this issue. S. 1618, the "Consumer Anti-Slamming Act," passed the Senate (99-0) with amendment, on May 12, 1998. H.R. 3888 passed the House, as amended, by voice vote, on October 12,1998. Despite intense negotiations to resolve differences between the bills, the Congress adjourned before the bill could be brought to the Senate floor for consideration. The "Telecommunications Competition and Consumer Protection Act of 1998" passed the House by voice vote, with amendment, on October 12, 1998. H.R. 3888 called for the establishment of a voluntary code of conduct as an alternative to FCC regulation to address the issue. The House-passed measure contained a different approach from its Senate counterpart to combat slamming. Failure to comply with or comply with the bill would result in a fine of up to $1,000,000 for each violation. on "the feasibility and desirability" of establishing a neutral third party to administer a system to prevent slamming. The version of H.R. 3888 passed by the House Commerce Committee, and ultimately the full House, was significantly different from the Senate-passed measure. Negotiations between the House and Senate to reconcile differences between the two measures continued through the waning days of the session. Despite such efforts, however, H.r.3888 was not passed by Congress. H.R. 3888 was not brought to the Senate floor and legislation to address slamming was not enacted prior to the adjournment of the 105 th Congress. The telecommunications industry has acknowledged the existence of a slamming problem but is not necessarily in agreement with an approach to solve it. The Competitive Telecommunications Association (CompTel), a telecommunications trade association that represents competitive telecommunications service providers, issued a statement that called for "zero tolerance" of intentional slamming. CompTel urged carriers to agree to investigate all slamming allegations, repay consumers who were slammed.