We performed our audit in Washington, D.C., and the bureau’s headquarters in Suitland, Maryland, between May 2001 and April 2002. Accurate census results are critical because the data are used to reapportion seats in the House of Representatives and for congressional redistricting. The Secretary of Commerce forwarded written comments from the Bureau of the Census on a draft of this report (see app. II). The bureau concurred with all of our recommendations and had no comments on them. but Census Bureau Should Evaluate Lessons Learned. U.S. General Accounting Office. 2000 Census: Coverage Evaluation Interviewing Overcame Challenges, but Further Research Needed. GAO/GGD-00-127R. Washington, D.C.: June 7, 2000. USGA: Historical Data on Enumerator Productivity Are Limited. GAE-01-208R.Washington, D,C.: January 5, 2001. US GAO: 2000 census: Better Productivity Data Needed for Future Planning and Budgeting. At that time, we will send copies to other interested congressional committees, the Secretary of Commerce, and the Director of the Bureau of the Census. Copies will be made available to others upon request. In addition, the report will be available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. If you have any questions concerning this report, please contact me on (202) 512-6806. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. before it would commit resources to investigate local data issues. The Full Count Review program had no filter for screening submissions based on the quality of the documentation. Better guidance on documenting issues could make the bureau’s follow-up investigations more efficient. Another area where there is room for improvement concerns the consistency and clarity in which the bureau communicated the objectives of the Full Count review program and how the bureau planned to use analysts’ input. The bureau may have set up the expectation that a larger number of issues would be resolved during Full Countreview. The Full Count Review program ran from June 2000 through March 2001. The bureau expected data analysts to identify data discrepancies, anomalies, and other data “issues” Some of the analysts’ work was contracted to members of the FSCPE, an organization composed of state demographers that works with the bureau to ensure accurate state and further action on them (see app. 1 for the disposition of Full count Review data issues by state). The overall results of the Full Count review program and FSC PE members’ participation appear to be mixed. We analyzed the work papers submitted by FSCPE members and other participants in the Full Count Review program. We also analyzed data from the bureau’s Count Review Information System. To identify lessons learned for future improvements, we examined bureau training manuals, statements of work, future improvements. We performed our audit in Washington, D.C., and the Bureau of Population and Social Services’ Washington, Washington, DC, office. We did not independently verify the information contained in the data. the basis of the quality and precision of the documentation, and investigating first those issues that are best documented and thus more easily resolved. exploring the feasibility of using staff from the bureau’s regional offices to help investigate data issues in the field prior to the release of public law data. The Secretary of Commerce should also ensure that the bureau clarifies and consistently communicates to participants the objectives of the Full Count Review program and how the bureau plans to use the information derived from the program, the authors say. members’ local demographic knowledge. According to bureau officials, the bureau plans to include a Full Count Review program in census tests later in the decade. Foremost among the areas in need of improvement is resolving, to the extent practical, a larger number of data issues prior to the release of apportionment data. The bureau should be given to planning the Full Count review program early in the census cycle and testing procedures under conditions as close to the actual census as possible, the authors say. from the 2000 Census appeared to accurately reflect the large amount of new house construction that had taken place within a specific census tract. However, because the population count differed from that indicated by other data sources, the analyst flagged it as an issue to avoid undercounting the population. Bureau officials told us that they used the Full Count Review program to identify systemic errors such as those that could be produced by software problems. None were found, officials said. The officials noted that the bureau generally did not use the Full count review program to resolve individual issues. Review program, with FSCPE participation, was not conceived until February 1999, which was extremely late in the census cycle, coming just 14 months before Census Day, April 1, 2000. Decision stemmed from the Supreme Court’s January 1999 ruling that prohibited the bureau from using statistical sampling for purposes of congressional apportionment. Faced with the larger workload of reviewing two sets of data— adjusted and unadjusted—the bureau decided to enlist the help of FSC PE members in order to meet the deadlines for releasing public law data. Census data remain an important element in allocating federal aid to state and local governments. With billions of dollars at stake, the data are scrutinized intensely for accuracy. The Full Count Review program was designed to rapidly examine, rectify if possible, and clear census data files and products for subsequent processing or public release. The fact that the apportionment and redistricting data were released with around 4,800 unresolved data issues of unknown validity, magnitude, and impact is cause for concern. errors did not require additional research or field verification. Bureau officials told us that they lacked the time to research the remaining issues. As a result, the bureau missed an important opportunity to verify and possibly improve the quality of the data. Until these issues are resolved, uncertainties will surround the accuracy of the census data for the affected localities. Some of the issues might be resolved soon, but not all of them will be resolved in time for the next census. The U.S. House of Representatives is expected to vote on a new redistricting bill this week. Of the 4,804 issues remaining after Full Count Review, 1,994 (42 percent) were referred to CQR. Of these, 537 were accepted for further investigation. The remaining 1,457 issues did not meet the bureau’s documentation requirements and consequently, the bureau took no further action on them. The bureau had no mechanism for managing the Full Count review workload. Unlike the CQr program, where the bureau required local governments to provide specific documentation before it would commit resources to investigate local data issues, the agency did not have such a mechanism. as much supporting information as necessary. Some analysts provided only minimal data, others supported issues with state and local administrative records, historical data, photographs, and maps. In some cases, the bureau had difficulty determining the precise nature of an issue or if in fact an issue even existed. In contrast, the CQR program provides comprehensive guidelines on the documentation required for making submissions. The guidance available on the bureau’s CQr web site notes that before the bureau will investigate concerns raised. Bureau’s requirements for documenting data issues were not clearly defined. Training materials did not provide any specific guidance on the type of evidence analysts needed to support data issues. Field staff would be needed to help verify issues, and the effort would require close coordination with several bureau units. This could help explain why the bureau was not able to correct a larger number of issues, the authors say. The report was published in the Journal of the National Law Enforcement Association (JNLEA) volume 3, issue 1. prisons, dormitories, nursing homes, and similar group living arrangements. Analysts also identified 479 housing unit issues (10 percent of the total), and 288 household issues (6 percent) There were also 383 issues (8 percent) that the bureau classified as “other” They contained questions concerning the demographic characteristics of the data such as age, race, and gender. The bureau was unable to classify 2,060 issues (43 percent) The bureau is investigating the issues. An analyst compared population data from the 1990 Census and 2000 Census. The 2000 Census did not appear to reflect this increase, and it was flagged. The analyst determined that bureau data had placed college dormitories in the wrong tract. To see the full report, go to CNN.com/suspect. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. Count Review program to resolve individual issues. Officials: Bureau corrected data for 5 of the 4,809 issues prior to the December 31, 2000, release of reapportionment data. FSCPE members identified the five issues, all of which involved group quarters that were placed in the wrong locations. They included (1) a military base in Nevada, (2) 10 facilities at a college in Wisconsin, (3) 9 facilities ata prison in New York City, (4) 14 facilities at an elementary school. prison in New York City, (4) 14 facilities at a Washington prison, and (5) a federal medical center in Massachusetts. FSCPE analysts found them early in the Full Count Review program, while the bureau was processing a key geographic data file. The five errors did not require additional research or field verification, the bureau said. The corrections were incorporated into the data before the data were finalized. The errors were documented and recommended by the FSC PE analysts, the agency said. that works with the bureau to ensure accurate state and local population estimates. The bureau contracted with 53 FSCPE members who reviewed data for 39 states and Puerto Rico. Bureau employees reviewed data. for the 11 remaining states and the District of Columbia without FSC PE representation in Full Count Review. Bureau and F SCPE analysts were to ensure that (1) group quarters were correctly placed or “geocoded” on census maps, and that their population counts and demographic characteristics appeared reasonable. Bureau data show that after reviewing census data for 39 states and Puerto Rico, FSCPE members identified a total of 1,402 issues. Since the bureau has yet to resolve most of these issues, it is not known whether they are necessarily errors. Group quarters issues were those most frequently identified by the bureau, accounting for 1,599 of the 4,809 issues identified (33 percent) The remaining issues could not be categorized because the nature of the issue couldn't be determined from the documentation. bureau was unable to classify 2,060 issues (43 percent) In these cases, analysts did not provide sufficient documentation for the bureau to determine the nature of the issue. Analysts used an automated process that compared data from the 2000 Census to independent benchmarks such as the 1990 Census. This process alerted bureau officials that there were data discrepancies, but did not indicate their nature. By comparison, FSCPE members compared census data to administrative records and other data, and were better able to document specific issues.