U.S. market share of the worldwide travel market and a decline in overseas visitors to the United States since 9/11. State Department’s 2003 report on Patterns of Global Terrorism recorded 67 attacks on American business facilities and 7 business casualties. In 2006, the Overseas Security Advisory Council noted that more threats against the private sector occurred in 2006 than in 2004 or 2005 in most of the industries it reports on. Working Group on Anti-Americanism also indicated that threats to American private property and personnel working overseas have become constant in some regions, especially the Middle East. 56 private U.S. citizens were killed as a result of terrorism incidents in 2005. The Working Group on Anti-Americanism suggests that there is some correlation between anti- Americanism and violence against Americans in the greater Middle East. The relationship is complex. For example, while increased anti-Americanist in Europe or Jordan has not led to violence against American or U.s. citizens, it has led to more violence in the region. The group notes that Americans face an increased risk of direct attack from individuals and small groups. Security concerns are particularly elevated in countries with significant Muslim populations. Security and budgetary concerns have led to the closure of publicly accessible facilities around the world. In Pakistan, for example, all American Centers and Libraries have been closed. The threat level for terrorism is rated as “critical” or “high” in 80 percent of posts. The U.S. military is committed to maintaining a balance between safety and mission, says the U.N. Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon. Anti-Americanism around the world may reduce the U.S.’s ability to pursue its foreign policy goals. The 9/11 Commission report of July 2004 stated that perceptions of the United States’ foreign policies as anti-Arab, anti-Muslim, and pro-Israel have contributed to the rise in extremist rhetoric. The Council on Foreign Relations has argued that increasing hostility toward America in Muslim countries facilitates recruitment and support for extremism and terror. Americans now face increased security costs. Foreign leaders may seek to leverage anti-American sentiment in pursuit of their own political goals. As these leaders achieve personal political successes based on their opposition to the United States, they may then be less likely to support U.S. foreign policy. Further, the 9/11 Commission, the Council on Foreign Relations, and others have reported on the possibility thatAnti-Americanism may also serve as a barrier to success in the world.our policy goals far more difficult.” The Working Group on Anti- Americanism said. on strategic communication, the Defense Science Board states that “damaging consequences for other elements of U.S. soft power are tactical manifestations of a pervasive atmosphere of hostility” Similarly, the Council on Foreign Relations has claimed that the loss of goodwill and trust from publics around the world has had a negative impact on U.s. security and foreign policy. Anti-American sentiments may negatively affect American economic interests and military operations, and the security of Americans. According to Business for Diplomatic Action, anti-Americanism can hurt American businesses by causing boycotts of American products. any causal relationships between negative foreign public opinion and specific negative outcomes regarding U.S. interests. Despite the fact that we cannot draw a direct causal link between anti-Americanism. and specific outcomes in these areas, it is clear that growing negative foreign. public opinion does not help the United States achieve its economic, foreign policy, and security. goals. U.N. Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon has called for an end to the use of anti- Americanism as a political football.  favorable attitudes toward the United States in Indonesia declined from 75 percent in 2000 to 30 percent in 2006. Numerous experts, expert groups, policymakers, and business leaders have expressed concerns that anti-Americanism may harm U.S. interests in various ways. In its 2004 report on strategic communication, the Defense Science Board states that “damaging’ anti-U.S., anti-Muslim sentiment is a worldwide trend. While individual opinion polls might reflect a snapshot in time, consistently negative polls may reflect the development of more deeply seated sentiments. Jordan has not led to violence against Americans or U.S. interests in those areas, but it does seem to play a role in fueling such violence in Iraq. Other factors, such as the visibility of Americans overseas, particularly in Iraq; the role of the media in supporting anti-Americanism; and the absence of economic security may also contribute to this violence. While all of the topics discussed here represent areas in which anti- Americanism may have negative consequences, the empirical evidence to support direct relationships is limited. boycotts of American products, a backlash against American brands, increased security costs for U.S. companies, and higher foreign opposition to U.s. trade policies. A report from the Princeton-based Working Group on Anti-Americanism generally echoes the possibility that anti- Americanism may harm U. s. business interests. The U. S. travel industry has reported significant declines in the U.K. market share of the worldwide travel market and a decrease in the world’s best talent to join American workforce. as American Centers and Libraries. In Pakistan, for example, all American Centers have closed for security reasons; the last facility, in Islamabad, closed in February 2005. These same concerns have prevented establishing a U.S. presence elsewhere. As a result, embassies have had to find other venues for public diplomacy programs. Some activities have been moved onto embassy compounds, where precautions designed to improve security have had the ancillary effect of sending the message that the United States is unapproachable and distrustful. escorts contribute to this perception, as do requirements restricting visitors’ use of cell phones and pagers within the embassy. According to one official in Pakistan, visitors to the embassy’s reference library have declined to as few as one per day. Other public diplomacy programs have had to limit their publicity to reduce the risk of becoming a target. A recent joint USAID-State report concluded that “security concerns often require a ‘low profile’ approach during events, programs or other situations’ which, in happier times, would have been able to generate considerable good will for the U.S. This constraint is particularly acute in Pakistan, where the embassy has had to reduce certain speaker and exchange programs. State has responded to security concerns and the loss of publicly accessible facilities through a variety of initiatives. According to State data, there are currently 365 American Corners throughout the world, including more than 200 in the Muslim world, with another 31 in the Middle East and North Africa.. public outreach and other functions within their host country capitals. It was particularly difficult to find time to travel outside the capitals to interact with other communities. This challenge is compounded at posts with short tours of duty, including many tours in the Muslim world. Officials stated that it is difficult to establish the type of close working relationships essential to effective public diplomacy work when they are in country for only a short time. In our May 2006 report, we reported that the average length of tour at posts in theMuslim world is about 22 percent shorter. posts in the Muslim world is about 22 percent shorter than tour lengths elsewhere. Public affairs officers who have shorter tours tend to produce less effective work than officers with longer tours. Officials at State said that the Management bureau is currently considering options for reducing the administrative burden on posts, including the development of centralized posts. The State Department recommends that the Secretary of State designate more administrative positions to overseas public affairs sections to reduce the burden on the State Department's Overseas Public Affairs Office (OPPO) for overseas posts. Staffing shortages may also limit the amount of training public diplomacy officers receive. Public diplomacy officers at posts are burdened with administrative tasks. State is repositioning several public diplomacyOfficers as part of its transformational diplomacy initiative. However, this effort represents shifting existing public diplomacy Officers and does not increase the overall number of officers, which we have noted were generally the same in fiscal years 2004 and 2006. The U.S. State Department has not released a full list of the officers it has reassigned. officers at posts are burdened with administrative tasks, and thus have less time to conduct public diplomacy outreach activities. One senior State official said that administrative duties, such as budget, personnel, and internal reporting, compete with officers’ public diplomacy responsibilities. Another official in Egypt stated that she rarely had enough time to strategize, plan, or evaluate her programs. These statements echo comments we heard during overseas fieldwork and in a survey for our 2003 report. In that survey, officers stated that, although they manage to attend public outreach and other functions within their host country capitals, GAO: State Department continues to experience significant foreign language proficiency shortfalls in countries around the world. In countries with significant Muslim populations, we reported that 30 percent of language- designated public diplomacy positions were filled by officers without the requisite proficiency in those languages. In Arabic language posts, about 36 percent of staff unable to speak Arabic at the designated level. State has begun to address these shortfalls, including the development of centralized administrative capabilities offshore. The information officer in Cairo stated that his office does not have enough Arabic speakers to engage the Egyptian media effectively. State has begun to address these language deficiencies by increasing its overall amount of language training and providing supplemental training for more difficult languages. Security concerns have limited embassy outreach efforts and public access, forcing public diplomacy officers to strike a balance between safety and mission. For example, State’s Foreign Service Institute recently offered a week of intensive media training for language-qualified officers that provided guidance on how to communicate with Arabic-speaking audiences. Shortly after the terrorist attacks on September 11, 2001, the U.S. State Department increased the number of officers meeting language requirements. structure to reinforce the Board’s role as CEO with a host of responsibilities. In 2006, MBN, which received $79 million in funding in fiscal year 2006, faces several managerial and editorial challenges. While MBN has taken steps to improve its process of program review and evaluation, it has not yet implemented our recommendations to improve the system of evaluation and program review, says the report. The report concludes that the BBG should take a more active role in shaping its overall strategic direction and setting expectations. not yet implemented our recommendations to improve its system of internal control or develop a comprehensive staff training plan. Individuals making key contributions to this statement include Audrey Solis, Assistant Director; Michael ten Kate; Eve Weisberg; Kate France Smiles; and Joe Carney. I would be happy to respond to any questions you or other members of the subcommittee may have at this time. For questions regarding this testimony, please contact Jess T. Ford at (202) 512-4128 or fordj@gao.gov. permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. For support in the Middle East, call the Salvation Army on 8457 909090 or see http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. The BBG’s vision is to create a flexible, multimedia, research-driven U.S. international broadcasting system. The BBG created a single strategic goal to focus on the key objective of maximizing impact in priority areas of interest to the United States. We recommended that the BBG improve its audience research methods, including identifying significant methodological problems with its audience surveys. We found that methodological concerns call into question the potential accuracy of this key performance measure with regard to Radio Sawa's listening rates and Alhurra's viewing rates. The key objectives of U.S. public diplomacy are to engage, inform, and influence overseas audiences. Public diplomacy is carried out through a wide range of programs that employ person-to-person contacts and print, broadcast, and electronic media. Since the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, State has expanded its public diplomacy efforts globally. In May 2006, we reported that this trend continued with funding increases of 25 percent for the Near East and 39 percent for South Asia from 2004 to 2006. recently launched a pilot public diplomacy performance measurement data collection project. In 2001, the BBG introduced a market-based approach to international broadcasting that sought to “marry the mission to the market” This approach was designed to generate large listening audiences in priority markets. Implementing this strategy has focused on markets relevant to the war on terrorism, in particular in the Middle East through such key initiatives as Radio Middle East and Radio Palestine. The project is designed to collect, document, and quantify reliable annual and long-term outcome performance measures. State and the BBG spent close to $1.5 billion on public diplomacy programs in fiscal year 2006. In recent years anti-American sentiment has spread and intensified around the world. Pew Global Attitudes Project has found that the decline in favorable opinion of the United States is a worldwide trend. The BBG manages and oversees the Voice of America (VOA), Radio/TV Marti, Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty, Radio free Asia, Radio Farda, Radio Sawa and the Alhurra TV Network. State Department had 887 established public diplomacy positions (overseas and domestic) as of March 31, 2007, but 199, or roughly 22 percent, were vacant. The BBG’s disparate organizational structure has been viewed as a key management challenge that significantly complicates its efforts to focus and direct U.S. international broadcasting efforts. Although several recent reports on public diplomacy have recommended an increase in public diplomacy program spending, several embassy officials stated that they do not have the capacity to effectively utilize increased funds. more than 200 in the Muslim world, with another 31 planned. Two of the posts we visited in October 2005 were having difficulty finding hosts for American Corners, as local institutions fear becoming terrorist targets. The Broadcasting Board of Governors has its own set of public diplomacy challenges, including trying to gain large audiences in priority markets and dealing with a disparate organizational structure that contains multiple discrete broadcasters. As noted in the BBG’s strategic plan, “diverse organizations with different missions,” plan, “the diversity of the BBG ... makes it a challenge to bring all the separate parts together in a more effective whole” As we reported in July 2003, the Board hoped to address this key challenge through two primary means. First, it planned to treat the component parts of U.S. international broadcasting as a single system with the Board in the position of actively managing resources across broadcast entities to achieve common broadcast goals. Second, it intended to realign theBBG’s organizational structure to reinforce the Board's role as CEO. Better Assess the Impact of Agencies’ Marking and Publicizing Efforts. U.S. Public Diplomacy: State Department Efforts to Engage Muslim Audiences Lack Certain Communication Elements and Face Significant Challenges. International Affairs: Persistent Challenges. The Department of State: Staffing and Foreign Language Shortfalls Persist Despite Initiatives to Address Gaps. The State Department and Broadcasting Board of Governors Expand Efforts in the Middle East but Face Significant challenges. The United States Agency for International Development: Management of Middle East Broadcasting Services Could Be Improved. This work is not subject to copyright protection in the United States. It may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from GAO. Because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material, permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you want to use it. The U.S. Government Accountability Office is an independent agency that advises the government on issues of national security. The GAO's mission is to provide the public with information about the State Department's efforts to address national security issues. The U.S. government lacks an interagency public diplomacy strategy. While the department has articulated a strategic framework to direct its efforts, comprehensive guidance on how to implement this strategic framework has not yet been developed. In addition, posts generally do not pursue a campaign-style approach to communications that incorporates best practices endorsed by GAO and others. State has begun to take credible steps towards instituting more systematic performance measurement practices, consistent with recommendations GAE and others have made. Finally, although the BBG has developed a strategic plan to integrate its diverse efforts, the State Department has yet to develop its own strategic plan. GAO: U.S. lacks a governmentwide, interagency public diplomacy strategy. The lack of such a strategy complicates the task of conveying consistent messages, GAO says. The BBG has added audience size as a key performance measure within its strategic plan, it adds. GAO: Our latest review of MBN’s operations call into question the potential value of this measure due to various methodological concerns. The GAO has made a number of unsuccessful attempts to develop a strategy. strategy complicates the task of conveying consistent messages and therefore increases the risk of making damaging communication mistakes. State officials have said that it also diminishes the efficiency and effectiveness of governmentwide public diplomacy efforts. Several reports have concluded that a strategy is needed to synchronize agencies’ target audience assessments, messages, and capabilities. On April 8, 2006, the President established a new Policy Coordination Committee on Public Diplomacy and Strategic Communications. This committee intends to better coordinate interagency activities, including the development of an interagency public diplomacy strategy. that normally exceeds the three- to four-page plans produced by posts in pilot countries. The plans omit basic elements, such as specific core messages and themes. In the absence of such research, programs may lack important information about appropriate target audiences and credible messages and messengers. Based on prior reports by GAO and others, the department has begun to institute a more concerted effort to measure the impact of its programs and activities. The department created (1) a task force to assess the effectiveness of the department's programs. Five tactics will be used to implement the Under Secretary’s priority goals. 18 posts selected to participate in a pilot initiative focusing on this objective. We have recommended that State adopt strategic communication best practices. These steps include defining the core message, identifying and segmenting target audiences, developing detailed communication strategies and developing country-level plans focusing on the countering extremism goal. We reviewed most of the plans submitted in response to this guidance. Although useful as a high-level planning exercise, these plans do not adhere to the campaign-style approach. message, identifying and segmenting target audiences, developing detailed communication strategies and tactics, and using research and evaluation to inform and re-direct efforts as needed. In 2006, our review of public diplomacy operations in Nigeria, Pakistan, and Egypt in 2006 found that this approach and corresponding communication plans were absent. In a recent development, 18 posts participating in the department’s pilot countries initiative have developed country-level plans focusing on the countering extremism goal. These plans have been released to the public. In March 2007, we reported that most agencies involved in foreign assistance activities had established some marking and publicity requirements. However, we identified some challenges to marking and publicizing activities. The U.S. government also lacks a governmentwide strategy and meaningful methods to ensure that recipients of foreign assistance are consistently aware that the aid comes from the United States. We have been told this strategy is still under development and will be issued soon.. State indicated that the interagency public diplomacy strategy will address assessment of marking and. publicity programs on public awareness. State has not yet developed a comprehensive strategy to guide the Department’s efforts to engage the private sector. In 2005, the Under Secretary established a strategic framework for U.S. public diplomacy efforts. This framework partially responds to our 2003 recommendation that State should develop and disseminate a strategy to integrate its public Diplomacy efforts and direct them toward achieving common objectives. The Under Secretary noted that she intends to achieve these goals using five tactics—engagement, exchanges, education, empowerment, and evaluation. impact of its programs and activities. The Department established an expanded evaluation schedule that is designed to cover all major public diplomacy programs. The department also has called on program managers to analyze and define their key inputs, activities, outputs, outcomes, and impact to help identify meaningful performance goals and indicators. Finally, the department recently launched a pilot public diplomacy performance measurement data collection data collection to help measure the department's performance in the public diplomacy community.iReport.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery.