From fiscal year 1991 through fiscal year 2022, the Army plans to purchase 85,488 FMTV trucks. The Army used a streamlined acquisition strategy to reduce the time required to develop and field FMTV vehicles. Army did not execute a low-risk acquisition strategy, authors say. The contract contained an aggressive production schedule that did not take into account the contractor’s inexperience, they say. They recommend that the Army include safeguards in follow-on production contracts so that it does not repeat errors. Production qualification testing was originally scheduled to be completed in August 1993. The trucks failed the test because they did not meet reliability and some performance requirements. The Army identified over 90 problems that the contractor was required to correct. The contractor had to stop new production for 5 months and produced only 175 new trucks during the other 4 months. About 1,474 trucks had to be disassembled to their frames and remanufactured. The first unit was not equipped with FMTV trucks until January 1996, 2 years and 3 months later than planned. of the contract. The Army planned to recompete a new multiyear FMTV production contract in fiscal year 1998. The Congress, in reviewing the Army’s fiscal year 1996 budget request, did not support the termination. Since this was not enough to fully fund the final year of the contract, the Army and the contractor agreed to extend the FMTV contract 2 years, ending in December 1998. We estimate that as of December 31, 1997 the Army may have incurred an additional $22 million to operate the older trucks. The FMTV production contract specifies that FMTV trucks be designed so that corrosion will not perforate or cause other damage. The contract also specifies the procedures to be used to test the 10-year corrosion protection. The FMTV project office first became aware of corrosion problems in late 1995, when a truck was found corroded through the sheet metal of its cab. The truck was less than 3 years old and was among those stored at the plant awaiting modification. The contractor and the contractor and The Army surveyed all of the trucks in storage and discovered corrosion on other truck cabs. They determined that the main causes of the corrosion were inadequate cleaning and painting procedures by the cab subcontractor, McLaughlin Body Company. McLaughlin subsequently improved its procedures at no cost to the Army. These improvements would be reflected in trucks produced after February 28, 1997. On January 19, 1996, the Army agreed to accept trucks with cabs produced before McLaughlin improve its procedures if Stewart & Stevenson repaired or replaced cabs that showed corrosion. cabs to verify the repairs, and (3) agreed to repair or replace the older cabs if corrosion appeared on them within 5 years. Pending its approval of the contractor’s corrective action plan, the Army withheld $1,000 or $2,000 per truck, depending on type. Both contractor and Army project officials said that the Army had not accepted these trucks and therefore could have required the contractor to replace all the cabs on all the trucks already produced or in various stages of production before McLaughlin improved its processes. The Army’s decision to award a $1.2-billion FMTV contract to a company that was not experienced in truck production, did not have truck production facilities, and was not affiliated with an experienced producer. The Army changed the final year of the 5-year FMTV production program when Congress provided additional funding to continue the program. The contract added an estimated $85 million to the original contract price when the first 4,955 trucks produced did not meet the corrosion protection requirements. For early historical data, we had to rely mainly on oral testimony because many documents dealing with the early program were unavailable. To determine the impact of delays in delivering FMTV trucks, we calculated additional operating and support costs the Army might have incurred as of December 31, 1997. We did not independently verify the accuracy of material receiving and shipping report data obtained from the Defense Finance and Accounting Service, but we corroborated its accuracy with another database that used the same original source documentation. We then computed the difference between the cost for the older and theFMTV trucks. than 400 systems deployed in tactical units. Army estimated that it would cost $18.5 million to replace all of the cabs on trucks covered by the warranty. The Army used a replacement cost of $8,000 per air drop cab and $6,000 each for standard cab to develop its estimate. It bases its estimate on 2,864 trucks that it thought would be covered, not 4,955 trucks that actually are covered. We were not able to reach the Army for comment. not able to determine the number of air drop and standard trucks in the 2,091 trucks not included in the Army’s estimate. To produce a conservative estimate of the potential total cost to replace all the cabs, we multiplied the standard cab cost of $6,000 per truck. We performed our work at Defense and Army Headquarters, Washington, D.C., Defense Contract Management Command Headquarters, Fort Belvoir, Virginia and Medium Tactical Vehicle Project Office, Warren, Michigan. We conducted our review between July 1997 and November 1998 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. We plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days from its issue date, unless you publicly announce its contents earlier. At that time, we will send copies of the report to the Chairmen and Ranking Minority Members of the Senate Committees on Governmental Affairs, Armed Services, and Appropriations and of the Defense Finance and Accounting Service, Columbus, Ohio. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org for details. House Committees on Government Reform, Armed Services, and Appropriations; the Secretaries of Defense and the Army; and the Director of the Office of Management and Budget. Major contributors to this report are listed in appendix II. Please contact me on (202) 512-4841 if you or your staff have any questions concerning this report. The first copy of each GAO report and testimony is free. Additional copies are $2 each. Orders should be sent to the following address, orders should be mailed to: accompanied by a check or money order made out to the Superintendent of Documents, when necessary. VISA and MasterCard credit cards are accepted, also. Orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent. U.S. General Accounting Office P.O. Box 37050 Washington, DC 20013 Room 1100 700 4th St. NW (corner of 4th and G Sts. NW) Orders may also be placed by calling (202) 512-6000 or by using fax number (202?) 512-6061. and testimony. To receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days, please call (202) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone. A recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255.