The Refugee Protection Act of 2011 would make significant revisions to asylum policy. The bill would eliminate the time limits on seeking asylum in cases of changed circumstances. It would also proscribe conditions under which an asylum seeker who was a victim of terrorist coercion would not be excluded as a terrorist. The report opens with an overview of current policy, discussing the threshold of what constitutes asylum and the procedures for obtaining it. The second portion of the report identifies the top sending countries and includes a time series analysis of six selected source countries for asylum seekers. The third section of theReport analyzes asylum approvals by country of origin. conditions). If the asylum officer approves the application and the alien passes the identification and background checks, then the foreign national is granted asylum status. There has been a 79% decrease in affirmative asylum cases filed since the enactment of IIRIRA in 1996. The number of asylum cases approved more than doubled from 13,532 in FY1996 to 31,202 in FY2002, and then fell to the lowest point over the 14-year period—9,614—in FY2009. Asylum applications of aliens who are not granted asylum by asylum officers are referred to EOIR immigration judges for formal proceedings. In some respects, these applicants/aliens are allowed a "second bite at the apple" Asylum applicants in the affirmative process are not subject to the mandatory detention requirements while their applications are being adjudicated, though there is broader authority under the INA to detain aliens for other grounds. Defensive applications for asylum are raised when a foreign national is in removal proceedings and asserts. claim for asylum as a defense to his/her removal. EOIR's immigration judges and the BIA, entities in DOJ separate from the USCIS, have exclusive control over such claims. Generally, the alien raises the issue of asylum during the beginning of the removal process. The matter is then litigated in immigration court, using formal procedures such as the presentation of evidence and direct and cross examination. If the alien fails to raise the issue at the start of the process, the claim for asylum may be raised only after a successful motion. Defensive asylum claims started at a lower level in FY1996 than affirmative USCIS claims (116,877) Since that time, defensive asylum claims have dropped by 53%, to 39,279 in. The immigration judge's ultimate decision regarding both the applicant's/alien's removal and asylum application is appealable to the BIA.to reopen is filed with the court. The applicant/alien is not detained due to their asylum claim, but rather because of the broader authority in the INA to detain aliens. FY2009. EOIR approved 5,131 in FY1996 and 10,186 in FY2009. DHS' Customs and Border Protection (CBP) officer must summarily exclude a foreign national arriving without proper documentation, unless the alien expresses a fear of persecution if repatriated. Absent a stated fear, the CBP officer is allowed to exclude aliens without proper. documentation from the United States without placing them in removal proceedings. This procedure is known as expedited removal. According to DHS immigration policy and procedures, CBP inspectors, as well as other DHS immigration officers, are required to ask each individual who may be subject to expedited removal the following series of "protection questions" to identify anyone who is afraid of return. Why did you leave your home country or country of last residence? Do you have any fear or concern about being returned to your homecountry or being removed from the United States? Would you be harmed if you were returned toyour home country? DoYou have any questions or is there anything else you would like to ask? If a foreign national expresses a fear of return, the alien is supposed to be detained by Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) and interviewed by a USCIS asylum officer. The asylum officer then makes the "credible fear" determination of the alien's claim. Those found to have a "c credible fear" are referred to an EOIR immigration judge, which places the asylum seeker on the defensive path to asylum. If the alien does not have a credible fear, theAlien may request that an EoIR immigrationJudge review that finding. fear" claims that USCIS has considered has steadily increased from 4,712 in FY2005 to 5,454 in FY2009. Consistent time series data on "credible fear" claims are not available before FY2005. On November 13, 2002, the former INS published a notice clarifying that certain aliens arriving by sea who are not admitted or paroled into the United States are to be placed on a waiting list. On that day, the U.S. placed more than 1,000 aliens on the list. In 2003, the Attorney General ruled that illegal mass migration by sea threatened national security because it diverts the U.S. Coast Guard and other resources from their homeland security duties. The case involved a Haitian who had had expedited removal proceedings and detained (subject to humanitarian parole) The Attorney General expanded on this rationale in his April 17, 2003, ruling that instructs EOIR immigration judges to consider "national security interests implicated by the encouragement of further unlawful mass migrations ..." in making bond determinations. come ashore in Biscayne Bay, FL, on October 29, 2002, and had been released on bond by an immigration judge. The BIA had upheld his release, but the Attorney General vacated the BIA decision. All foreign nationals seeking asylum are subject to multiple background checks in the terrorist, immigration, and law enforcement databases. Those who enter the country legally on nonimmigrant visas are screened by the consular officers at the Department of State when they apply for a visa, and all foreign nationals are inspected by CBP officers at ports of entry. by the U.S. Border Patrol or the ICE agents when they are apprehended. When aliens formally request asylum, they are sent to the nearest USCIS-authorized fingerprint site. They have all 10 fingers scanned and are subject to a full background check by the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) Distinct from asylum law and policy, aliens claiming relief from removal due to torture may be treated separately under regulations implementing the United Nations Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (hereafter, Torture Convention) a country where there are "substantial grounds" for believing that he or she would be in danger of being tortured. The alien must meet the three elements necessary to establish torture: 1. the torture must involve the infliction of severe pain or suffering, either physical or mental, and 2. it must be intentionally inflicted. The torture must be committed by or at the acquiescence of a public official or person acting in an official capacity. Generally, an applicant for non-removal under Article 3 has the burden of proving that it is more likely than not that he would be tortured. be tortured if removed to the proposed country. If credible, the applicant's testimony may be sufficient to sustain this burden without additional corroboration. All evidence relevant to the possibility of future torture is required to be considered. If a diplomatic assurance (deemed sufficiently reliable by the Attorney General or Secretary of State) that the alien will not be tortured is obtained from the government of the country to which the alien would be repatriated, the alien's claim for asylum is likely to be successful. If not, the application for asylum will be denied. protection will not be considered further and the alien may be removed. For many years, most foreign nationals who sought asylum in the United States were from the Western Hemisphere. In FY1999, the People's Republic of China (PRC) moved to the top of the source countries for affirmative asylum applications. The U.S. now has more asylum cases filed from China than from any other country in the world, according to the U.N. refugee agency's most recent report on the number of asylum cases. asylum claims, with 4,209 new cases. Somalia followed as a leading source country with 3,125 cases in FY1999. As the overall number of asylum seekers fell in the late 1990s, the shrinking numbers from Central America contributed to the decline. Simultaneously, the number of Asylum seekers from the PRC began rising and reached 10,522 affirmative cases inFY2002. The PRC remained the leading sourcecountry throughout the 2000s. As a result, asylum seekers from PRC dominated both the affirmative and defensive asylum caseloads in FY2009. of the 39,279 defensive cases filed with EOIR. Five of the top 10 source countries of asylum seekers were Western Hemisphere nations in FY2009. The PRC asylum cases peaked in FY2002 for both affirmative and defensive claims. Affirmative asylum claims from El Salvador have steadily declined by 90.4%, from a high of 4,706 in FY 1997 to 453 in FY 2009. The "credible fear" claims have dipped by 54.6%, from 185 in FY2005 to 84 in FY2008. Asylum seekers from Ethiopia comprise the smallest number of cases among the six source countries studied. The number of asylum seekers from Haiti who do reach the United States has not fluctuated greatly over the 13-year period. All three asylum gateways of affirmative, defensive, and "credible fear" claims have each evidenced a drop since FY2006, when defensive claims peaked at 6,056. Chinese, Salvadoran and Mexican asylum claims each yielded similar levels of affirmative versus defensive asylum claims. unique fluctuations over time. Country conditions lie at the core of the principle that the U.S. will not return a foreign national to a country where his life or freedom would be threatened on account of race, religion, nationality, membership in a particular social group, or political opinion. As discussed more fully above, individualized persecution or persecution resulting from group persecution is more likely to cause asylum seekers to seek refuge in the United States. This data analysis suggests that conditions in the major source countries—whether economic, environmental, political, religious or social—were likely the driving force behind asylum seekers. identity may form the basis of the asylum claim. In the individualized instance, if the asylum seeker demonstrates that there is a reasonable possibility of suffering such persecution as an individual if he or she were to return to that country, then the fear of persecution is deemed reasonable. The group identity instance is the same as the individual instance. The asylum seeker must show that there was a pattern or practice in his or her home country of persecution. If the asylum seekers is unable or unwilling to return because of such fear, the fear is deemed to be reasonable. of a group of persons similarly situated to the applicant on account of race, religion, nationality, membership in a particular social group, or political opinion; then the fear of persecution is deemed reasonable. The PRC led in the number of asylum cases approved by USCIS and EOIR in FY2009 ( Figure 13 ). Moreover, abuse of human rights in the PRC has been a principal area of concern for the U.S. government. The U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) has the authority to grant asylum. concern in the United States for many years. Presumably, PRC asylum seekers are also benefiting from the provision enabling aliens to claim asylum on the basis of persecution resulting from resistance to coercive population control policies. The portion of approved asylum cases from Haiti was consistent with its portion of asylum seekers in FY2009. Specifically, Haiti represented shares of asylum cases that USCIS and EOIR approved. that were comparable to the portion of Asylum cased filed with USCIS in FY 2009—4.5% and 4.6%. The U.S. Coast Guard interdiction of Haitians has undoubtedly suppressed the number of asylum seekers from that nation. Although the continent of Africa was not home to many of the asylum seekers discussed above, the African nations of Cameroon and Eritrea, as well as Ethiopia, appear in the top 10 source countries for asylum cases approved by USCIS and EOIR in FY2009 ( Figure 13). The emergence of the African countries in theTop 10 source nations for approved asylum cases is revealed in Table 1. Iran, Iraq, Indonesia, and Pakistan were top 20 source countries for those who received asylum from FY2000 through FY2009. Iraq and India were the only ones among these countries (along with Nepal) to be among the top 10 in FY 2009. Several top sending countries were also among the decade's top 20 approved affirmative and defensive asylum cases: Colombia, Haiti, Guatemala, and, of course, the PRC. Figure 14 presents the data for the asylee producing countries in the high-volume immigration courts from which these conclusions are drawn. The size of the disparities in asylum grant rates creates a perception of unfairness in the asylum adjudication process within the immigration court system. Researchers at Syracuse University's TRAC have been conducting analyses of the immigration courts for several years. They were among the earliest to identify wide variations in asylum outcomes that were dependent on the immigration judge. "The typical judge-by-judge denial rate—half denied more and half denied less than the average asylum seeker," the researchers say. "We could not measure the effect of case merits on case outcomes," they say. half denied less—was 65% . There were, however, eight judges who denied asylum to nine out of ten of the applicants who came before them. In the New York immigration court, for example, one judge denied only 6% in one case. TRAC's latest study of the FY2008-FY2010 period found that judge-to-judge disparities in asylum decisions have moderated since their earlier studies, but it concluded that the disparities remained substantial. The latest study was conducted by the Center for Immigration Studies. The judge-to-judge range in the San Francisco immigration court was from 32% to 92%. The disparities were also evident when immigration court decisions were analyzed by the asylum seeker's country of origin. The denial rates of Iraq asylum seekers were the lowest, spanning from zero to 4%, and their variation was also the lowest at 4%. In contrast, the New York court's denial rates ranged from 4% to 74% for PRC asylum seekers. of the asylum cases, while another denied 70% of the Asylum cases. denial rates of Salvadoran asylum seekers were the highest, spanning 90% to 98%. Some argue that given the religious, ethnic, and political violence in various countries around the world, it has become more difficult to differentiate the persecuted from the persecutors. Some express concern that U.S. sympathies for the asylum seekers caught up in the current political uprisings in the Middle East, northern Europe, and South America are being misconstrued by the media and the public. Some cite the seemingly inexplicable disparities in asylum approvals rates. Africa, and South Asia could inadvertently facilitate the entry of terrorists. Others maintain that current law does not offer adequate protections for people fleeing human rights violations or gender-based abuses. Some assert that asylum has become an alternative pathway for immigration rather than humanitarian protection provided in extraordinary cases. At the crux of the issue is the extent to which an asylum policy forged during the Cold War is adapting to the competing priorities and turbulence of the 21 st century. Some of these issues are highlighted below. attracts asylum seekers who have weak or bogus claims. Some have warned of "the ongoing separation of asylum from any grounding in the national interest" Others have maintained that migration "push" factors, such as rapid population growth, poverty, and political instability in the sending countries of asylum seekers, are factors over which the U.S. has little control. "The asylum system has become the hole in the fence for millions of dubious claimants—and a major immigration magnet in itself," one critic has concluded. Some argue that the U.S. should re-calibrate asylum policy to provide more protections for asylum seekers. These proponents have expressed a desire for the United States to reaffirm its welcome to those who have fled persecution as well as its commitment to humanitarian efforts. They have argued that some of the statutory revisions in 1996 and 2005 created unnecessary barriers for genuine asylees and that these provisions can be reformed.argued for a serious examination of the forces that propel asylum seekers to seek refuge. Research has revealed disparities in asylum decisions. Many are calling for greater congressional oversight of the immigration courts. Some are pushing for an increase in funding for immigration judges and law clerks. Others, however, contend that the problems related to disparities in Asylum decisions lie with the U.S. government. Without making the United States more vulnerable to unauthorized migrants, criminals, or terrorists, it would not be as vulnerable as it would otherwise be, they say. It would be more secure and less vulnerable to criminals and terrorists. less in the funding shortages and more in the quality of immigration judges. Some are recommending higher recruitment standards for immigration judges and more training, particularly training in the culture of asylum seekers' homelands. Some further recommend a requirement of written opinions in asylum cases. Still others maintain that the USCIS asylum officers also display disparate outcomes among similarly situated asylum cases, and that enhanced training and research support should be available. Establishing mechanisms to foster communication among asylum offices is offered as an option to improve consistency. to consider cases in pairs or panels of three asylum offers. Despite concern over the disparate decisions, there is an argument that greater congressional oversight might politicize the process. Legislative intervention to promote more consistent decisions presumably might undermine the independence of the asylum adjudicators and immigration judges. Because none of the studies that documented the disparities had access to the case facts and evidence, the rationale for decisions remains unknown and thus may indeed be justified. Immigration removal proceedings are civil in nature and, thus, do not entail the right to legal counsel that criminal proceedings do. Asylum seekers' access to counsel has arisen in recent years. Many maintain that few can adequately represent themselves. Charity and pro bono legal projects cannot afford to serve all asylum seekers, many say. Some offer that providing legal counsel is an option for addressing the disparities in outcome, they say. Many cite the GAO study, which found that many can't afford to represent themselves and need legal counsel to get a fair hearing. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org. asylum seekers were three times as likely to obtain asylum if they had legal representation. Some further argue that lack of counsel for a bona fide asylum seeker might result in deportation to a country where the person's life and liberty are threatened. Under current law, a foreign national has one year after the date of arrival to apply affirmatively for asylum, unless there are changed circumstances or extraordinary circumstances related to the delay in filing the application. Supporters of current law maintain that the one-year rule prevents abuses of the asylum system. Many asylum seekers who fail to file within one year of arrival subsequently receive withholding of removal or relief under the U.N. Convention Against Torture. They assert such people would have qualified for asylum but for the one-year deadline. They point out that foreign nationals have the option of seeking asylum defensively during removal proceedings. They advocate for a good cause and cite the drop in asylum applicants after the 1996 revisions to the law that added theOne-year rule to the asylum law in 1996. Asylum seekers are often detained with criminal aliens, a practice that many consider inappropriate and unwarranted. Detention is psychologically damaging, some argue, to an already fragile population. Proponents for current law warn that releasing asylum seekers in expedited removal undermines the purpose of the law. They argue that mandatory detention of asylum seekers is an essential tool in maintaining immigration control and homeland security.. Any loosening of these policies, they allege, would divert the CBP and ICE officers from their homeland security duties to track. Some have long been concerned that terrorists would seek asylum in the United States. Critics point to asylum seekers from countries of "special concern" as potential national security risks. Supporters of current law say it sends a clear signal of deterrence to aliens who consider using asylum claims as a mechanism to enter illegally. Some argue further that because asylum is a discretionary form of asylum, it should not be treated as a law enforcement tool.down wayward asylum seekers. The U.S. is home to hundreds of thousands of pending asylum cases. immigration relief, national security risks should outweigh humanitarian concerns, some argue. Others point out that asylum seekers are subject to multiple national security screenings and that if an asylum seeker is a suspected or known terrorist, the law already bars alien terrorists from entering the United States. They argue that to the extent to which security risks had existed, those risks resulted more from the limits of intelligence data on terrorists in the past rather than the expansiveness of asylum policy. Some further assert that asylees from other countries should be allowed to stay in the U.S. Some argue that the law should be amended to provide an exception for people who have been forced by terrorists to provide support. Opponents of limiting the judicial review of asylum cases contend that it would erode two traditional values of U.S. polity. The law states that an alien who commits an act that is of "special concern" may be eligible for asylum. The right to due process and freedom from repression and persecution are protected by the Constitution. It is illegal to deny asylum to someone who has committed an act of violence against the United States. he "knows, or reasonably should know, affords material support" to a terrorist organization is inadmissible. It makes no exception for instances where the alien has been coerced into providing support. Over the past decade, the United States has admitted or adjusted about 1 million foreign nationals to legal permanent resident (LPR) status each year. Overall, asylee adjustments comprised only 4% (411,972) of the 10.3 million LPRs admitted oradjusted from FY2000 through FY2009. immigration policy, asylum issues are less about the number of foreign nationals involved and more about the qualities of the policies and the efficacy of the procedures. Asylum is an adjudication of a person based upon facts, evidence, beliefs, and circumstances that might be clear at some times yet nebulous at other times. The policy tensions of asylum often pit the promotion of our humanitarian values against the prevention of fraudulent abuses. The protection of the persecuted against the security of our borders; and the obligations of our moral responsibilities internationally against the commitments of our social priorities domestically. balance of these competing concerns may be shaken by a crisis in a neighboring nation or by larger world events. The U.S. Congress plays the key role in considering when and whether revision or re-calibration of asylum law and policies is warranted, says John Avlon, a professor of law at the University of California, Los Angeles. He says Congress should consider whether a change in asylum law or policies is in the best interests of the country as a whole, rather than just the asylum seekers.