The Magnuson-Stevens Fisheries Conservation and Management Act granted responsibility for managing marine resources to the Secretary of Commerce. NMFS is part of Commerce’s National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) The act also established eight regional fishery management councils, each responsible for making recommendations about managing fisheries in federal waters. The eight councils include the Caribbean Council, covering waters off the U.S. Virgin Islands and the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico. The councils are made up of fishing industry participants and state and federal fishery managers. Gulf of Mexico Council, covering waters off Texas, Louisiana, Mississippi, Alabama, and the west coast of Florida. Mid-Atlantic Council covers waters off New York, New Jersey, Delaware, Maryland, Virginia, and North Carolina. New England Council covering waters of Maine, New Hampshire, Massachusetts, Rhode Island, and Connecticut. North Pacific Council covered waters off Alaska; Pacific Council covering California, Oregon, and Washington. Western Pacific Council covers Hawaii, American Samoa, Guam, Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands and uninhabited islands. U.S. territories in the Western Pacific. NMFS has six regional science centers, which are responsible for generating the scientific information necessary for the conservation, management, and use of each region's marine resources. Alaska Center, covering the coastal oceans off Alaska and parts of the west coast of the United States. Northeast Center covering waters along the Northeast Continental Shelf from the Gulf of Maine to Cape Hatteras, North Carolina. Northwest Center covering the northeast Pacific Ocean, primarily waters off the coasts. of California, Oregon, Washington, and British Columbia; Pacific Islands Center, covering the central and western Pacific Ocean; Southwest Center, primarily covering waters off the coast of California and areas throughout the Pacific and Antarctic Oceans. Southeast Center, covers waters along the continental southeastern United States as well as Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands. The Magnuson-Stevens Act, as amended by the Sustainable Fisheries Act, also established national standards for fishery conservation and management. These standards deal with preventing overfishing, using scientific information, using fishery resources efficiently and minimizing bycatch. The Pacific Fishery Management Council (Pacific Council) released its initial Fishery management plan for groundfish in 1982. The Pacific Council’s goal is to have long-range plans for managing groundfish fisheries that will promote a stable planning environment for the seafood industry and will maintain the health of the resource and environment. To help achieve these goals, stock management plans are being developed by the Pacific Council to help protect and restore the fishery's long-term health and stability. The council is also working to develop appropriate plans for conserving and managing fisheries under their jurisdiction. assessments are conducted on groundfish species to estimate fish populations. Since 1995, the Northwest Center has had lead responsibility for conducting stock assessments on Pacific groundfish. The Northwest Center receives assistance from other NMFS science centers, such as the Southwest Center, which conducted the bocaccio assessment. Stock assessments are the biological evaluation of the status of fish stocks. They provide official estimates in key areas, including the size of the stock population, the size. of the spawning population, and the amount of fish that have died. Stock assessments form the scientific basis used by regional councils to determine biologically sustainable harvests and guide the monitoring and rebuilding of overfished and threatened stocks. For example, regional councils use stock assessments and other indicators of biological productivity to recommend to NMFS a maximum, or total allowable catch, in a particular fishery. Without stock assessments, fishery managers would have limited information about the status of fisheries in making decisions about setting harvest levels. For each species, the assessor reviews for each species. previous stock assessments, gathers available data about the species being assessed, runs the data through computer-generated models, and estimates the species’ total biomass. Stock assessors use NMFS-collected data, such as stock surveys conducted on NOAA vessels or contracted commercial fishing vessels, as well as data collected by non-NMFS sources. Commercial and recreational fisheries data—the amount and composition of fish caught from a particular stock, whether caught intentionally or not. Stock abundance—surveys of how many fish constitute a stock’s total size or weight. by commercial and recreational fishermen or unintentionally caught and discarded. Data sources include fishing logbooks, dockside samples, and onboard observations, among others. Data on the abundance of juvenile and larval fish (fish at their earliest stage), which helps scientists forecast the size of a particular stock in the future. Synoptic oceanographic sampling—data data on the relationship between a fish stock and its physical environment, as well the relationship of a fishStock to other species. Data about the age and sex composition of the stock, age at first maturity, fertility, average lifespan and natural mortality. on the ocean ecosystem, such as water temperature or salinity, plankton composition, or ocean currents. For each stock assessment, a review panel, consisting of NMFS scientists and outside experts, independently reviews the methodology of the assessment and works with the assessor to ensure their comments are adequately addressed. Through 2003, 24 of the 82 species of Pacific groundfish have had a full quantitative stock assessment. Relying on these assessments, NMFS has declared that nine species ofPacific groundfish are overfished. Pacific hake, also called Pacific whiting, is generally found off the west coast of North America. It is one of many species of hake distributed in the Atlantic and Pacific oceans. Fishermen use mid-water trawls and generally fish over the ocean bottom at depths of 100 to 500 meters. Pacific hake was declared overfished in 2002 because the 2002 stock assessment estimated that the species was over-fished.darkblotched rockfish, and yelloweye rockfish. Pacific hake biomass at 700,000 metric tons. By 2004, the biomass was estimated at between 2.7 and 4.2 million metric tons, and Pacific hake is no longer considered overfished. Bocaccio rockfish generally inhabit waters off the coast of northern Baja, Mexico to Alaska. They are commercially fished using trawls, hook-and-line and gillnets. They commonly live over rocky areas or open areas of the ocean’s floor to about 320 meters. Canary rockfish inhabit the northeastern Pacific Ocean, from northern Baja, Mexico to the western Gulf of Alaska. Adult canary rock fish are primarily found along the continental shelf, from 46 to 457 meters deep. Canary rockfish are harvested commercially using trawl nets and hook-and-line and are also considered an important species for recreational fishermen. NMFS declared canaryRockfish as overfished in 2000. The 2002 stock assessment estimated the canary Rockfish biomass at 6,197 metric tons. rockfish are found in the waters from Santa Catalina Island, California to the Bering Sea on soft bottom areas at about 29 to 549 meters deep. Commercial fishery concentrations are located off the coasts of California and Oregon. Darkblotched rockfish are caught primarily by commercial trawls and contribute to both commercial and recreational fishing. NMFS determined that darkblotches rockfish was overfished in 2000, when the last full stock assessment was conducted; it was updated in 2003. almost exclusively inhabit rocky areas from northern Baja, Mexico to the Aleutian Islands, Alaska. Yelloweye rockfish, found in depths ranging from 15 to 550 meters, are caught using both trawl nets and line gear. NMFS determined that the species was overfished in 2002. The reliability of NMFS’ stock assessments is questionable for the Pacific hake and Pacific tilapia, as well as yelloweye and Pacific bluegill. The 2002 stock assessment estimated the yelloweye biomass at 2,325 metric tons in 2001. four rockfish species we reviewed, although they were based on the best information available at the time the assessments were conducted. The reliability of the stock assessments we reviewed is questionable. Four of the assessments did not have at least one NMFS-collected data source of sufficient scope and accuracy. NMFS lacked a standard process for assessing the reliability of non-NMFS data used in all five assessments. For four of the assessment reports, the stock assessment reports did not adequately identify the uncertainty of the biomass estimates.  stock assessors use a variety of data, including NMFS data and non-NMFS data, in developing their assessments. Two key pieces of NMFS survey data are the shelf and slope bottom trawl survey and the acoustic survey. Other data that assessors sometimes use include larval surveys (data for fish in their earliest stage) and recruitment data.plans to increase the scope and accuracy of its collected data, as additional funds become available; is implementing changes that will help ensure the reliability of non- NMFSData. Northwest Center officials raised concerns about basing assessments solely on non-NMFS data. The non- NMFS data assessors use include commercial catch data and recreational catch data. A 2002 National Research Council report found that the inclusion of NMFS survey data was the best option for a reliable estimate of abundance because such surveys use an unbiased statistical design, control sampling locations, and provide for quality assurance. According to Northwest Center officials, each stock assessment should include at least one source ofNMFS-collected data. such as commercial and recreational catch data. Catch data do not provide the species’ relative or absolute biomass, according to NMFS officials. For example, catch data alone is insufficient because fishermen are not randomly sampling the ocean but are fishing areas that they are allowed to fish and they believe have the most fish. fishing restrictions, such as a total allowable catch, can limit the amount of fish being caught. catch data have often been inaccurate for a variety of reasons, including imprecise accounting for dead fish tossed back into the ocean. data sources, four of the five assessments did not use NMFS survey data or the NMFS data used covered only a portion of the species’ habitats. In the yelloweye assessment, no NM FS survey data were available because yelloweye live almost exclusively in the rocky habitat that NMFS trawl surveys cannot cover. Bocaccio, canary, and darkblotched live in both the trawlable and untrawlable waters. As a result, theyelloweye assessment was based solely on non-NMFS data.  NMFS reported in 2003 that 77 percent of the survey area was trawlable and 23 percent was untrawlable. Lacking data on species in the 23 percent that is untrawl able, the assessors estimated the overall biomass using the NMFS data collected from the trawlability areas. However, the abundance in the trawlerable area is not representative of the abundance of species in untrawling waters. The 2003 NMFS report also found that darkblotched groundfish are less abundant in untrawled waters. untrawlable waters. NMFS does not have a standard process for evaluating whether the non-NMFS data used in its stock assessments are reliable. As a result, some rockfish populations may be understated while others may be overstated. We believe that certain internal control activities, such as aStandard process for ensuring data reliability, would be helpful to stock assessors and the public. The fifth groundfish species, Pacific hake, lives primarily in mid-water habitat; and so the concerns about the lack of NMFS data in rocky, untrawlable habitats are not applicable. Lacking a standard process, some assessors reviewed the quality of the raw non-NMFS data. Assessors who reviewed for data quality found mistakes that they believed made some of the data unusable or that could have impaired the accuracy of the stock assessments. For example, the assessor for the 2002 yelloweye stock assessment found numerous errors in the recreational catch data, such as attributing the catch from an entire fishing vessel to a single fisherman, and thus did not use the data. Commercial catch data frequently have inconsistencies. California, Oregon, and Washington require fishermen to enter catch and location information into logbooks, but logbooks are often incomplete and inaccurate. While the stock assessment review panels evaluated the assessments, the panels did not evaluate the quality of the raw data used in the assessments.doing so could have resulted in overestimating the biomass. According to a Northwest Center official, several assessors have raised concerns about data quality and accessibility in feedback meetings. In response to these concerns, the Northwest Center has recently begun. The Northwest Center plans to conduct a data quality workshop in July 2004 to formally establish the roles and responsibilities of the data stewards. Data stewards are responsible for helping assessors compile relevant data and for conducting quality assurance and quality control checks on the data. In 1998, the National Research Council recommended that NMFS include realistic measures of uncertainty in its stock assessments. NMFS’ 2001 stock assessment improvement plan also recognized the need to better quantify and communicate the data and its value to the community. The Northwest Center will conduct the workshop in June 2004. uncertainty in assessments. In a review of the 2002 canary assessment, the stock assessment review panel recommended that standard estimates of uncertainty be included in future assessments. However, the bocaccio, canary, darkblotched, and yelloweye assessments did not present a measure of uncertainty associated with the biomass estimates. Without uncertainty ranges, it is difficult for regional councils and NMFS to know how much confidence they have in their biomass estimates, the report says. It is difficult to determine the reliability of the stock Assessment without them. they can have in relying on the estimates for determining stock abundance and hence for setting allowable harvests of the fish. With such wide variations, it is important to provide uncertainty ranges, otherwise management may make inappropriate decisions. While assessors told us that their stock assessments included some information about differences in estimated biomass when using the estimates, they said they did not provide such information to the public. The 2003 assessment of bocaccio biomass, however, estimated 6,506 metric tons in 2002—more than doubling the previous estimate. different data sources (sensitivity analyses), the mathematical model that NMFS uses to estimate biomass does not calculate uncertainty ranges. NMFS is updating the model so that it can compute uncertainty ranges; NMFS expects to use the updated model for all 2005 stock assessments. The Pacific hake assessor used a mathematical model (AD Model Builder) that could compute uncertainty range and included these ranges in the Pacific haKE assessment report. NM FS has taken some steps recommended in the Marine Fisheries Stock Assessment Improvement Plan to improve the quantity, quality, and type of data. The Northwest Center has concentrated most of its efforts on implementing recommendations aimed at obtaining more data. Recommendations aimed at increasing the types of data and improving their quality have not yet been fully implemented for a variety of reasons, such as staffing and funding limitations. Other program priorities have precluded NMFS from implementing the recommendation to create a comprehensive plan that incorporates the improvement plan and related plans so that it can develop integrated program initiatives to improve stock, the report says. The report says much remains to be done to make the assessments more reliable. The October 2001 stock assessment improvement plan identified three scenarios (tiers) to consider when analyzing the resources needed to improve stock assessments. The three tiers of assessment improvements are as follows: Tier 1—improve stock assessments using existing data without initiating new data collection programs. Tier 2—conduct baseline monitoring of species, which in most cases requires sampling the species at least every 1 to 3 years. Tier 3—implement “next generation” stock assessments by explicitly incorporating ecosystem considerations and environmental effects in assessments. a number of recommendations to improve stock assessments. Data collection: Pursue new initiatives to expand data collection efforts. Communication: Educate constituents about NMFS’ strategies for improving stock assessment. Training:implement comprehensive training and staff development programs for NMFS' analytical and quantitative staff. Research: Develop partnerships and cooperative research programs with other entities, such as state agencies, commercial and recreational fishing organizations, and individuals to improve the quantity, quality, and type of data collected. The recommendations fall into the following four categories: improvement in the quantity of data collected for use in stocks assessments is a key component to achieving Tier 2 status. Northwest Center officials said that the quality of the data improves with more frequent surveys and more randomly selected survey locations. The assessments become more reliable because the data cover a longer period of time, producing better population trend information.interested in stock assessment science. Planning—develop integrated program initiatives by preparing a comprehensive plan that combines the improvement plan with its complementary plans. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. The Northwest Center has concentrated most of its efforts on implementing improvements in data quantity. The surveys are now coastwide from Cape Flattery, Washington to the Mexican border, adding over 300 more miles along the southern California coast. The Northwest Center now participates in NMFS’ National Sea Grant program to augment a Northwest Center-supported graduate study program at the University of Washington. Efforts continue to communicate the strategies needed to improve stock assessments and to augment existing programs aimed at developing future stock assessment scientists. NMFS to better integrate and coordinate program initiatives for improving stock assessments. According to NMFS funding and budget requests, the Northwest Center needs at least $8.9 million to complete ongoing and planned improvements. The Northwest Center did not receive its full funding request, in part, because NMFS did not get all the funding it had requested. NMFS is now updating its plan for improving Pacific groundfish stock assessments using key findings from its December 2003 review of the groundfish program. The updated groundfish research plan should be completed in late 2004 or early 2005. reliable assessments, fishery managers may reach erroneous conclusions and take actions that could adversely affect the fishing industry economically. Without a comprehensive, integrated improvement plan, funding requests and planned actions to improve the stock assessments may not be coordinated, jeopardizing successful and timely implementation of improvements. Continue efforts to collect more types of data, such as data obtained from surveys in rocky, untrawlable waters, recruitment surveys, and ecosystem studies, for groundfish assessments where reliable data are now lacking. Establish a standard approach that requires that non-NMFS data used in stock assessments be evaluated for its reliability. GAO: We conducted our review from May 2003 through April 2004 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. We did not simulate NMFS’ stock assessment models nor evaluate the mathematical and statistical methodologies used in the models for Pacific hake, bocaccio, canary, darkblotched, and yelloweye. We found NMFS does not check or have a standard process to verify that these data have been reviewed for reliability. For these reasons, we did not change the report. GAO: reliability of the five assessments we reviewed is questionable and could easily be misconstrued to mean all these assessments are an unreliable basis for management of the west coast groundfish fishery. NOAA: The five assessments GAO reviewed all passed scientific review and are serving as the basis for formal status determination and fishery management. We believe the Pacific hake biomass estimates are questionable because the assessment used non-NMFS data that NMFS did not check or subject to standard data reliability testing. We added clarification to the report to show that stock assessments are a key tool for managing fisheries and are important in making decisions about setting harvest levels.