GAO reviewed the process for distributing highway funds to the states. The act provided an unprecedented authorization of $122 billion for highways, bridges, and related activities for fiscal years 1992-97. Funding is funded primarily through federal highway user taxes such as those on motor fuels (gasoline, gasohol, and diesel), tires, and trucks. For other roads eligible for federal assistance, a program with the characteristics of a block grant, the Surface Transportation Program (STP), provides financial assistance. the states’ funding shares for these programs remain fixed over time. The final program included in the four-part calculation—the STP—behaves as an adjuster. This means that any annual increase or decrease in a state’s funding for the Interstate Maintenance Program, Bridge Program, or NHS must be offset by a corresponding, reciprocal change in the STP funds the state receives for that same year. Figure 2.2 illustrates this zero-sum game through a hypothetical example involving 2 years and two states. largest programs—the NHS and STP, together accounting for 40 percent of all the funding apportioned in fiscal year 1995. As we reported in March 1986, the factors that influenced the historical targets for funding in the federal-aid highway program are not closely related to the highway system’s needs. Alternative factors, such as lane miles and annual contributions to the Highway Trust Fund, are more closely aligned with highway needs, according to our March 1986 report and an FHWA-sponsored study. March 1986 report, we found that the factors used to apportion certain highway funds were not closely related to the highway system. At the time of our report, the data on which these factors were based were already between 40 and 70 years old. A state’s land area was originally included as a factor in the distribution formula in 1916. Land area was thought to provide a balance for the factor based on population and to reflect a state's future highway needs. However, this approach resulted Postal mileage was included as a formula factor in 1916 to provide a constitutional justification for federal involvement in highways. By 1919, changes to the highway legislation had ended the need for this justification. Land area no longer bears a close relationship to future highway needs, namely need for new construction, since the highway system is no longer growing rapidly throughout the country. In addition, since postal mileage is computed on the basis of the postal mileage, land area is not a factor in the formula factor for land area. Population figures for formula use were derived every 10 years from the census. As a result, changes in the states’ populations were accounted for only at 10-year intervals. This problem has been exacerbated under ISTEA, since the population data underlying the states' historical shares for ISTEA’s major funding calculations are, in part, based on 1980 population data, not the more current 1990 data. In our March 1986 report, we also identified those factors previously and identified those that are still relevant today. suggested to the Congress as consistent with basic federal highway programs and for which data were available. Our results supported lane miles as a direct measure of the size of the road network and thus as a reflection of the extent of the system to be preserved. In addition, we found that vehicle miles traveled and motor fuel consumption reflected the amount of highway use. We recognized that each of these factors has its own advantages and disadvantages in establishing a formula. Finally, we recognized that changing the formula could have a negative effect on the safety of the highway system. the factors used in certain highway apportionment formulas would result in some states’ receiving more or less funds than they did under the then-current formulas. We suggested that to lessen these impacts, a transition period could be provided during which the full effect of the formulas would be gradually introduced. However, the Congress elected not to change the basic formula structure. In December 1986, Jack Faucett Associates, a consultant for FHWA, issued a report evaluating alternative apportionments formulas for highway funds. of vehicle miles traveled on the Interstate would also have a high requirement for repairs to the Interstate. Similarly, the states that contributed large amounts of revenue to the Highway Trust Fund, reflecting substantial use of motor fuels, were also shown to require more repairs. The correlation analysis was reported in terms of values between zero and one. The closer the value is to 1, the closer the correlation between the factor and the need for repairs. For more information, visit the U.S. Department of Transportation’s website. The highest correlations—at least 0.900—existed for vehicle miles traveled and annual contributions to the Highway Trust Fund. This was not the case, however, for weather-related variables or per capita income. Equity adjustments were designed to address the concerns of the states that contribute a greater share of the Highway Fund's funds. The findings were published in the Journal of the American Highway and Transportation Association's 2014 State of the U.S. Highway System report, which is available online at http://www.reported.com/state-of-the-u. The three equity adjustment categories address the concerns of those states that contribute more in highway user taxes than they receive in federal-aid highway funds. The Minimum Allocation guarantees a state an amount such that its percentage of the total apportionments and prior-year allocations from certain highway funding categories is not less than 90 percent. The 90 Percent of Payments Adjustment provides each state with the same relative share of overall funding that it received in the past. The Donor State Bonus provides a bonus to states that give more to the federal government. The 90 Percent of Payments Adjustment ensures a state that selected apportionments for the fiscal year and allocations in the previous fiscal year will equal at least 90 percent of its contributions to the Highway Trust Fund’s Highway Account. The Donor State Bonus, as implemented by FHWA, compares each state's projected contributions with the apportionment that the state will receive in that fiscal year. Starting with the state having the lowest return (apportionments compared with contributions), each state is given a bonus. is brought up to the level of return for those states with the next highest level of returns. This process is repeated successively for each state until the funds authorized for this funding category in that fiscal year are exhausted. Finally, a fourth adjustment category, referred to as Hold Harmless, addresses a different objective—preserving the states’ historical funding share. For example, this legislatively prescribed funding percentage is 1.74 for Alabama, 0.41 for Delaware and 0.69 for Idaho. The calculations that determine the level of funding that each state receives for the various funding categories occur in a strict sequence. All of the equity adjustments come into play late in the sequential calculation. These adjustments essentially increase the funding calculated for a state up to that point. For example, if a state is hypothetically entitled to a total apportionment of of Illinois, and 4.36 for Massachusetts, these adjustments increase the state’s total funding to that amount by 1.5%. This is the case for Illinois. $500 million on the basis of the Hold Harmless provision, it will receive that amount regardless of whether all the calculations up to that point yielded a total of $200 million, $300 million, or $400 million. In fiscal year 1995, equity adjustments accounted for $2.8 billion (16 percent) of the approximately $18 billion distributed to the states. Only nine states—Colorado, Connecticut, Hawaii, Maryland, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, South Carolina, Virginia, and Washington—and Puerto Rico did not receive funding through equity adjustments. the basis of the funding for the programs alone. For the other 41 states and the District of Columbia, the total amount of federal highway funding apportioned in fiscal year 1995 was ultimately increased by equity adjustments. Funding for demonstration projects is distinct from apportionments to the states in that the authorized funding for such projects is not distributed by formula. Rather, the Congress directs how certain funds are to be distributed by requiring that particular projects receive a specified amount of funding. The Congress has jurisdiction over highway appropriations and authorizations. The amount of federal funds authorized for demonstration projects has grown since 1982. ISTEA alone authorized over $6.2 billion over 6 years for 539 demonstration projects. As we noted in a 1991 report and testimony in 1993 and 1995, demonstration projects often cost more than expected. In our 1991 report, we found that for 66 projects reviewed, the federal funding and state matching funds together accounted for more than $1 billion for each of the 66 projects. For more information, go to: http://www.transportation.gov/. only 37 percent of the projects’ total anticipated costs. Future finances could be drained if extra federal funds are needed to cover the cost of completing the projects. Demonstration projects can yield a low payoff for a variety of reasons, including that they frequently are not aligned with the states’ transportation priorities. For instance, in our 1991 report, we found that for 22 of the 66 projects reviewed, none of the authorized funds ($92 million) had been obligated, even though the projects had been approved. projects had been authorized 4 years earlier. ISTEA authorized approximately $120 billion for highway construction and repair and related activities over 6 years. Figure 2.3 depicts the funding to each state for highway programs, and, if applicable, any modifications to that funding realized through either equity adjustments or funding for demonstration projects provided under ISTEA in fiscal year 1995. But the factors underlying the distribution of funds for two of the largest projects had not yet been determined. The funds were intended to be used for a variety of highway and mass transit projects. highway programs—the NHS and STP—essentially remained the same. Each state’s funding was to be based on the historical share of funds the state received from major programs before ISTEA was enacted. Locking in the status quo on the basis of historical funding averages has also been supported through two other funding avenues. The Hold Harmless equity adjustment category serves to raise the states’ ultimate level of annual funding to a predetermined percentage share of the total funding available. These percentage shares are fixed over the life of ISTEA. The data underlying the distribution of highway funds to the states are generally outdated, unresponsive to changing conditions, and often not reflective of the nation’s highway system or its usage. Because the percentage share is fixed for the four largest programs, any updated data that are factored into the calculation for two of these programs are negated. On the basis of our analysis and discussions with federal and state officials, we believe that the federal government should increase its share of highway funding for the states. state transportation officials, ISTEA’s myriad objectives for highways can be placed into four overarching categories. The first two objectives translate into formula components that are at the core of the distribution process. Addressing the states’ highway needs, such as the miles of highway in need of repair and the deterioration of the highway associated with traffic loads, is a primary objective in the distribution of highway funds. The second objective is returning the majority of funds to the state where the revenue was generated, and the third is fostering social benefits. The second component, calling for a return of funds to the state in which they were generated, supports a congressional objective of having the states receive a substantial return on the federal fuel and other tax receipts that they generate. The third and fourth objectives discussed in this chapter could be met through formula components that would distribute funds set aside from the regular apportionment process. A portion of formula funding could be devoted to social goals by, for example, directing a portion of funding to selected purposes such as improving air quality. New components could be added to recognize the states’ capacity to fund highway needs from state resources. A share of funding could be set aside and used to protect the states' historical funding shares. The task of revising the formula for distributing highway funds will be difficult because needs vary across the country and objectives conflict among themselves. The analysis presented in this report is intended to provide the Congress with formula alternatives that reflect the key objectives governing the current federal-aid highway formula. and conserving energy. Some states believe that center-line miles, not lane miles, are a more appropriate factor for distributing highway funds. A highway that is 2 miles long would equal 2 center- line miles or 8 lane miles. However, this measure does not capture any information on the various widths of highways, because a lane mile is not the same thing as a center line mile. The U.S. Department of Transportation says it will continue to use center line miles for highway funding until a new formula is developed. Lane miles are a good measure of the extent of the highway system (capital stock) to be preserved. Using lane miles as a factor for apportioning highway funds was endorsed by a Policy Review Committee of the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) in fiscal year 1991. Two-lane highway and an eight- lane highway are considered equal under this measure. The width and length of highways is reflected in lane miles, and as we noted in our 1986 report, lane miles are an important measure. both rural and urban areas. The committee further noted that a measure of lane miles is probably the simplest and most efficient potential apportionment factor on which to obtain accurate information. Annual data are generally available within 6 to 9 months of the close of the calendar year. Regardless of whether center-line miles or lane miles are used to indicate the extent of a system, some observers criticize the use of mileage for apportioning future highway funds. Such usage could reward expansion of the system. Thus, this type of apportionments factor would tend to encourage more highway. construction, to the possible detriment of adequately preserving the existing network and of considering air quality. Several actions could be taken to counterbalance such tendencies. First, as part of the third component of the formula framework, set-asides could be established to reward those states that meet certain preservation or maintenance goals. Second, greater use of performance measures geared to preserving theexisting infrastructure would help FHWA ensure that the states do not neglect needed preservation and maintenance. As we noted in our July 1994 testimony before the Senate Committee on Environment and Public Works, performance measures are important. A well-maintained system is the necessary foundation for pursuing the myriad goals for the system. Without such a foundation, system enhancements such as alleviating congestion and improving the efficient movement of goods may not be fully realized. While measures of a system’s extent provide part of the story on highway needs, the condition of the road is also an important element. Condition can be captured by measures of the use of the system, as well as by the state of the highway itself. distinct from the extent of the system. The AASHTO Policy Review Committee observed that data on vehicle miles traveled have been statistically designed for a high level of measurable accuracy. Also, in the Faucett study, vehicle miles travel garnered one of the highest correlation values, 0.913, of the other factors used in the formula for a system’s usage. It is relevant as an indicator of both capital and system preservation needs, the committee said. The study was published in the Journal of the American Society of Mechanical Engineers. all the factors related to Interstate repair needs. That is, a state with a high number of vehicle miles traveled would also likely have high needs for repair of the Interstate. Motor fuel consumption reflects travel on all roads, not just on the federal-aid system or on roads under a state’s jurisdiction. It would not be a precise measure for apportioning funds to specific groups of roads. These data are reported by states monthly and adjusted at year's end. Annual data are generally available within 6 to 9 months of. Fuel consumption patterns may differ across states because of the urban-rural population mix, the amount of travel done under congested conditions, and fuel purchases by transients in those states with lower fuel taxes. While vehicle miles traveled and motor fuel consumption correlate well with system usage, they do have some drawbacks. Vehicle miles traveled measure the vehicles moved rather than the people and do not account for different vehicle classifications. Both factors are largely at odds with air quality objectives, and the principle of air quality. rewarding motor fuel consumption with more highway funding also conflicts with the goal of encouraging energy conservation. New Jersey transportation officials, for instance, noted that such factors reward energy consumption and air pollution and penalize those who successfully enact measures to reduce the use of single-occupant vehicles. Congress has previously rejected the notion of giving vehicle miles traveled greater weight in apportioning funds, in part because of the strong environmental objections raised. As in the case of the factors related to the system’s extent, the disadvantages associated with measures of are similar. the system’s usage could be at least partially counteracted by building incentives into the formula or by creating appropriate performance standards. A host of other factors—such as population, climatic conditions (daily mean temperature, annual snowfall, and annual precipitation), and per capita income—could also be used to determine how highway funds are distributed. Yet, as the Faucett study demonstrated, a low correlation exists between highway needs as reported by FHWA and climatic variables. The Executive Director of the Surface Transportation Policy Project supports the use of population levels for distributing highway funds. to the extent that the formula uses factors such as vehicle miles traveled, lane miles, and fuel consumption, it encourages behavior that runs counter to the objectives of reducing congestion and improving air quality. In his view, population and population density would be preferable alternatives as proxies. These proxies were recommended because they were perceived as avoiding the perverse effects tied to a system’s extent and usage. Population data, however, also have limitations. As noted by the Executive Director of AASHTO, the link between population and the states’ highway needs is questionable. Funds would be targeted to congested urban areas, the approach would do little to accommodate the needs of rural areas. Some state transportation officials from sparsely populated states believe that much of the traffic that occurs in densely populated areas is local. Officials from these states maintain that the promotion of interstate commerce should be a principal objective of the federal-aid highway program. They say federal funds should target the highways that tend to carry national, not local, traffic. The approach does not recognize that goods produced in sparsely. populated areas ultimately must be transported to dense areas. As we reported in March 1986, factors reflecting a system’s extent and use in isolation do not provide a complete picture on the states’ needs. Introducing neutral factors, such as population, into the formula further diversifies the mix of factors and alters the amounts the states receive. Table 3.1 provides an outline of the factors to be considered in the two alternatives. The first alternative assumes that 100 percent of total needs are met. The second assumes that only a small fraction of the total needs is met. Highway funds are distributed to the states based equally on total lane miles and total vehicle miles traveled. Under this alternative, 13 percent of the overall highway funds would be redistributed. Twenty-three states and Puerto Rico would receive more funds than they were apportioned in fiscal year 1995. The average dollar gain would be $102 million; $643 million would be the high end of the range (California) Twenty-seven states and the District of Columbia would receive less funding. (State-by-state details are provided in app. IV.) million (California), and the low end would be $2 million (Nevada). Twenty-four states and the District of Columbia would receive less funding. For these states, the average loss would be  $79 million; the greatest loss would is $359 million (Pennsylvania) (State-by-state details are provided in app. V.) One indicator of need that we intentionally omitted from the above discussion is that of the states’ contributions to the federal Highway Trust Fund. As a formula factor, these contributions have a special status. program. Not only do contributions to the Trust Fund correlate strongly with highway needs, particularly for major highways, but the states’ returns on these contributions have also been considered a key measure of equity. For years, the highway apportionment formula has endorsed, through one or more equity adjustments, the principle that the states ought to receive back a substantial portion of what they deposit. This does not currently occur. If the formula were restructured to encompass a pure return-to-origin approach, each state’s contribution to the trust fund would simply be returned to that state. In 1993, federal highway apportionments as a percentage of the states’ contributions to the Highway Trust Fund’s highway account ranged from 83 percent for South Carolina to 707 percent for Hawaii. Because the majority of revenues credited to the Trust Fund derive from the federal fuel tax, the states' contributions tend to be quite closely linked with fuel consumption. As a potential formula factor, these contributions therefore offer the same kinds of potential formula factors as the federal excise taxes, FHWA says. Some state transportation officials could be expected to support this approach. It would guarantee that all or a substantial amount of the revenues collected in their states would be returned to them. An advantage of returning funds to their source is that contributions to the Highway Trust Fund tend to correlate highly with highway needs, particularly for major highways. However, the return-to-origin approach has advantages and disadvantages as well as fuel consumption does. It is a relatively simple and direct way of distributing these funds. It could be a good idea for the U.S. to return some of its highway funds to the states. approach would not be universally attractive. For instance, those states whose fuel usage is low relative to their land area and extent of highway network would be financially hurt. A prime argument made by officials from these states is that the national interest requires highways to span the wide expanses of large, sparsely populated states. The financial resources of those states are often insufficient to construct, maintain, and operate such networks. Two additional arguments are made against the return-to-origin approach to highway construction. approach. New York transportation officials noted that formulas based on returning contributions to the Trust Fund to the state where they are raised meet neither federal or state transportation goals nor national policy. If the primary goal of federal apportionment formulas is to return revenues from motor fuel taxes to the place they were earned, these officials questioned whether there was a need for a federal program. Second, state officials have questioned the wisdom of selecting a formula factor that is geared predominantly to fuel use. They argue that such an approach rewards greater. use of motor fuel and as such contradicts federal goals of improving air quality and conserving energy. This approach would not necessarily preclude congressional direction of the use of those funds. Legislation could still specify that the returned funds be used in certain proportions for certain programs, such as the NHS. The return could function as (1) a simple return of funds, in which states would be exempt from any or most federal oversight, or (2) a distribution of funds in which FHWA would oversee the programs for which the funds were returned. considered three different alternatives, which are summarized in table 3.2. Under the first alternative, $17.8 billion of the total $19.1 billion would be returned to the source. This amount would represent all the funds distributed to the states in fiscal year 1995, except funds for Interstate Construction. These funds were excluded since the Interstate Construction program’s final apportionment was made at the beginning of fiscal year1995. Under this alternative, 24 states would receive more funds than they would have received otherwise. were apportioned in fiscal year 1995, while the remaining states, along with the District of Columbia and Puerto Rico, would lose funds. Under the second alternative, the total amount of funds ($18.1 billion) would be returned, including funds for Interstate Construction funds but excluding those for demonstration projects. The average dollar gain would be $67 million; the average loss would be £58 million. (State-by-state details are presented in app. VI.) The Congress directs how the funds are distributed. The current funding level for the STP represents about 40 percent of the total funds authorized for these programs. The two alternatives outlined in table 3.3 and described below maintain this distribution of funding. While many social objectives are probably best addressed through means other than the highway apportionment formula, a portion of highway funds might nonetheless be retained to advance specific objectives. For instance, a certain percentage of funds—10 percent, for example—could be set aside before the remaining funds were distributed to the states. is the existing Congestion Mitigation and Air Quality Improvement (CMAQ) program, which directs funds to states with particularly severe problems in air quality. CMAQ is focused on investment in airquality improvements and provides funds for projects that expand or initiate transportation services. It is directed to those states that are classified as nonattainment areas for ozone and carbon monoxide. Every state, regardless of its air quality status, is guaranteed an annual minimum apportionment of 0.5 percent of the program’s program. total funding.) The advantage of such a program is that it focuses funding on precisely those areas with the greatest needs. The disadvantage is that, as occurs with the needs-based formula factors discussed earlier in this chapter, directing funding to states with specific needs can foster a perverse incentive. Questions have been raised about the wisdom of essentially rewarding states for their nonattainment status, particularly given that a state loses CMAQ funding if it makes “too much progress” in improving air quality. A second approach to directing set-aside funding towards specific goals is to treat the funds as incentive payments. Incentive payments, as the name implies, do not redress shortcomings, but instead reward desired behaviors or accomplishments. For example, shared set-aside funding could be used to reward states that make notable and measurable improvements in the percentage of the state’s pavement condition rated as “good” under FHWA’S classification system. To emphasize the condition of the nation's most heavily traveled highways, such rewards could be further refined. states on the condition and performance of their roadways are not always reliable, making it more difficult to equitably distribute such incentive payments. In subcommittee hearings for the House Committee on Appropriations in fiscal year 1994, FHWA was questioned on significant swings in the percentage of Interstate pavement rated in poor condition, as illustrated by table 3.4. FH WA explained that the data were based on the use of an index, referred to as the Present Serviceability Index. This index, however, represents a subjective measure of the pavement’s ride quality and can be arrived at differently. by a variety of procedures. FHWA noted that from time to time the states have attempted to improve their estimation of this measure, thus invalidating comparisons with data from previous years. Until the reliability of these data is improved, their use as an indicator for distributing federal highway funds would be suspect and arbitrary. An alternative measure, the International Roughness Index, is a more objective measure of pavement condition (roughness) FH WA expects this data source to play a more prominent role in the future. 37 states used the International Roughness Index to measure pavement condition on Interstate highways, while the remaining 13 states continued to rely on the Present Serviceability Index. For other major highways, the proportion of states using the Internationalroughness Index dropped to about half the states. An FHWA official noted that some states do not use the International roughness index because they do not have the money to purchase the necessary equipment. Another impediment is that the equipment must be operated at a speed of 35-55 miles per hour, thus making it difficult to use. Alaska and Hawaii could lose 50 percent or more of their highway funds under any of the scenarios. Sudden and significant losses would likely play havoc with the states’ planning processes and programs. To help temper the effects of changes in the formula, any new formula might include a component designed to place a cap on the maximum percentage of loss that any individual state would be expected to bear as a result of the changes. For example, a maximum-loss cap of 20 percent might be established. period of time during the transition to a new funding amount. If the existing, intricate equity adjustments were replaced with a single, simple cap, the funds devoted to these equity adjustments in fiscal year 1995 would more than offset the states’ combined losses in that year. The scenario resulting in the greatest adverse impact on the states—alternative 1 of the needs proxy approach—produced a combined loss of $2.4 billion. Alternatively, other scenarios could be used to shield the states from severe losses. Reauthorization of the federal-aid highway program presents Congress with the opportunity to review the objectives associated with providing federal highway funds. A review of the program’s objectives could be structured to recognize differences among highways and the federal role associated with important highways, such as those included in the NHS. There are no perfect factors that embrace the breadth of ISTEA”s diverse objectives as well as its role in the health care system, says Tom Zoellner, president of the Center for American Progress. as the states’ different needs. Some states will experience disadvantages that the construction of a formula may not be able to compensate for. Which states are negatively affected changes with the factors chosen and the percentage weights assigned to various factors. Whether DOT’s proposed changes are adopted or other scenarios for delivering grants are developed, the Congress will have to reach a consensus on the national objective(s) that are critical for the highway program to address; decide whether a highway program should be created. formula is the appropriate vehicle for addressing these objective(s); and for those objectives that the formula can best address, determine the most representative factors and corresponding weight to be assigned to those factors. If an alternative formula is adopted for distributing highway funds in the future and this formula would result in dramatic funding losses for certain states, ways could be considered to reduce the magnitude of the losses. For example, providing for a cap on the maximum percentage of loss that any one state would be expected to bear.