U.S. economy and security are heavily dependent on oil, natural gas, and other energy commodities. Nearly half of the nation’s oil is transported from overseas by tankers. Coast Guard seeks to mitigate many kinds of security challenges in the maritime environment. The FBI shares responsibility with the Coast Guard for preventing and responding to terrorist incidents, including incidents involving energy tankers, they say. They say the U.S., with limited authority, has limited authority to oversee the security of such vessels. The Coast Guard does not have data on the ability of an OCS facility to withstand an attack. The input for secondary economic impacts can have a substantial effect on how MSRAM’s output ranks a facility relative to other potential targets. The Coast Guard may recommend conducting more research on the vulnerability to and consequences of attack scenarios as a result of a study it is currently conducting on OCS facilities in the Gulf of Mexico. The study initially reviewed the “lessons learned” from Deepwater Horizon and how those lessons could be used. The Coast Guard did not conduct MSRAM assessments for all 50 of the OCS facilities that are subject to federal security requirements in 2011. Coast Guard officials added that they are working with DHS’s Office of Risk Management and Analysis in studying ways to improve how it assesses secondary economic impacts. Some facilities may drop below the production or personnel thresholds described earlier in this statement, thereby falling outside the scope of 33 C.F.R. part 106, or other facilities could meet or exceed such thresholds, thereby rendering them subject to part 106. Internal control standards state that such control activities are an integral part of an entity’s planning, implementing, reviewing, and accountability for stewardship of government resources. Developing such procedures could help ensure that the Coast Guard carries out its risk assessment requirements for such security- regulated OCS facilities. Challenges in assessing security risks to offshore energy infrastructure that is not subject to security requirements: With respect to OCS. facilities, analysts only use MSRAM to assess security risks associated with those O CS facilities that are regulated for security under 33 C.F.R. The Deepwater Horizon did not meet the threshold criteria subjecting it to regulation under part 106, and therefore, MSRAM was not used to assess its security risks. According to Coast Guard officials, mobile offshore drilling units (MODUs) do not generally pose a risk of a terrorist attack. There is little chance of an oil spill when these units are drilling and have not struck oil. However, there is a brief period of time when a MODUs can pose a threat to national security. drilling unit strikes a well, but the well has yet to be sealed prior to connecting it to a production facility. The Deepwater Horizon was in this stage when it resulted in such a large oil spill. MODUs could be at risk of a terrorist attack that could have significant consequences despite a facility not meeting production or personnel thresholds. For example, such risks could involve the reliability of blowout preventer valves. Gaining a fuller understanding of the security risks could help MODUs prevent future incidents. associated with MODUs, such as the Deepwater Horizon, could improve the quality of program decisions. MSRAM does not assess systemic or network risks because, according to Coast Guard officials, these types of assessments are beyond the intended use of MSRAM. The threat of terrorism against energy tankers and offshore energy infrastructure highlights the importance of the Coast Guard having policies and procedures in place to better ensure the security of OCS facilities, and deepwater ports. Improvements in security could help to prevent a terrorist attack against this infrastructure, which could have significant consequences. determined that some OCS facilities were not assessed, the Coast Guard has completed its assessments for the previously omitted facilities. Given that the list of security-regulated facilities may change each year based on factors such as production volume, it is important to ensure that any facilities added to the list in the future will be assessed for security risks in MSRAM. By revising policies and procedures to help ensure that an updated list of O CS facilities is provided to MSRAM analysts on an annual basis, the coast guard would be better positioned to ensure all risk assessments are carried out. facilities requiring such assessments be conducted in a manner consistent with the law and presidential directive. We recommend that the Commandant of the Coast Guard revise policies and procedures to ensure that MSRAM analysts receive the annual updated list of security- regulated OCS facilities. This testimony concludes our work on Coast Guard efforts to assess security risks for offshore energy infrastructure. However, we will continue our broader work looking at the security of offshore energy. infrastructure, including Coast Guard security inspections and other challenges. The Coast Guard concurred with our recommendation. We will continue to work with the Coast Guard to develop solutions to ensure that inspections of OCS facilities are completed as required. I would be happy to respond to any questions you may have. We are committed to working with the U.S. Coast Guard on all matters relating to maritime security and safety. We welcome your comments and suggestions on how to improve OCS operations. We look forward to hearing from you in the coming days and weeks. We hope to hear from you as soon as possible. the Horn of Africa. GAO-11-449T. Quadrennial Homeland Security Review: 2010 Reports Addressed Many Required Elements, but Budget Planning Not Yet Completed.GAO-10-940T. Maritime Security: Actions Needed to Assess and Update Plan And Enhance Collaboration among Partners Involved in Countering Piracy off the Horn of African. GAE-10/10/856. Critical Infrastructure Protection: Update to National Infrastructure Protection Plan Includes Increased Emphasis on Risk Management and Resilience. This work is a work of the U.S. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States. The published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from GAO. However, because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material, permission from the GAO is required for the use of the material. For more information, visit GAO's Maritime Security Program at: http://www.gao.gov/maritime-security-program. copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. For support in the UK, call the national suicide prevention line on 0800 273-TALK (8255). In the Middle East, contact the Syriac Orthodox Church on 020 709090. For more information on the Syriacs, visit www.sriac.org.