In the last 10 years social media has played an increasing role in emergencies and disasters in both the public and private sectors. Social media can be used as an output to disseminate public safety related information and as an emergency management tool through the use of inputs. For example, during Hurricane Gustav, a Community Emergency Response Team (CERT) used social media to send mass email notifications. Notifications can also be sent to mobilize first responders to respond to an incident. Using social media for mobilization purposes can be particularly useful when traditional call systems fail. The Federal Communications Commission (FCC) Personal Localized Alerting Network known as "PLAN" (technically the Commercial Mobile Alert System, or CMAS) Implemented in 2011, PLAN expands the emergency alert system notifications sent over TV and radio to include mobile and smart phones. PLAN sends geographically targeted alerts through cell towers in the form of text-like messages to the cell phones of people who have requested to be notified in the event of an emergency. It also includes searchable hashtags and links to more information on the agency's website. target emergency alerts to specific geographic areas, which then push the information to dedicated receivers with PLAN-enabled mobile devices. Over 150 entities, including 75 counties, 25 states, and the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, have access to the IPAWS-OPEN gateway. The gateway allows them to transmit messages to cellular phones (using Wireless Emergency Alerts or WEA), radio and television (using the Emergency Alert System), and National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) The gateway was developed by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, which oversees development and operation of the system. The NWS can send weather alerts, and the National Center for Missing and Exploited Children can send AMBER alerts over IPAWS. Social media can also be used by users to let family and friends know they are safe if they are near an incident or natural disaster. For example an estimated 3.5 million tweets with the hashtag #sandy were generated in 24 hours during Hurricane Sandy and roughly ten pictures per second were uploaded using Instagram.weather radios. In addition to alerts and messages sent by emergency management and governmental organizations, valuable crisis information is often disseminated by citizens. Social media can also use inputs to provide unique emergency and disaster information. For example, Facebook activated a feature called "safety check" during the Paris terrorist attacks to allow users to post if they are safe or not in the area of an incident. Crowdsourcing consists of obtaining needed services, ideas, or content by soliciting contributions from people. The above are examples of how information is disseminated through outputs. For more information on how to use social media to help in a crisis or disaster, visit www.disaster.org. The U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) "Did You Feel It?" project creates automatic intensity maps based on "felt" reports submitted online. More than 2 million reports have been filed on this website, with 40 earthquakes receiving more than 10,000 reports each. Another useful source of information during an incident are crisis maps. Crisis maps combine information scattered across the Internet along with other information and places them on a single map. Users can use the crisis map to ascertain storm paths and flood zones, as well as identify flood zones. evacuation routes, shelter locations, and power outage areas. Information posted at the time of an event could be valuable later for investigative and research purposes. For example, viewers at the 2012 theater shooting in Aurora, CO, tweeted and posted messages moments before the attack took place. Forensic analysis of the information was used to construct incident timelines and retrieve first-hand accounts of the event as it unfolded. Social media is used to alert emergency managers and officials to certain situations. Monitoring information flows help establish "situational awareness" First responders can leverage social media to enhance situational awareness and assist in decision-making. Obtaining real-time information as an incident unfolds can help officials determine where people are located and assess victim needs. Emergency managers can also use the information to direct certain resources to reduce damages, loss of life, or both. In some cases it might be a good idea to use social media as a tool to communicate and gather and share real- time, dynamic information, such as on social media sites such as Twitter. Social media is increasingly altering emergency communications. Information can flow in multiple directions (known as backchannel communications) Social media are increasingly seen by some as a supplement or replacement to "911" emergency system lines and can be particularly useful when there is a disaster in the area. The public can now use social media to get information before first responders reach the disaster area. It is.possible to obtain this information beforefirst responders arrive in a disaster area, according to the U.S. Department of Homeland Security. traditional forms of communication are not available. The use of social media to request assistance is likely to become more common. According to a study by the American Red Cross, younger people generally use social media more frequently than older segments of society. They are also more likely to request help through social media, believe agencies should monitor their postings, and have high expectations that agencies will respond quickly to their requests. There are also indications that older adults are increasingly using social media. As more older adults usesocial media, they too may develop similar expectations. Emergency managers and officials may need to embrace social media technology in order to be responsive to the public's needs. Social media has also played a role after an incident through recovery efforts. At the federal level, social media is commonly used to provide information concerning what types of assistance is available to individuals and households. At state and local level, groups are using social media to manage donations and organize volunteer efforts. Some may question the feasibility of taking requests through social media—particularly during periods when there is a high volume of incoming information. how to apply for assistance, announce application deadlines, and provide information and links to other agencies and organizations that provide recovery assistance. Social media could be used to raise funds in such cases through private contributions. However, it would not likely be capable of supplanting federal assistance altogether. Recovery from large-scale disasters can cost billions of dollars (the federal government provided approximately $120 billion and $50 billion in supplemental funding in 2012). In some cases, individuals and households do not qualify for FEMA Individual Assistance (IA) grants. Smart phones and tablets can be used to send images of damaged structures. The Army Corps of Engineers has used a smart phone application to identify and report breeches, seepage, overtoppings, and other areas of structural weakness in levees. The application allows the Corps to take a photo of problem areas and then "geotag" its precise location. According to Corps officials, the application has helped improve the efficiency of the Corps' damage estimate process.for Hurricanes Katrina and Sandy respectively. speed, and accuracy of detecting and responding to levee failures. In addition, the application has also helped reduce human error by reducing instances of mislabeling or misreporting problems. Within the past decade, reports on successful use of social media during emergencies and disasters have spurred congressional interest and policy discussions. Much of the congressional and executive branch interest has centered on how social media can be used to improve disaster response and recovery capabilities. On May 5, 2011, Craig Fugate, the FEMA Administrator, testified before the Senate Committee on Emergency Preparedness. Fugate met with representatives from Apple, Craigslist, Facebook, Google, Microsoft, and Twitter to discuss how to harness the "capabilities of the digital world to better serve the public" Possible future applications include using smartphone-friendly mobile versions of FEMA websites to allow users to access information, request assistance, and facilitate communication between citizens, first responders, volunteer groups, the private sector, and all levels of government. Subsequent hearings were held by the Subcommittee on Emergency Preparedness, Response, and Communications Committee on Homeland Security. Crowdsourcing information can be geotagged with longitude and latitude coordinates. The hearings also explored how social media was transforming preparedness, response, and recovery efforts in the private sector and how lessons learned in these sectors might be applied at the federal level. Lessons learned were also discussed as well as how crowdsourcing can be used to enhance the quality and timeliness of critical information. According to Mathew Stepka, Vice President, Technology for Social Impact for Google, during some disasters, authoritative sources may not have been available. as expansive information as individuals who are experiencing the incident first-hand. Stepka provided an example of crowdsourcing in his testimony to the Subcommittee. During Sandy, a group of student volunteers called stations in New Jersey to check whether they were open and had gas available. Within a few days they had data for more than 1,000 different stations, which was fed into our Sandy crisis map automatically. The Department of Energy's call center ended up referencing this information. Study findings reported at the bottom of the page. The American Red Cross found that 20% of Americans received some form of emergency information from an app. 76% of American expect help within three hours of posting a request on social media. 40% would use social media to inform others they were safe. The study also found that roughly 40% of people would use a social media app to report that they were in a safe place. The figures are higher than the percentages reported (68% and 24% respectively) in their 2011 survey. The survey also finds that roughly 25% of those surveyed would use an app in the future. 75% of social media users use the medium to seek information about an incident. One noteworthy finding from the hearings was a reported need to enhance public and private partnerships. Legislation to address this need was introduced in the 113 th Congress and later in the 114 th Congress. H.R. 623 , which was enacted on November 5, 2015 ( P.L. 114-80 , the DHS Social Media Improvement Act of 2015) amended the Homeland Security Act of 2014. The bill was passed with bipartisan support. Act of 2002 to direct the Secretary of Homeland Security to establish a social media working group. The law requires the social media group to submit an annual report to Congress. The report includes a review of current and emerging social media technologies being used to support preparedness and response activities related to terrorist attacks and other emergencies. A review of best practices and lessons learned on the use of social media during the response to terrorist Attacks and Other emergencies that occurred during the period covered by the report. recommendations to improve DHS's social media efforts. use of social media for emergency management purposes. improve public awareness of the type of information being disseminated through social media. improve information sharing among DHS and its components and among state and local governments. A review of available training for government officials on the use of social social media in response to a terrorist attack or other emergency. and a summary of coordination efforts with the private sector to discuss and resolve legal, operational, technical, privacy, and security concerns. Another bill introduced in the House of Representatives. 114 th Congress, H.R. 3517, requires the DHS Secretary to conduct a one-year pilot program with the American Red Cross. The program would research and develop mechanisms to better leverage social media to improve preparedness and response capabilities. It would include timely dissemination of public preparedness information for terrorist attacks and other disasters, and the delivery of response supplies to affected areas. The bill requires the Homeland Security Secretary to issue a report to the House and Senate no later than 90 days after completion of the pilot program. H.R. 3517 was referred to the Subcommittee on Emergency Preparedness, Response, and Communications. This list is not exhaustive—there are many federal entities that use social media for emergencies and disasters in various capacities. The federal government does not use a single platform for emergency and disasters. Rather, federal entities use different social media. for different purposes. Some have platforms dedicated to emergency and disaster preparedness and response, while others have dedicated social media platforms for other purposes. The Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee is considering the bill. emergencies and disasters while others have emergency and disaster information comingled with other agency information. When possible statistics on social media use are provided; however, not all entities collect such data. It is important to note that social media is subject to rapid advances in applications and technologies. New uses are being adopted on a continual basis. Social media products typically require digitally signing terms of service agreements. Many terms ofService agreements are, however, incompatible with federal law, policies, and other laws. Federal agencies have negotiated federal-compatible terms of service agreements with social media vendors. The Government Services Administration provides government-wide support, training, and assistance with various social media platforms. Doing so allows FEMA to quickly create a Facebook page, upload pictures and videos, or post information. In FEMA's case, the agency developed negotiated terms ofService agreements with varioussocial media outlets. Do you have a social media problem? Share it with FEMA by emailing jennifer.smith@dailymail.co.uk. FEMA began using Youtube in 2006, Twitter in 2008, and Facebook in 2009. FEMA also uses social media to inform people where and how to apply for federal and nongovernmental assistance. FEMA can use social media as an emergency management tool by integrating various social media platforms through the use of tools referred to as "social media management systems" FEMA has staff responsible for day-to-day social media operations but has the capacity to deploy people from Regional Offices for surge support during disasters. SBA utilizes social media on several different platforms including Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, and blogs. Each SBA region has its own Twitter account to provide users with specific local information. Using social media SBA will often provide links to information on their website for more technical information and may link and share posts from FEMA and other agencies. SBA thinks of their social media as part of their larger digital engagement with users. and to help repair, rebuild, and recover from economic losses after a declared disaster. outreach, approximately 1.6 million people have subscribed to SBA's e-newsletter online. SBA comingles emergency and disaster information with other information about small business programs on their social media platforms. HHS directs and coordinates preparedness activities and oversees public health agencies within the Department with responsibilities for emergency preparedness and response. These include the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), the Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA), the National Institutes of Health (NIH), the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), and the Agency for Healthcare. HHS uses a variety of social media platforms including Facebook and Twitter. In particular, social media plays an integral role in HHS's National Health and Security Strategy. HHS also provides health information through social media during incidents and directs people to health resources through web links and hashtags. HHS does not use dedicated web pages for incidents and does not collect data on social media usage. Each subentity of HHS contains working groups with separate social media efforts that that are separate from each other and do not share data. focus on their particular organizational mission and goals. The HHS working group is relatively small but has capacity to surge if needed for large incidents. The working group monitors social media to dispel rumors, obtain situational awareness, and answer questions about preparedness and public health issues. HHS does not respond to immediate requests for assistance. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) works with states and localities, as well as other nations to detect, investigate, and prevent disease and injury, to develop and implement prevention. strategies, to monitor the effect of environmental conditions on health, and to study illness and injury in the workplace. CDC responds and supports state and local efforts to save lives and reduce suffering when a disaster occurs. CDC also helps states and localities recover and restore public health functions after the initial response to an incident. CDC uses Twitter, Facebook, Pinterest, and YouTube among other social media platforms. In some cases, CDC has a number of profiles on each platform (for example,CDC has 30 different Facebook profiles and over 60 Twitter profiles addressing various public health topics). does not use incident-specific social media accounts, but does have web pages for specific incidents. In an emergency, CDC coordinates with other federal entities, state and local agencies, and partners through the emergency operations center. CDC uses a handful of social media staff in an emergency event, but has the capacity to surge if needed. During the 2014 Ebola response, the social media team used a number of different social media platforms to answer questions and obtain situational awareness. CDC does not respond to individual requests for assistance. Social Media Council consists of 15-20 individuals representing program areas within CDC. Oversight for CDC social media is carried out by the Social Media Council. During an emergency, social media information is coordinated through CDC's Joint Information Center (JIC) The National Guard is both a state and federal organization: it is simultaneously the organized militia of a state or territory and a reserve component of the Army and the Air Force. Due to its size (over 450,000 individuals), trained personnel, and available. The National Guard operates in a state status, under the control of state and territorial governors. In this state capacity, National Guard personnel are not subject to the restrictions of the Posse Comitatus Act. Under certain conditions, the National Guard can also be activated to respond to emergencies and disasters under Title 32 of the U.S. Code. Guard personnel who are activated under Title. 32 can perform law enforcement functions. The National Guard is frequently used for emergency response, and has a wide range of equipment. The National Guard Bureau (NGB) is a joint activity of the Department of Defense. It serves as the channel of communications between the Departments of the Army and Air Force and the states on all matters pertaining to the National Guard. NGB operates its social media efforts out of its public affairs office to educate and inform the public about National Guard preparedness and response efforts. It uses a variety of social media platforms including Facebook, Twitter, Google+, Instagram, and YouTube.32 remain under state control, but pay and benefits are provided by the federal government. also uses social media through internal pages to conduct internal communications. For example, uploaded images of damages posted by social media users are circulated internally to help understand the extent of damages caused by an incident. The images, however, are not used for damage estimates. The National Guard Bureau also monitors social media for situational awareness, and rumor control. Policy guidance for the NGB's use of social media is outlined in the Department of Defense's "Web and Internet-Based Capabilities (IBC) Policies. National Guard uses response-specific analytics to help make data-driven decisions with respect to future applications of social media for emergencies and disasters. The National Guard Bureau does not use disaster specific web pages and does not respond to individual requests for assistance. The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) provides emergency response activities through more than 40 planning and response teams (PRTs) These deployable teams have been specifically trained to perform USACE emergency response functions, including provision of emergency power, debris removal and temporary housing. USACE social media platforms include Facebook, Twitter, Google+, Youtube, and Pinterest. The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers synchronizes outgoing information across the platforms and coordinates with other federal agencies such as FEMA and NWS. In general, the Emergency Operations Center and the Joint Field Office for each incident have external affairs personnel with social media responsibilities. USACE does not use incident-specific web pages or respond to individual requests. The text box at right provides composite data and provides a link to the full report. results for FY2015. The NWS is a component of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration within the Department of Commerce. The social media platforms used by the NWS mainly consist of Twitter and Facebook. Each of the Weather Service's 122 weather forecast offices, along with other specialized field offices, national centers, and regional and national headquarters utilize social media. It is not specific to disaster or emergency related posts. It provides weather, water, and climate data, as well as forecasts and warnings for the protection of life and property. The NWS does not have incident specific pages, but does use social media outlets to address specific threats. Local users can follow a field office for more specific information to their local area or the headquarter account for national or general information. The NWS may utilize social media to let users know a hurricane is approaching a particular area and that people should prepare for dangerously high wind and flooding. Following the event, they may assist the emergency response community by providing critical post-event information that aids in emergency response efforts. NWS mainly uses social media as a tool to provide information about weather events to users. In some instances the field offices utilize social media information in conjunction with traditional spotter reports to identify and confirm weather events. Following significant meteorological or hydrological events, NWS conducts Service Assessments to evaluate NWS products and services before, during, and after events. Every NWS Service Assessment since 2011 has included sections on the NWS's social media use. For an example, an assessment following a severe thunderstorm was conducted on social media. Hurricane/Post-Tropical Cyclone Sandy praised the NWS's use of social media. The NWS also sends out Wireless Emergency Alerts (WEA) to mobile phone users within a close proximity of a critical weather event. These alerts are 90 characters in length and may include information on the weather event and suggestions like " take shelter " or " avoid flood areas " As previously mentioned, surveys indicate that many citizens expect help from government agencies in the event of a disaster. within three hours of posting a request on social media. Some jurisdictions may not yet have the capacity or resources to meet this expectation. Others might argue that this expectation is unrealistic, particularly during large-scale disasters, due to the potential volume of incoming messages and posts. They may further argue that some jurisdictions do not have the capabilities to effectively monitor social media for incoming requests for assistance. For example, according to the West Virginia State Police, citizens should not use social media to request immediate help because they don't have the manpower and resources to monitor its. Congress could explore the feasibility of using social media to make requests. Congress could also investigate the use of a pilot program that would allow people to request assistance through social media. The program could then be evaluated to determine its effectiveness. A key issue of interest would be how to use social media around the clock. The use of social media as a tool to ask for assistance would be similar to a call to 911. It could also help state, local, and federal jurisdictions develop their capacity to receive and effectively respond to the requests. A potential method that could be used to accelerate diffusion is through public-private partnerships (PPPs) A PPP is a contractual arrangement whereby the private sector would assume more responsibility than is traditional for the development and design of new technologies. Once developed, the new technology would be shared with the public sector. In the case of social media for emergencies and disasters, Congress should use PPPs to accelerate the diffusion of new technology, the report says. The report is based on a report by the U.S. Institute of Peace. could consider providing grants to the private sector or investigate other methods that would help foster partnerships between the private and public sectors. FEMA provides a number of tools and models to help organizations start emergency management PPPs. Proponents would likely argue they would inject additional resources in to the development of social media as a tool for emergency management, increase private sector involvement, potentially reduce costs and project delivery times, and reduce public sector risk. Some argue that government agencies can potentially achieve what private sector agencies can not. more objectives more efficiently through PPPs than they could on their own. Detractors, on the other hand, might argue that P PPs are complicated arrangements and require too much oversight. They may also be concerned about potential fraud and abuse of technology grants. Instances of inaccurate and false information may be an inherent problem given the nature of social media platforms and the number of people disseminating information. There have been studies that found that outdated, inaccurate, or false information had been disseminated via social media forums during disasters. Inaccurate information could jeopardize the safety of first responders and the community. The extent to which inaccurate information poses a problem to the emergency management community is not clear. Some studies have concluded that social media information is generally accurate; suggesting that reports about the spread of misinformation during incidents may have been exaggerated. In addition to inaccurate information, too much information can also pose a problem. As a disaster or crisis unfolds, the amount of information generated by users can be enormous. Sifting through this information can be difficult. Unofficial sources are often trusted and used as information sources by the general public. This is because citizens may think official sources are too slow, general, or inaccurate. Some reports have indicated that information from unofficial sources can be just as, and even more desirable than information from official social media websites. The volume and speed with which available information is disseminated, combined with an inability to identify, verify, coordinate, aggregate, and contextualize it can leave this information unused and ultimately, unactionable. The number of people using Twitter and Facebook spike during disasters because they are searching immediate information they cannot find on traditional broadcast channels. Congress could investigate the accuracy of emergency and disaster information and examine strategies and best practices that could increase organizational capacity to handle a large influx of information. Similarly, Congress could examine methods that could be used to ensure that emergency information is accurate, timely and accurate to the public. To donate to the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline, call 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. Malicious use of social media during an incident could range from mischievous pranks to acts of terrorism. One tactic that has been used by terrorists involves the use of a secondary attack after an initial attack to kill and injure first responders. Social media could be used as a tool for such purposes by issuing calls for assistance to an area, or notifying officials of a false hazard or threat that could be posed.help prevent or reduce the spread of misinformation. There is some concern that individuals or organizations might intentionally provide inaccurate information to confuse, disrupt, or otherwise thwart response efforts. Many smartphones and tablets have battery lives lasting twelve hours or less depending on their use. In some cases disaster survivors will not have the means to recharge their devices. In other cases, the device may have adequate power, but cellular towers in the area do not, significantly limiting their use in the event of a disaster.requires a response. When using social media for situational awareness and response efforts, officials and first responders should be aware it could be used for malicious purposes and develop measures to mitigate those possibilities. Congress could require FEMA to develop and deploy 3G and 4G mobile networks in presidentially declared disasters. Congress could also consider other methods that would help residents recharge their devices during power outages. We encourage the subcommittee to explore innovative solutions to provide deployable 3/4G mobile Networks. Without both, social media is useless without power and connectivity, the subcommittee says. The subcommittee urges FEMA to provide 3G or 4G networks to the public during large-scale emergencies. It could also provide mobile device charging stations, the panel says. Social media may improve some aspects of emergency and disaster response. Some may be concerned that overreliance on the technology could be problematic under prolonged power outages. Another concern is the potential of overwhelming Internet traffic during crisis situations. For example, Internet traffic in Belgium after the terrorist attacks in Brussels slowed after social media was used in the wake of the attacks. They may argue that traditional forms of communications still need to be used in conjunction with social media. They might also argue that emergency managers and officials consider alternative or backup options during extended powerOutages. Congress could examine whether parts of the U.S. might experience similar problems with Internet traffic. It is unclear how much the federal government is paying for its various social media efforts with respect to emergencies and disasters. The number of personnel required to monitor multiple social media sources, verify the accuracy of incoming information, and respond to and redirect incoming messages is also uncertain. In addition, federal entities may experience a large amount of Internet traffic, which could be difficult to handle. In response, Belgian officials requested that users reduce their Internet consumption. volume of incoming messages from the public during a disaster. Financial information is also useful for congressional oversight of the entities that have received the funds and to evaluate the overall effectiveness of the expenditures. Knowledge concerning federal expenditures on social media use during disasters can help Congress determine how the money has been spent and what resources have been provided to the nation. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. In the U.S., call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. Privacy concerns exist about the potential for the collection, retention, and data mining of personal information by the federal government. Others are concerned how the information might be used. The E-Government Act of 2002 mandates that federal agencies conduct an assessment of the privacy impact of any social media use. The use of status alerts and the creation of personal pages to establish situational awareness may raise privacy concerns.identify cost saving opportunities. For example, would the government compile records after a terrorist attack to help investigate certain individuals? Section 208 of the E-Government Act requires federal agencies to complete PIAs. The PIA uses the Fair Information Privacy Principles (FIPPs) to assess and mitigate any impact on an individual's privacy. In March 2011, the Department of Homeland Security completed a Privacy Impact Assessment (PIA) for the U.S. Department of Justice. The document that results from these mandated assessments is called a Privacy impact assessment (Pia) and is called the Privacy Impact assessment (PIAs) for federal agencies. DHS issued a Privacy Impact Assessment for the Use of Unidirectional Social Media Applications Communications and Outreach. The PIA does not cover users sending content to the Department. It describes the personally identifiable information (PII) and the limited circumstances under which DHS will have access to PII. In 2010, DHS published a PIA on the use of Social Networking Interactions and Applications (Communications/Outreach/Public Dialogue). Neither PIA covers other social media. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. activity such as monitoring initiatives, law enforcement and intelligence activities, and other similar operations. Some have argued that privacy laws can hamper the use of information obtained from social media during disasters. Such laws restrict how the government can collect, maintain, and use PII. Efforts are being made to develop software that could remove personal information from social social media messages without loss of vital disaster information. Congress could consider amending existing laws to make theUse of PII less restrictive during disasters, or investigate methods that could help the federal government develop software. Social media has made tremendous inroads into emergency management for a variety of reasons. Social media has proven to be a useful method for communicating when traditional forms of communication are ineffective or inoperable. There are strong indications that the use of social media for emergencies and disasters will increase as people continue to embrace new technologies. This increase will lead to a greater expectation that government will meet their information needs during crisis situations through social media. By and large, the federal government uses social media as an output to disseminate information. The emphasis on outputs could prevent the federal government from fully realizing social media's potential as an effective emergency management tool. A different approach would be to reorient the focus with an emphasis on inputs. The reorientation, however, could be a complicated matter. Some might argue that the federal role in social media efforts should be limited because the decentralized nature of social media makes the medium too unwieldy for large, centralized organizations to control. They may further argue that federal involvement might lead to standardization and rigid usage. guidelines which might hinder the nimbleness of social media to be applied in new and novel ways. They may therefore conclude that state and locals should take the lead with social media with the support of the federal government. Some starting points would include pilot programs and public private partnerships. Congress could also require FEMA to develop and deploy 3G and 4G mobile networks in presidentially declared disasters, and provide grants to state and local governments to help them develop their social media capabilities. It could also investigate the use of social social media at the federal level to help inform the public. decisionmaking and policymaking. This could include determining hardware and software costs, personnel costs, surge capacity during large-scale disasters. Congress could also explore ways to address and overcome some of the other challenges described in this report. These challenges include using social media to request assistance, inaccurate or malicious crisis information, information overload, and technical limitations. The federal government's ability to keep pace with advances in and the social media and changing patterns of public usage could also be considered in the report.