After 9/11, responding to potential and real threats to homeland security became one of the federal government’s most significant challenges. The Homeland Security Act of 2002 merged 22 federal agencies and organizations into DHS, making it the department with the third largest budget. In January 2003, we designated implementation and transformation of the new Department of Homeland Security as high risk based on three factors: (1) the implementation, (2) the funding, and (3) the political will of Congress. and transformation of DHS is an enormous undertaking that will take time to achieve in an effective and efficient manner. Failure to effectively carry out its mission would potentially expose the nation to very serious consequences. One of the department’s key challenges is integrating the components’ respective financial management systems, many of which were outdated and had limited functionality, as well as addressing weaknesses from the inherited components. The Homeland Security Act of 2002 states that DHS’S missions include, to protect the U.S. among other things, preventing terrorist attacks within the United States, reducing America’s vulnerability to terrorism, minimizing subsequent damage, and assisting in the recovery from attacks that do occur. To help accomplish this integrated homeland security mission, the various mission areas and associated programs of 22 federal agencies were merged, in whole or in part, into DHS. The department's organizational structure consists of eight major components, each of which is headed by an Under Secretary. The U.S. Coast Guard (Coast Guard), the U.s. Secret Service, the Bureau of Citizenship and Immigration Services (CIS), and five directorates are headed by Under Secretaries. Within the Management Directorate is DHS’s Office of the Chief Financial Officer (OCFO) OCFO is assigned primary responsibility for functions, such as budget, finance and accounting, strategic planning and evaluation. OCFO also charged with ongoing integration of these functions within the department. The CFO Act requires the agency's CFO to develop and maintain an integrated accounting and financial management system that provides for complete, reliable, and timely financial information that facilitates the systematic measurement of performance at the agency. The act also requires that the agency’s CFO be qualified, presidentially appointed, approved by the Senate, and report to the head of the agency. FFMIA requires that agencies implement and maintain financial management systems that substantially comply with federal financial management system requirements, applicable accounting standards, and the U.S. Government Standard General Ledger at the transaction level. While not required to comply with provisions of the CFO Act, agencies must comply with the requirements of the act. the CFO Act or FFMIA, the Accountability of Tax Dollars Act of 2002, requires DHS to prepare and have audited financial statements annually. The President’s Management Agenda recognized that an unqualified financial audit opinion is a basic prescription for any well-managed organization. Without sound internal control and accurate and timely financial information, it is not possible to accomplish the agenda and secure the best performance and highest performance, the White House said. The White House did not require DHS to comply with the CFO act. measure of accountability for the American people. Joint Financial Management Improvement Program (JFMIP) Principals have defined certain measures, in addition to receiving an unqualified financial statement opinion. These additional measures include being able to routinely provide timely, accurate, and useful financial and performance information, having neither material internal control weaknesses nor material noncompliance with laws and regulations. DHS obtained a consolidated financial audit for the 7-month period from March 1, 2003, to September 30, 2003. DHS received a qualified opinion from its independent auditors on its financial performance. When DHS was created in March 2003 and merged with 22 diverse agencies, there were many known financial management weaknesses and vulnerabilities in the inherited agencies. Auditors were unable to opine on the consolidated statements of net costs and changes in net position, combined statement of budgetary resources, and consolidated statement of financing. The auditors reported 14 reportable conditions on internal control, 7 of which were considered to be material weaknesses. Most of the 22 components that transferred to DHS had not been subjected to significant financial statement audit scrutiny prior to their transfer. Nine of the 30 internal control weaknesses identified in prior component financial statement audits have been closed as of September 30, 2003. The remaining 21 issues represent continuing weaknesses that have been reported in DHS’s first Performance and Accountability Report. Nine of these were combined and reported as 3 material weaknesses, while 5 were reported as reportable conditions. Several of the departmentwide weaknesses resulted from combining previously identified weaknesses or reclassifying them, rather than from resolving the underlying internal control problems. FEMA, FEMA, and TSA each had weaknesses that while not material to DHS on a departmentwide basis, need to be addressed. We have found that similar projects have proven challenging and costly for other federal agencies. NASA is on its third attempt in 12 years to modernize its financial management process and systems. DC Courts struggled in developing requirements that contained the necessary specificity to ensure the system developed would meet its users’ needs. It is too early to tell whether DHS’s planned financial enterprise solution will be able to meet the requirements of relevant financial management laws it is currently not subject to. The goals of the CFO Act and FFMIA are to provide the Congress and agency management with reliable financial information.  auditors reviewed prior-period component agency annual financial statement audit reports when available. Key controls to ensure reporting integrity were not in place, and inefficiencies made the process more error prone. Several DHS bureaus lacked clearly documented procedures, making them vulnerable if key people leave the organization. The Coast Guard and the Strategic National Stockpile had weaknesses in financial oversight that have led to reporting problems. The auditors found weaknesses across DHS in its entitywide security program management and in controls over system access. The Transportation Security Administration (TSA) lacked a comprehensive property management system. Internal controls over physical counts of OM&S were not effective at the Coast Guard. The Secret Service did not record the.documentation to support its estimation methodology. The Coast Guard also had not recently reviewed its OM &S capitalization policy, leading to a material adjustment to its records when an analysis was performed. The TSA lacked adequate policies and procedures to ensure the accuracy of its PP&E records. The auditors were unable to verify the recorded value of $497 million in OM & S. pension liability for certain of its employees and retirees, and when corrected, the auditors had insufficient time to audit the amount recorded. The Coast Guard also was unable to provide sufficient documentation to support the recorded value of $201 million in post-service benefit liabilities. DHS lacked controls to verify that monthly financial reports and transferred balances from legacy agencies were accurate and complete. The Bureau of Customs and Border Protection’s (CBP) accounting system lacked automated controls to detect Drawback claims on duties, taxes, and fees. CBP did not have a reliable process of monitoring the movement of ‘in-bond’ shipments. CBP lacked an effective compliance measurement program to compute an estimate of underpayment of related duties, taxes, and fees. The Bureau of Citizenship and Immigration Services’ (CIS) process for tracking and reporting the status of applications and related information was inconsistent and inefficient. Also, CIS did not prevent excessive drawback claims and payments. The U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP) failed to adequately monitor the movements of “in- bond” shipments, which are merchandise that is not subject to duties until it reaches its destination. perform cycle counts of its work in process that would facilitate the accurate calculation of deferred revenue. Fund balance with Treasury (FBWT): The Coast Guard did not perform required reconciliations for FBWT accounts and lacked written standard operating procedures (SOP) to guide the process. Intragovernmental balances: Several large DHS bureaus had not developed and adopted effective SOPs or established systems to track, confirm, and reconcile intragovernmentals balances and transactions. Strategic National Stockpile (SNS): The SNS accounting process was fragmented and disconnected, largely due to operational challenges caused by the laws governing SNS. A $485 million upwards adjustment had to be made to value SNS in DHS’s records properly. CIS and the Bureau of Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE), TSA, and the Coast Guard had weaknesses in their processes for accruing accounts payable or reporting accurate balances for undelivered orders. SNS had a Material Weakness (Financial Systems Functionality and Technology) Reportable Condition (Drawback Claims on Duties, Taxes, and Fees) Condition (In-bond Movement of Imported Goods) Observation & Recommendations to Management Material Weakness (Financial Systems Functionality and Technology) Immigration and Naturalization Service (as of February 28, 2003) Reportable Condition (Acceptance and Adjudication of Immigration and naturalization Applications) Reportability Condition (Accounts Payable and Undelivered Orders) Material Weaknesses (Financial Reporting) Materialweakness ( financial reporting) Material weakness (Intragovernmental Balances) The Government Accountability Office is the audit, evaluation and investigative arm of Congress. GAO examines the use of public funds; evaluates federal programs and policies; and provides analyses, recommendations, and other assistance to help Congress make informed oversight, policy, and funding decisions. The GAO’s commitment to good government is reflected in its core values, which are set out in the agency's mission statement. The agency's core values are: "Accountability, transparency, and accountability for the American people" Each weekday, GAO posts newly released reports, testimony, and correspondence on its Web site. To have GAO e-mail you a list of newly posted products every afternoon, go to www.gao.gov and select “Subscribe to Updates.” The fastest and easiest way to obtain copies of GAO documents at no cost is through GAO’s Web site (www.gaO.gov) of accountability, integrity, and reliability. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details.