In 1995, over 9,000 foreign physicians with J-1 visas were in the United States for graduate medical education or training. These exchange visitors constituted about one-tenth of all individuals receiving medical education. Each year a few thousand new physicians receive J- 1 visas and enter the U.S. for medical education and training. For more information, visit the USIA website or go to www.usia.gov/j-1-visas or call 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.usIA.gov/. Congress has imposed restrictions on J-1 visa holders, including physicians in graduate medical education. These physicians are required to return to their home country (or to their country of last legal residence) for at least 2 years after completion of training. However, they may obtain a waiver of this requirement and remain in the United States. For most physicians, the waivers are requested on the request of the physician's home country or country of first legal residence. The waiver process can take up to two years. their behalf by a federal agency or by a state agency or department that is responsible for public health issues. These federal agencies and states generally request waivers of the 2-year foreign residence requirement so that the physicians can practice for several years in underserved areas. USIA reviews the program, policy, and foreign relations aspects of the case and forwards its recommendations to the INS Commissioner. For waiver requests made by interested U.S. government agencies or states, INS may only grant the waiver if USIA submits a waiver request. HHS endorses the philosophy that exchange visitors return home after completing their training to make their new knowledge and skills available to their home countries. HHS does not support waivers for physicians to remain in the United States to practice in underserved areas. Instead, HHS administers other federal programs, such as NHSC, to address physician shortages in the U.S. NHSC supplies physicians and other health professionals to underserved area.favorable recommendation. HHS is the federal agency responsible for addressing physician shortages it does not use waivers to do so. primarily by awarding scholarships to students who agree to serve in a shortage area after their health professions training is complete. On December 31, 1995, 848 NHSC physicians and 685 other NHSC professionals who received scholarships or federal loan repayment were practicing in underserved areas of the country. In addition to NHSC, HHS has other programs to address medical underservice. For example, HHS provides federal grant funding to community health centers that are required to accept all patients regardless of gender. The number of physicians receiving waivers of the 2-year foreign residence requirement for J-1 exchange visitors has grown more than tenfold in the past 5 years. Several factors have contributed to the increase: more hospitals and other facilities have found the waiver to be a means to fill their empty positions; more agencies and states are making requests; and physicians are actively seeking waivers. Waiver physicians are practicing in virtually every state; most are primary care physicians. Some are allegedly paying recruiters and immigration attorneys to find them a position. The number of waivers being processed for physicians to practice in underserved areas each year has grown from 70 in 1990, to 1,374 in 1995. Indications are that in 1995, about half of the foreign physicians that were supposed to return home were granted waivers of this requirement. The waivers were enough to offset about 27 percent of the total physician shortage identified by HHS, according to the HHS report. The number of NHSC physicians (1,267) practicing inunderserved areas in 1995 was greater than the number of foreign physicians practicing in the U.S. By 1995, four U.S. government agencies and 23 states were requesting waivers of J-1 visa requirements for physicians. The rapid growth in waivers began in late 1993 and 1994. The number of waivers also increased because the authority for states to request waivers was passed in 1994. Some facility officials and physicians reported paying up to $25,000 in immigration attorney or recruiter fees for assistance in matching a physician with a facility and processing the waiver. In addition to ARC, since 1993 the Department of Transportation has requested waivers for a handful of physicians. In 1996, waiver physicians were practicing in 49 states and the District of Columbia. The degree to which they are relied on to relieve physician shortages varies greatly from state to state. No single entity is responsible for coordinating practice locations of waiver physicians. Policies vary with regard to such matters as eligible practice locations and state involvement and the consequences of failure to complete the agreed-upon service length of a J-1 visa. The Department of Health and Human Services does not view waivers as a mechanism to help resolve the problems of shortage areas. HHS waivers are not well-coordinated, authors say. This means that federal agencies and states may not know of problems identified by HHS. Coordination between agencies involved in the requests and other programs is important. Authors: Weak controls mean there is little to deter physicians or their employers from failing to comply if they choose to break the terms of their agreement. They say many of these physicians have been at their jobs for a relatively short time, in many cases for less than 1 year. coordinated with other federal programs. Designating leadership responsibility for managing the program. Establishing penalties against facilities that fail to comply with requirements of the waiver. Directing the entity(ies) managing program to implement procedures and criteria for the selection and placement of physicians and for monitoring compliance with waiver requirements. For example, requiring the state to clearly support the use of the physician for the purposes of this waiver. For more information, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/29/health/health-care/healthcare-reform-wavier/index.html. addressing unmet need and to show that it has sought other options for fulfilling this need. We provided a draft copy of this report to seven agencies that are involved with waivers for physicians to practice in underserved areas. ARC, USDA, and USIA provided formal written comments (see apps. VIII, IX, and X) These comments indicate general agreement with our conclusions and matters for congressional consideration. HUD and Justice chose not to provide formal comments. However, we discussed our findings with HUD and INS officials, and they raised no objections to our findings or matters. HHS did not submit formal comments by the end of our 30-day comment period. DOT has had limited involvement in waivers for physicians with J-1 visas and did not have comments on the draft report. The Director of the department’s Office of International Affairs (who also chairs the department's Exchange Visitor Waiver Review Board) said that HHS favored the option of delegating responsibility for the waivers to the states. For congressional consideration, he said, HHS favors delegating the waivers. three agencies that provided formal written comments also expressed their support for the need for better coordination between the participating agencies, states, and other programs to address medical underservice. One agency, USDA, also expressed concern about the lack of available funding to operate its program effectively. USDA suggested that an alternative to funding the program from appropriated research funds would be to initiate a fee-for-service type application fee to offset operational costs, which would require legislation to authorize the collection and utilizations of fees. for oversight and operational support to ensure that the physicians address unmet needs for physician resources. We did not examine financing options for managing the waivers in our review. A few states, such as Michigan, have been requiring user fees of up to $500 per application. We also received comments on technical matters from several of the agencies, which we considered in preparing our final report. We are sending copies of this report to the Secretaries of Agriculture, Health and Human Services, Housing and Urban Development, and Transportation. United States Information Agency, the Federal Co-Chairman of the Appalachian Regional Commission, and the Attorney General. We also will make copies available to others on request. Please contact me on (202) 512-7119 if you or your staff have any questions. Major contributors to this report are listed in appendix XI. To accomplish our objectives, we interviewed (1) federal agency officials responsible for requesting the waivers at ARC, HUD, USDA, and DOT; (2) HHS officials in the department’s Office of International Affairs and the Health Resources and Services Administration; and (3) officials at USIA and INS. including INS service centers; (4) officials from the Department of Labor and the State Department. We also reviewed relevant legislation, studies, and policy documents. We conducted two mail surveys: one of the states regarding the use of waivers of the J-1 visa foreign residence requirement for physicians in their states, and another of the facilities that requested such waivers for physicians. We concluded that the waiver of the requirement for doctors to live and work in the U.S. should be considered a non-discriminatory practice. obtained and analyzed data on requests for waivers for physicians from USIA and the requesting federal agencies. We also visited three states—Washington, Texas, and Georgia. During our site visits, we met with state and other health officials, visited 14 sites where waiver physicians were practicing, and interviewed health care facility officials and 20 physicians who received waivers. We conducted our work between November 1995 and September 1996 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. We used the date that the agencies sent the request to USIA in our calculations. computer-based systems, we did review the requesting agencies’ data for consistency and accuracy and selectively compared the agency data with that held by USIA. We obtained information on the waiver requests made by DOT from its Office of the General Counsel. Our scope did not include waiver requests from VA or requests from other agencies for physicians to conduct research. Because the agencies requesting waivers do not consistently track the practice dates of the physicians, we don’t know the exact date of each waiver request. could not identify the number of physicians in practice at any given point in time. Instead, we used the dates that the agencies and states submitted their requests for waivers to USIA. We assumed that those physicians whose waivers were requested in 1994 or 1995 were either already practicing at the facility listed in agency data on December 31, 1995, or had their waivers in process to begin practicing shortly thereafter. We compared this number with (1) the number. of physicians needed to remove the primary care Health Professional Shortage Area designations in the state on December. We obtained data from HHS’ Health Resources and Services Administration. We compared waivers with the number of NHSC physicians practicing in underserved areas on September 30, 1995. We also compared waivers to those who did not have NHSC scholarship or federal loan repayment obligations. We estimated the number who completed graduate medical education and training in 1995 who would be subject to the 2-year foreign residence. We used this data to estimate the number. of physicians who completed Graduate Medical Education and Training (GME) in 1995. requirement, we subtracted the number of exchange visitor physicians who were continuing applicants in the 1995-96 academic year from the number. physicians sponsored by ECFMG in the prior academic year. While this number is not exact because it may include a small number of physicians. who were involved in research and some physicians who did not complete their training, it does represent a reasonable estimate of the number with J-1 visas who completed graduate medical education or training who would be required to return home without a waiver. number of waiver requests for physicians to practice in underserved areas that the agencies sent to USIA in 1995 (1,374) is about 64 percent of this figure. To identify characteristics of the physicians who received waivers of the J-1 visa foreign residence requirement, we selected a random sample of 40 from 355 physicians for whom ARC requested waivers between 1990 and 1992. To determine conditions attached to the waivers, we interviewed state and federal agency officials, reviewed their written waiver policies, and analyzed the results of our state survey. Section 212(e) of the Immigration and Nationality Act requires that certain J-1 visa program participants, including participants in graduate medical education, reside at least 2 years in the countries of their nationalities or last residences after leaving the United States. They must meet this requirement before they are eligible to apply for nonimmigrant visas. There was no 2-year foreign residence requirement or waiver provision in the exchange visitor program authorized with the passage of the U.S. immigration reform act in 1996. The 2-year foreign residence requirement and its related waiver provision evolved through a number of legislative changes after the exchange visitor program was authorized in 1948. “The exchange program is not an immigration program and should not be used to circumvent the operation of the immigration laws,” a 1956 amendment to the act said. The act required participants to depart the United States after completing their programs. The 1956 amendment also provided for a waiver of the foreign residence requirements on the basis of a request from a foreign national. an interested U.S. government agency showing the waiver to be in the public interest. “To make available the services of exchangees who possess talents desired by our universities, foundations and other institutions, the language of the House bill was modified to permit the waiver of the foreign residence requirement on the request of an interested government agency,” the bill says. An amendment to the foreign residency provision in 1970 removed the blanket application of theforeign residence requirement for exchange visitors and imposed it only on participants whose participation was financed in some way by the United States. countries or (2) whose home countries clearly needed their services. Participants could no longer meet the 2-year foreign residence requirement by residing in other foreign countries but had to reside in the countries of their nationalities or their last foreign residences before coming to the United States. The 1970 act also established two additional bases for waivers: persecution because of race, religion, or political opinion and statements by the participant’s home countries that they had no objections to the waivers. These bases still apply except the statement of no-objection waiver is no longer available. to participants in graduate medical education or training. “that there is no longer an insufficient number of physicians and surgeons in the United States.” In light of this finding, the Congress tightened immigration laws for foreign doctors and strengthened requirements affecting J-1 visa program participants. The latter were made subject to the 2-year foreign residence requirement whether or not their programs were based in the U.S. or in a foreign country. It was not clear whether the new requirements would apply to foreign-born medical students. In 1981, USIA asked the Congress to extend the limit up to 7 years for medical doctors to encourage them to study in the United States. The House Committee on the Judiciary questioned USIA officials regarding the likelihood that physicians would be willing to return home after 7 years. The Congress increased the usual permissible duration of stay to7 years, but it imposed additional requirements. Graduate medical education or training participants were required, as a continuing reminder, to furnish annual affidavits to INS attesting that they would return to their home countries. Up to 20 waivers for physicians with J-1 visas may be granted at the request of a statedepartment of public health or its equivalent each fiscal year. Amendment of the Immigration and Nationality Act in 1994 established another basis for physicians to obtain waivers. U.S. officials were required to issue an annual report to the Congress on participants who had submitted affidavits, including their names and addresses, the programs in which they are participating, and their status in the programs. The amendments apply only to exchange visitors who were admitted to the United States under a J-visa or acquired such status before June 1, 1996. J-1 visa waivers did your state receive from employers between October 1, 1995 and March 31, 1996? (enter 0 if no applications were received during that time) 112 (total) applications please continue on next page--> ) 5. Based on your current situation, how. adequate is the annual limit of 20 state J-1. visa waivers to meet your state’s needs for. physicians under this program? (check one) 6. We require periodic reports by the 6% less than. adequate 0% much less than adequate 50% We conduct periodic site visits 82% We rely on the employers to enforce 0% None of the above factors. received NHSC scholarships or federal loan repayment who were practicing in the state. We used the number of full-time-equivalent physicians identified by HHS as needed to remove primary care Health Professional Shortage Area designations. Although physicians with waivers may also practice in designated Medically Underserved Areas, HHS does not remove this designation and, as a result, there is no dedesignation level to measure the need for physicians in the MedicallyUnderserved Area. To measure need, we used the primary measurement used by HHS and the requesting agencies to establish the need. the number of waiver physicians who would be practicing on December 31, 1995, or shortly thereafter. We used data from the requesting agencies and states on the number of waived applications sent to USIA from 1994 to 1995. The number of NHSC physicians in a state was used to determine the total number of physicians practicing in that state. This is a conservative number because it does not include the number. of physicians who were NHSC state loan repayment recipients practicing in shortage areas, which was not available by state. from NHSC at the time of our review. As shown in table VII.1, the degree to which the identified physician shortage can be offset by the waiver physicians practicing in a state varied between the states. When combined with the NHSC physicians practicing there, the number exceeded the number of physicians needed to remove some states’ primary care Health Professional Shortage Area designations. OtherStates’ identified physician needs were not met by these two physician sources. In addition to those named above, the following individuals made important contributions. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 1988. Council on Graduate Medical Education. Sixth Report: Managed Health Care: Implications for the Physician Workforce and Medical. Education. Washington, D.C.: U.S.-based Council. First Report of the Council, Vols. I and II, 1988; Fourth Report, Vol. I, 1989; Fifth Report, vol. II, 1989. Third Report, v. III, 1991; Fourth, viv. IV, 1991. Services, 1995. Institute of Medicine. The Nation’s Physician Workforce: Options for Balancing Supply and. Requirements. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press, 1996. Pew Health Professions Commission. Critical Challenges: Revitalizing the Health. Professions for the Twenty-First Century. San Francisco: University of California San Francisco Center for the HealthProfessions, 1995, p. 1521-27. The New England Journal of Medicine, Vol. 334, No. 25 (1996), pp. 1679-83. General Accounting Office. Health Care Shortage Areas: Designations Not a Useful Tool for Directing Resources to the Underserved. National Health Service Corps: Opportunities to Stretch Scarce Dollars and Improve Provider Placement. U.S. Information Agency: Inappropriate Uses of Educational and Cultural Exchange Visas. The New England Journal of Medicine: “Correcting the Oversupply of Specialists by Limiting Residencies for Graduates of Foreign Medical Schools.” “ Journal of Medicine, Vol. 333, No. 7 (1995), pp. 454-56. The first copy of each GAO report and testimony is free. Additional copies are $2 each. Orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent. VISA and MasterCard credit cards are accepted, also. The U.S. General Accounting Office P.O. Box 6015 Gaithersburg, MD 20884-6015 Room 1100 700 4th St. NW (corner of 4th and G Sts) GAO issues a list of newly available reports and testimony each day. To receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days, please call (202) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone. A recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists. Orders may also be placed by calling (301) 258-4066, or TDD ( 301) 413-0006. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details.