GAO: OMB and Treasury have made progress implementing 5 of our recommendations related to DATA Act implementation. Additional effort is needed to address 11 previous GAO recommendations that remain open. Data governance is an institutionalized system of decision rights and accountabilities for planning, overseeing, and controlling data management. A common set of key practices endorsed by standards setting organizations recommend that data governance structures should include the key practices shown in the text box below. The Data Standards Committee held its inaugural meeting on September 15, 2016, and will meet on a monthly basis. OMB is conducting a pilot program, known as the Section 5 Pilot, aimed at developing recommendations for reducing reporting burden for grantees and contractors. Agencies that are developing interim solutions will only have until May 2017 to test the data before the reporting deadline. An OMB document commended these agencies for developing robust contingency plans since this will better position them for timely implementation. Officials said this interim solution is complex and their processes cannot be fully automated until the Oracle patch is released. Since these processes are not fully automated, they carry a risk of errors being introduced though human error. iterative approach enabled agencies and other key stakeholders to provide feedback and contribute to improving the technical guidance and the public website. We are sending copies of this report to the Secretaries of Agriculture, Health and Human Services, and the Treasury; the Director of OMB; the Chief Executive Officer of the Corporation of National and Community Service; the Administrator of the General Services Administration; as well as interested congressional committees and other interested parties. This report will be available at no charge on our website at http://www.gao.gov. This review is part of an ongoing effort to provide interim reports on the progress being made in implementing the Digital Accountability and Transparency Act of 2014. Contact points for our Offices of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of our report. This report examines: (1) steps taken to establish a clear data governance; and (2) the progress made in meeting the reporting requirements for us mandated by the act. For confidential support, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org. structure which is particularly important during the upcoming transition to a new administration. challenges reported by Chief Financial Officers Act of 1990 (CFO Act) agencies in their implementation plan updates. The operationalization of government-wide data standards and the technical specifications for data reporting. updated designs for the Section 5 Pilot for reducing recipient reporting burden and progress made in its implementation. We identify common key practices for establishing effective data governance structures for the DATA Act. We describe the Office of Management and Budget’s (OMB) and the Department of the Treasury (Treasury) efforts to implement a data governance structure for the Data Act. data governance structures. To identify key practices for data governance we reviewed our past reports to identify applicable laws, regulations, and guidance, as well as reports from other entities that could inform our work. We identified organizations that had data governance expertise, had previously published work on data governance, were frequently cited as a primary source, or some combination of these qualifications. In addition, because the DATA Act requires that established data standards incorporate widely accepted common data elements such as those developed in this report, we selected sources that had previously been cited as primary sources. by international voluntary consensus standards bodies, federal agencies with authority over contracting and financial assistance, and accounting standards organizations. All of the organizations we identified endorse establishing and using a governance structure to oversee how data standards, digital content, and other data assets are developed, managed and implemented. Based on these selection factors we drew on work from the following organizations to help us identify data governance key practices across several domains. We selected a range of organizations, including domestic and international standards-setting organizations, industry groups or associations, and federal agencies. governance key practices: American Institute of Certified Public Accountants, American National Standards Institute, Carnegie-Mellon University-Software Engineering Institute, Data Governance Institute. We also met with OMB and Treasury to obtain information on the status of their efforts to address our previous recommendation that they establish a data governance structure. To determine the implementation challenges reported by CFO Act agencies in their DATA Act implementation plan updates, we requested and received the Data Management Association International’s report on the issue. updates from the 24 CFO Act agencies. We reviewed these implementation plan updates and assessed the information against OMB’s requirements and the revised guidance. We determined whether the updates contained the information required by OMB. We also looked at the timeline and milestones with an explanation of the agency's progress to date and the remaining actions it would take to implement the act in accordance with the suggested steps in Playbook 2.0, (2) costs to date, and estimated total future costs. analyzed the agency-reported challenges and mitigating strategies and categorized them. We compared the categories of challenges reported by the CFO Act agencies in their implementation plan updates to the challenges that had been reported in their initial implementation plans in 2015. We interviewed cognizant OMB and Treasury officials and obtained any supporting documentation to further understand the implementation challenges. We also met with O MBM and Treasury to obtain the supporting documentation and processes and controls for reviewing the updated implementation information and monitoring agencies’ progress. information on the status of efforts to address our previous recommendations related to agency implementation plans. To assess efforts to date to operationalize government-wide standards, we reviewed OMB policy guidance intended to facilitate agency reporting. We also interviewed OMB staff and Treasury officials to obtain information about plans for additional guidance as well as to assess the extent to which issued guidance is responsive to agency questions, requests for additional clarity on their reporting requirements, or both. We met with OMB and met with Treasury officials. Treasury to obtain information on the status of efforts to address our previous recommendation related to the provision of policy guidance. To examine the technical structure and specifications for reporting, we assessed Treasury’s processes for developing technical guidance. We reviewed the broker made available by Treasury through open source code posted on a public website (GitHub repositories associated with the DATA Act) In addition, we observed several demonstrations of how agencies submit their data to a prototype of the broker. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. the broker and the feedback produced by the system regarding data verification. We interviewed knowledgeable officials from OMB, Treasury, and selected federal agencies and inspectors general. We also interviewed enterprise resource planning (ERP) vendors assisting federal agencies with technical implementation. Based on these selection, we selected three agencies based on whether they were in compliance with existing federal requirements for federal financial management systems, and the type of federal funding provided (such as grants, loans, or procurements), and their status as a federal shared service provider for financial management. factors, we chose the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), the. Department of Agriculture (USDA), and the Corporation for National and Community Service (CNCS) Although the information obtained from these three agencies is not generalizable to all agencies, they illustrate a range of conditions under which agencies are implementing the act. These are the same three agencies we selected for our January 2016 and August 2016 reports. This allowed us to assess progress in DATA Act implementation at these agencies since our last review. We reviewed Section 5 of the Federal Funding Accountability and Transparency Act of 2006, as amended by the DATA Act. We met with OMB and Treasury to obtain information on the status of efforts to address our recommendation related to providing technical guidance. We reviewed the draft design documents to assess OMB’s plans for meeting these requirements. To supplement our review of those plans, we also spoke with cognizant staff implementing. and DATA Act implementation team members. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. these pilots at OMB, HHS, and General Services Administration. To assess the extent to which the Section 5 pilot designs adhered to leading practices for effective pilot design, we reviewed the documented designs. We provided HHS and OMB with feedback on the design of the grants and procurement portions of the pilot. These officials generally accepted our feedback as useful and, in some instances, noted that they have or planned to make changes to their design. We determined that the design met the criteria when we saw evidence that all aspects of a leading practice were met. If we identified a critical gap or shortcoming related to the practice, we determined the criteria were not met. as a result of our input. We also met with OMB to obtain information on the status of efforts to address our recommendation related to the design of the pilot for reducing recipient reporting burden. We conducted the work upon which this report is based from May 2016 to December 2016 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. In May 2015, the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) directed federal agencies to submit Digital Accountability and Transparency Act of 2014 (DATA Act) implementation plans to OMB concurrent with the agencies’ fiscal year 2017 budget requests. In June 2016, OMB directed Chief Financial Officers Act of 1990 (CFO) to prepare their implementation plans. We reviewed these implementation plans and on July 29, 2016, we issued a report on the results of our review. Act) agencies to submit updates to their initial DATA Act implementation plans by August 12, 2016. The updates were to (1) update timeline and milestones and explain the agency’s progress to date and the remaining actions it would take to implement the act in accordance with the suggested steps in the DATA Act Implementation Playbook (Version 2.0) (Playbook 2.1) The updates also were to report costs to date, estimated total future costs, and explain any new challenges and mitigation strategies. develop their DATA Act implementation plans. Steps 1 through 4 were to be completed by September 2015. As of October 2016, only 16 of the 24 CFO Act agencies reported that they had completed all steps 1 through four. Four agencies had not completed their inventory of data and identified the gaps in systems and processes for data elements (step 3) Data Act Implementation Playbook (Version 1.0) indicated that agencies would be working on steps 5 through 8 throughout fiscal years 2016 and 2017. Playbook 2.0—issued June 24, 2016—includes, among other things, steps 5 and 8. expanded guidance on actions to be included in steps 5 through 8. Playbook 2.0 did not include expected timeframes for agencies to complete each step. Instead, it referred agencies to Treasury’s implementation roadmap, which includes high level milestones for Treasury's technical deliverables. Step 5: Prepare Data for Submission to the Broker. This step involves reviewing the schema version 1.0, extracting data from source systems, mapping agency data to the schema and submitting it to the broker. The broker uses validation rules to test the completeness and accuracy of the data elements and linkages between financial and award data. The broker also tests whether the data passes basic validations within the schema version 1.0. This step involves updating information and systems. If data does not pass validation (see Step 6), the broker will update the data and data systems. Step 7: Update Data. The next step involves implementing system changes as needed to collect and link data. Step 6: Test Broker Outputs and Ensure Data are Valid. provide error details to the agency. The agency should then reference the authoritative data sources and address the discrepancies. Step 8: Submit Data. Once the data is linked, validated, and standardized, agencies are to submit the data to Treasury for posting on USASpending.gov or a successor system. Agency senior accountable officials (SAO) are to provide reasonable assurance that their internal controls support the reliability and validity of the agency account-level and award-level data they submit to Treasury. a minimum, that data reported are based on appropriate internal controls and risk management strategies identified in OMB Circular A-123. Five CFO Act agencies reported challenges in each of the five categories of challenges reported by 19 of the 24 agencies in their implementation plan updates. OMB required agencies to include information on remaining actions the agencies should take to implement suggested steps 5 through 8 in Playbook 2.0, and the number of agencies that included the information in their updates. Five agencies reported problems in each category of challenges. Act agencies did not identify any challenges in their implementation plan updates. Table 5 describes the mitigating strategies reported by 16 of the 24 CFO Act agencies. The number of agencies reporting mitigating strategies in each category is listed in Table 5. The agency contacts included: Peter Del Toro, Michael LaForge, Kathleen Drennan, Diane Morris, Shirley Hwang, Aaron Colsher, Katherine Morris, Sophia Tan, Thomas Hackney, Charles Jones, Laura Pacheco, Maria Belaval. major contributions to this report. Additional members of GAO’s DATA Act Internal Working Group also contributed to the development of the report. The report was compiled by the GAO and the Department of Health and Human Services’ Office of the Inspector General for the Office of Management and Budget. For more information, go to GAO.gov and the Office for the Inspector general for the Health Care Professionals, or go to http://www.gao.gov/. For more on the Data Act, click here.