Congress has enacted several laws to assist agencies and the federal government in managing IT investments. About 8.5 percent of federal agencies’ planned spending for fiscal year 2016 has gone toward provisioned IT services. The vast majority of spending going toward IT that is non-provisioned. The federal government has spent billions of dollars on failed and poorly performing IT investments which often suffered from ineffective management, such as project planning, requirements definition, and program oversight and governance, the authors say. They recommend implementing the recently-enacted statutory requirements promoting IT acquisition reform. recommendations had been implemented. OMB has implemented a series of initiatives to improve the oversight of underperforming investments and more effectively manage IT. In June 2009, to further improve the transparency into and oversight of agencies’ IT investments, OMB publicly deployed the IT Dashboard. Currently, the Dashboard publicly displays information on the cost, schedule, and performance of over 700 major federal IT investments at 26 federal agencies. Further, the public display of OMB’s recommendations will be expanded. The data is intended to allow OMB, other oversight bodies, and the general public to hold the government agencies accountable for results and progress. Among other things, agencies are to submit ratings from their Chief Information Officers (CIO), which, according to OMB’s instructions, should reflect the level of risk facing an investment. Each agency CIO is to assess his or her IT investments against a set of six pre-established evaluation factors and then assign a rating of 1 (high risk and red) to 5. Over the past several years, we have made over 20 recommendations to help improve the accuracy and reliability of the information on the IT Dashboard. Most agencies agreed with our recommendations or had no comment. In January 2010, the Federal CIO began leading TechStat sessions to terminate or turn around IT investments that are failing or are not producing results. These meetings involve OMB and agency leadership and are intended to increase accountability and accountability for agency IT investments. The CIO’s best judgement of the level of risk facing the investment.(low risk and green) based on the CIO's best judgement. OMB’s 25-Point IT Reform Plan included a “Cloud First’ policy that required each agency CIO to implement cloud-based solutions whenever a secure, reliable, and cost-effective cloud option exists. In May 2012, OMB released its Federal IT Shared Services Strategy. The strategy requires agencies to save at least $3.8 billion through this initiative. OMB partially agreed with our recommendations, and responses from 21 of the agencies varied, with some agreeing and others not. to use shared services to increase return on investment, eliminate waste and duplication, and improve the effectiveness of IT solutions. Examples of commodity IT areas to consider migrating to a shared environment, as described in the strategy, include software licenses, e-mail systems, and human resource systems. Of the more than $80 billion reportedly spent on federal IT in fiscal year 2015, 26 federal agencies spent about $61 billion on O&M, more than three-quarters of the total amount spent. According to agency data reported to OMB’s IT Dashboard, the 10 IT investments spending the most on O &M for fiscal year2015 total $12.5 billion. systems has decreased by about $7.3 billion since fiscal year 2010. O&M spending relative to overall IT spending has increased by 9 percent since 2010. In fiscal year 2017, agencies plan to spend 77 percent of their IT funds on O &M. According to agency officials, reasons for the increase in O & M spending include the recent shift of major systems from DME to O& M. The percentage of total IT spending on O&m ranges from a 20 percent increase (Department of Education) to a 16 percent decrease (Office of Personnel Management) the CIO stated that one reason for the increased spending on O&M as a percentage of its total is because initially DHS had high DME spending to setup the agency. DHS officials stated that they anticipate future increases in DME funding as prioritized IT modernization efforts are approved and funded. Further, an official in Department of State’s (State) Bureau of Information Resource Management stated that the increase is largely due to increased costs of maintaining the infrastructure, including meeting security requirements. Moreover, VA officials stated that updates to its technology are the primary reason for the increase in spending. In addition, an official in HHS’s Office of the CIO stated that the increased spending on O&M was largely due to grants to states and local entities for new programs, such as the Affordable Care Act. Conversely, several agencies have decreased spending onO&M. For example, as we have previously reported, the Department of Energy reduced spending by approximately $300 million, which it attributed to the reclassification of high performance computers. were re-categorized because they include both supercomputers and laboratory facilities. Department of Commerce reduced spending by approximately $110 million and attributed it to the reclassification of satellite ground systems from its IT portfolio. We disagreed with these reclassifications, and reported that they run contrary to the Clinger-Cohen Act of 1996, which specifies requirements for the management of IT. Further, we reported that by gathering information on satellites, the CIO and others in the oversight of satellites. incomplete information on IT investments, OMB increases the risk of not fulfilling its oversight responsibilities. We recommended that Energy and Commerce appropriately categorize their IT investments. Both agencies disagreed. A policy analyst within OMB’s Office of E-Government and Information Technology expressed concern when agencies, or their bureaus, spend a low percentage of their IT funds on DME. The analyst further stated that this could indicate that the agency's maintenance costs are reducing its flexibility and ability to innovate. 5 of the 26 agencies that report to the IT Dashboard reported spending less than 10 percent on DME activities in fiscal year 2015. 34 percent of bureaus (i.e., 51 of the 151) spent less than ten percent on the DME. According to agency officials, reasons for low DME spending include the size and mission of the bureau. The agency or bureau is unable to innovate, according to the agency officials. For more details, see appendix III of this report. as well as several bureaus having recently completed major DME work that is now in the O&M phase. Commerce officials: One of their bureau had no actual IT systems in its budget, as its IT has been absorbed by headquarters. OMB staff in the Office of E-Government and Information Technology have recognized the upward trend of O&m spending and identified several contributing factors, including maintaining legacy hardware, which costs more over time, and (2) costs are rising. increased in maintaining applications and systems that use older programming languages. programmers knowledgeable in these older languages are becoming increasingly rare and thus more expensive. OMB encourages agencies to adopt provisioned IT services, such as cloud computing and shared services, to make IT more efficient and cost-effective. According to OMB, agencies tend to categorize investments as O&M because they attract less oversight, require reduced documentation, and have a lower risk of losing funding. In several situations where agencies are not sure whether to report costs as O and DME, agencies default to reporting as O &M. agile, and enable innovation. It provides an approach for agencies to implement cloud-based solutions whenever a secure, reliable, and cost-effective cloud option exists. OMB identified a series of performance metrics for agencies’ PortfolioStat sessions to measure the federal government’s progress in driving value in federal IT investments. One measure is the percent of IT spending on non-provisioned O&M spending. The goal is to increase return on investment, eliminate waste and duplication, and improve the effectiveness of IT solutions. Federal agencies reported spending $55 billion—69 percent of total IT spending—on non-provisioned O&M in fiscal year 2015. OMB has not identified an associated goal with its non- provisioned IT measure. For example, State allocates about 87 percent of its IT spending on non- Proportions. Department of Transportation (DOT) allocates 50 percent. See figure 5 for details on agencies’ planned spending allocations. For more information on OMB’s Non-Provisioned IT Measure, visit the OMB website. The aim is for the amount of spending on DME and provisioned IT services to rise. OMB has not identified a specific goal for the measure because it would be ever changing. While goals for performance measures may change over time, it is still important for OMB to set a target by which agencies can measure their progress in meeting this measure. In particular, leading practices should be monitored to ensure that agencies are following the best practices. That is part of the PortfolioStat process. stress that organizations should measure performance in order to evaluate the success or failure of their activities and programs. Performance measurement involves identifying performance goals and measures, identifying targets for improving performance, and measuring progress against those targets. Without links to outcomes and goals, organizations are not able to effectively measure progress toward those goals. OMB’s own website, performance.gov states that when measuring performance, a goal is a simple but powerful way to motivate people and communicate priorities. In addition, the website states that the federal government operates more effectively when agency leaders, at all levels of the organization, focus on performance. The O&M phase is often the longest phase of an investment and can consume more than 80 percent of the total lifecycle costs. As such, agencies must actively manage their investment during this phase. Until OMB develops a specific goal associated with measuring non- provisioned services, OMB and agencies will be limited in their ability to evaluate progress that has been made and whether or not they are achieving their goals to increase the amount spent on development activities and provisioned IT services.starting at the top, set clear measurable goals aligned to achieving better outcomes. CIOs from 12 selected agencies reported that 23 of their 187 major IT O&M investments were moderate to high risk as of August 2015. They requested $922.9 million in fiscal year 2016 for these investments. Of the 23 investments, agencies had plans to replace or modernize 19 investments. However, the plans for 12 of those were general or tentative in that the agencies did not have specific plans to make changes to the investments, the CIOs said in a report. not provide specificity on time frames, activities to be performed, or functions to be replaced or enhanced. Agencies did not plan to modernize or replace 4 of the investments. The lack of specific plans could result in wasteful spending on moderate- and high-risk investments. In instances where investments experience problems, agencies can perform a TechStat, a face-to-face meeting to terminate or turn around IT investments that are failing or not producing results. OMB directs agencies to monitor O&M investments through operational analyses, which should be performed annually. assess costs, schedules, whether the investment is still meeting customer and business needs, and investment performance. Table 5 provides details on the 23 investments and whether the operational analyses and TechStats were performed. Although not required, agencies had performed TechStats on only five of the at-risk investments. Agencies provided several reasons for not conducting TechStats. Several of the investments’ risk levels were reduced to low or moderately-low risk in the months since the IT Dashboard had been publicly updated.  Commerce's monthly process does not include all of the key elements of an operational analysis. DHS plans to perform the analysis on the investment in August 2017. Performing the analysis once the investment is operational will enable DHS to determine whether it is meeting the needs of the agency and delivering the expected value. The Director of Treasury’s Capital Planning and Investment Control program stated that the department’S policy does not require an analysis before an investment is made. The Integrated Fixed Towers Program Manager stated that since the investment had only become operational in October 2015, an operationalAnalysis was not yet required. infrastructure investments to have an operational analysis performed. OMB’s guidance on operational analyses does not exclude infrastructure investments. Numerous old investments are using obsolete programming languages. Several agencies, such as the Department of Justice (Justice), DHS, HHS, Treasury, USDA, and VA, reported using Common Business Oriented Language (COBOL)—a programming language developed in COBOL. Until agencies ensure that their O&M investments are fully reviewed, the government’'s oversight of old and vulnerable investments will be impaired. the late 1950s and early 1960s—to program their legacy systems. It is widely known that agencies need to move to more modern, maintainable languages. In 2010, Gartner noted that there should be a shift in focus to using more modern languages for new products. Some legacy systems may use parts that are obsolete and more difficult to find. For instance, Defense is still using 8-inch floppy disks in a legacy system. For more information, go to Defense.gov. that coordinates the operational functions of the United States’ nuclear forces. Further, in some cases, the vendors no longer provide support for hardware or software, creating security vulnerabilities and additional costs. For example, each of the 12 selected agencies reported using unsupported operating systems and components in their fiscal year 2014 reports. Commerce, Defense, DOT, HHS, and VA reported using 1980s and 1990s Microsoft operating systems that stopped being supported by the vendor more than a decade ago. Lastly, legacy systems may become increasingly more expensive as agencies have to deal with the previously mentioned issues and may pay a premium to hire staff or contractors with the knowledge to maintain outdated systems. For example, one agency (SSA) reported re-hiring retired employees to maintain its COBOL systems. Selected agencies reported that they continue to maintain old investments in O&M. Table 6 shows the 10 oldest investments and/or systems, as reported by selected agencies. Agencies reported having plans to modernize or replace each of these investments and systems. or tentative in that the agencies did not provide specific time frames, activities to be performed, or functions to be replaced or enhanced. For a full list of the agencies’ reported oldest systems, see appendix IV. Separately, we profiled one system or investment from each of the 12 selected agencies. The selected systems and investments range from 11 to approximately 56 years old, and serve a variety of purposes. For example, Treasury’s Individual Master File was first initiated about 56 years ago and is the authoritative data source for individual taxpayer accounts. DOT’s profiled system was initiated about 46 years ago and allows the agency to maintain comprehensive information on hazardous materials incidents. Of the 12 investments or systems, agencies had plans to replace or modernize 11 of these. However, the plans for 3 of those were general or tentative in that the agencies did not provide specificity on time frames, activities to be performed, or functions to be replaced or enhanced. The profiles of these systems and investments are available on the DOT's website. Agencies are not required to identify, evaluate, and prioritize their O&M investments to determine whether they should be kept as-is, modernized, replaced, or retired. Of the more than $80 billion that the 26 agencies reported spending for federal IT in fiscal year 2015, the agencies spent about $61 billion on O &M. Several of the 12 selected agencies’ major O&m investments were rated as moderate or high risk. Several aging investments are using unsupported components, many of which did not have specific plans for modernization. direct the respective agency CIO to ensure that required analyses are performed on investments in the operations and maintenance phase. We recommend that the Secretaries of Agriculture, Commerce, Defense, Energy, Health and Human Services, Homeland Security, State, the Treasury, Transportation, and Veterans Affairs identify and plan to modernize or replace legacy systems as needed. We received comments on a draft of this report from OMB and the other 12 agencies in our review. Eight agencies agreed with our recommendations, Defense and Energy partially agreed, and Justice and the Treasury stated they had no comment on the recommendations. reviewed IT Dashboard data on O&M investments to identify those that were rated as moderate to high risk by the agency chief information officer (CIO) We reviewed agency documentation such as TechStat documentation and operational analyses that had been performed on the investments, as available. In addition, we interviewed agency officials to determine plans for replacing or modernizing the investments. To assess the age and obsolescence of federal IT, we reviewed documentation associated with their legacy investments, such as operational analyses and enterprise architecture documents. that agencies provide a list of their three oldest systems. In some cases, agencies reported that they do not track the ages of individual systems. Agencies noted that these systems and investments may have components that are newer than their operational age. We also compared OMB and agencies’ current practices with federal guidance, such as OMB’s Circular No. A-11: Preparation, Submission, and Execution of the Budget and its associated supplement on capital assets, to determine whether they are adequately managing the age and obsolescence. of federal IT. To select systems or investments to profile, we identified agencies’ existing investments in O&M that were rated as medium or high risk. We then interviewed agency officials to confirm and obtain additional information on the systems. From the resulting list of systems and investments, we created a list of the agency-identified oldest systems. We also used the list of agency- identified oldest systems or Investments to identify the oldest investments in the federal IT system. The list of oldest systems and Investments was then used to select the agencies to profile. we selected one system or investment per agency using the following factors: investment type (major or non- major), system or Investment age, and risk level as of November 2015. We also reviewed agency documentation and interviewed agency officials on those profiled systems or investments. To assess the reliability of the OMB budget data and IT Dashboard data, we reviewed related documentation, such as OMB guidance on budget preparation, capital planning, and other topics. We sought to have a mix of systems and investments that included both major and non-major investment types and a range of ages. and IT Dashboard submissions. In addition, we corroborated with each agency that the data downloaded were accurate and reflected the data it had reported to OMB. We conducted this performance audit from April 2015 to May 2016 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions. We determined that the budget and IT Dashboards data were reliable for our purposes of reporting IT O&M spending. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. Table 8 provides the reported spending by agency on operations and maintenance (O&M) and the percentage of IT spending on O&M for fiscal years 2010 and 2015. Table 9 lists the 51 federal bureaus which reported spending less than 10 percent of their IT funds on development, modernization, and enhancement in fiscal year 2015. As part of this review, we requested that agencies provide a list of their three oldest systems. track the ages of individual systems, and as a result, we requested that the agency provide their 3 oldest IT investments and their approximate age. Table 10 provides a listing these systems or investments, as reported by agencies. We selected one system or investment per agency using a combination of factors including investment type (major or non-major), system or Investment age, and risk level as of November 2015. In particular, we sought to have a mix of systems and investments that included both major and non- major investment types, a range of ages, and aRange of risk ratings. The investment is a commercial off-the-shelf system that runs on Windows and Unix servers using Oracle’s PeopleSoft applications. The investment uses the PeopleSoft Supply Chain Management and PeopleSoft Financials modules. According to an agency official in Savannah River Operations, the investment will be used to manage 13,000 employees and pensioners at the Savannah River Site. It will also manage human resources, transparent financial reporting to Energy, supply chain, and project management, the official said. vendors still support all of the hardware and software used by this investment. The agency is not currently planning future modernization activity because the investment has gone through several updates in the past. The officials stated that there is no projected end of life date, and they plan to continue to maintain and use the system. The U.S. Department of Homeland Security has 14,000 Coast Guard users and also services the Transportation Security Administration. The investment start date: 1998 Age: 18. The last allowed the retirement of 16 associated legacy applications in 2011 and retired two mainframes. Core Accounting System (CAS) Suite is the primary financial management system for the U.S. Coast Guard. CAS is a set of several applications that assist the agencies in several areas, including accounts. Agency plans to transition to federal shared services in fiscal year 2018. The agency's total estimated life-cycle costs are $543.2 million. The U.N. Security Council has approved the use of CAS for the Coast Guard, TSA and the Domestic Nuclear Detection Office (DNDO) CAS uses a version of Oracle Federal Financials software that was first available in 2004. The extended vendor support for the software ended in November 2013. The agency plans to pursue using other shared services to provide its financial management services and, therefore, began looking for a new provider of financial services to use in the near future. It plans to use a combination of cloud-based and on-premises services to offer its financial services in the long-term. It also plans to begin using a new vendor to provide financial services for the agency in 2015. The agencies agreed to a staggered transition of these services, with DNDO transitioning in fiscal year 2016, TSA in 2017, and USCG in 2018. Until the migration is complete and CAS can be decommissioned, USCG plans to resolve emergent issues and maintain applications. In the meantime, due to the costs associated with implementing a full fix and the impending transition to shared services,. USCG has accepted the security risks and will continue to use CAS until the transition is complete. The transition will take place in fiscal years 2016-17 and 2017-18. Diversity Visa Information System (DVIS) is an electronic case management system used by approximately 30 federal employees and contractor staff working at the Department of State’s (State) Kentucky Consular Center. It tracks and validate application information submitted by foreign nationals under the Diversity Visa immigration program. System start date: early 1990s Age: Approximately 26 years System anticipated end date: 2020 Fiscal year 2016 funding: about $164,000 Total estimated life-cycle costs: $2.4 million Development costs: Not tracked at. The DVIS interface software, PowerBuilder, is no longer supported by the vendor. According to State officials, the main challenges in maintaining DVIS’s aging technology are related to information security and infrastructure concerns. State plans to replace DVIS with a project called ConsularOne. The replacement effort is to begin in October 2018, State officials say. The cost of replacing DVIS at system level is not tracked at the system level, according to the State Department. The project is expected to be completed at an unknown time. and they plan to retire DVIS when appropriate. In the meantime, the department plans to upgrade the unsupported software to a new version, which is also not supported. Department of Transportation—Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration Number of users: 250 federal users, 547,000 active hazardous materials facilities, 10,000 pipeline operators, and several million potential facilities. Investment start date: 1970s Age: about 41 years Investment anticipated end date: 2018 Fiscal year 2016 funding : $6.7 million Total estimated life-cycle costs: $38.0 million The Department of Transportation’s (DOT) Hazardous Materials Information System maintains and provides access to comprehensive information on hazardous materials incidents, exemptions and approvals. The system consists of five modules that register carriers and shippers, document incidents involving hazardous materials, issue special permits, facilitate approvals and exemptions pertaining to safety regulations, and document standards. To replace legacy modules, and plan to retire the legacy modules by the end of fiscal year 2018, the system will be replaced by software applications and processes. used by the system have become outdated and costly to maintain. Officials stated that costs have increased due to maintaining the personnel with the knowledge to use these older applications. The costly applications include those for scanning, imaging, and documentation management. These applications are compartmentalized, so data is duplicated and not integrated. Finally, the system uses an application that is no longer supported by the manufacturer, which can cause security risks, among other issues. The system uses Kofax Indicius software to perform optical character recognition. on scanned hazardous materials incident reports; the software was no longer supported by the vendor, as of December 2014. DOT is in the process of updating the functions performed by the system. The new system’s modules are intended to be integrated, automated, and improve efficiency, effectiveness, and data quality. Further, the unsupported application is planned to be eliminated. While DOT does not have dates for when individual legacy modules will be retired, officials stated that they plan to have all the legacy modules retired by the end of fiscal year 2018. The Internal Revenue Service’s (IRS), Individual Master File (IMF) is the authoritative data source for individual taxpayer accounts. Within IMF, accounts are updated, taxes are assessed, and refunds are generated as required during each tax filing period. Virtually all IRS information system will be replaced by Customer Account Data Engine 2 at an unknown date. The IMF is expected to be retired by 2019. The IRS has approximately 230 million tax accounts. It is estimated to cost $135.4 million to replace. IMF was written in an outdated assembly language code and operates on a 2010 IBM z196/2817-m32 mainframe. This has resulted in difficulty delivering technical capabilities addressing identify theft and refund fraud, among other things. IRS plans to address these issues by replacing IMF with a new, modern mainframe in 2015. The new mainframe will be powered by a new IBM Z196/2717-M32 system. The IRS will also be replacing its current mainframe with a newer, more modern IBM z 196/2716-M31 system in 2016. IMF with the Customer Account Data Engine 2 (CADE 2) investment. The CADE 2 investment includes plans to re-engineer the IMF. However, the replacement date is currently unknown. In addition, we have previously reported on IRS’s difficulty in delivering planned capabilities on time and on budget. Further, a key phase of the replacement project was initially to be completed by March 2015, but IRS is currently planning to complete parts of this phase well. The IMF is the world's largest bank. The agency will continue to maintain two separate systems until the replacement is complete. The agency has general plans to continuously update the system. The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services’ Medicare Appeals’ system is expected to be retired in 2020. The system is estimated to cost $99.6 million through fiscal year 2017, with $79.0 million in operations and maintenance costs. It has 1,900 system users and an estimated life-cycle cost of more than $100 million. It was built in 2005 and has an estimated age of 11 years. System is a case tracking system that is to facilitate maintenance and transfer of case specific data with regard to Medicare appeals through multiple levels of the appeal process. The system runs on a Solaris 10 operating system, last updated in February 2016, and uses commercial off-the-shelf systems for case management and reporting. According to the agency, the software is still supported by the vendors. TheSystem has faced challenges due to the rapid growth in Medicare appeals and the number of people seeking treatment. appeals processed each year, expanded use of settlements, and the increased interest in appeals data. This has resulted in an increased need for infrastructure changes, such as more storage, licenses, and processing capacity. Agency officials stated that they do not have any plans to address these gaps and that doing so is contingent on funding. They also noted general plans to continuously update the system, but they too are contingent on receiving funding. Number of users: Thousands of users across the federal, state, and local levels, in addition to those in the international. The National Weather Service Telecommunication Gateway (NWSTG) system is operated by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. The agency plans to retire the system in fiscal year 2017 and replace it with a new system. It is the nation’s hub for the collection and distribution of weather data and products and provides information to the public and academic communities. The NWSTG system has a life-cycle cost of $282.8 million, including $35.4 million for development and $247 million for operations and maintenance. National and global real-time exchange services using automated communications resources to collect and distribute a wide variety of environmental data. Thousands of customers worldwide use data distributed by the NWSTG and these data affect a wide range of economic and emergency management decisions. Concerns with the system had been increasing because the investment faced risks and challenges associated with an aging and unsupportable infrastructure, limited backup capability, and un-scalable architecture to support future data volume collection and dissemination. In 2013, the agency upgraded its hardware and software to Power7 IBM servers and Unix. operating systems (as depicted in the figure); however, NWSTG still lacks full backup capability for 26 percent of its functions. In fiscal year 2013, a major rearchitecture and redesign effort began which, according to Department of Commerce officials, will result in an entirely new dissemination architecture. According to officials, a detailed project plan is now being carried out and is scheduled to replace theNWSTG in early fiscal year 2017. The Personnel and Accounting Integrated Data will be replaced with an integrated system that is more capable, more reliable and have 100 percent backup capability. PAID system automates time and attendance for employees, timekeepers, payroll, and supervisors in the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) The PAID software has three major modules: Time and Attendance, Employee Master Record Downloads, and Education Tracking. System start date: 1963 Age: 53 years System anticipated end date: 2017 Fiscal year 2016 funding: $6.7 million Total estimated life-cycle costs: n/a, not tracked by system. Operations and maintenance costs: $ 6.6 million yearly. PAID is a 50-year old COBOL-based system at the end of its life span. The system runs on IBM mainframes and uses an IBM database. Officials stated the system is not user friendly and requires extensive training in order to use the system successfully. VA officials stated that PAID is intended to be mostly replaced by the Human Resources Information System Shared Service Center. The center will consolidate several IT services to provide core human resources- related functions. It is expected to be completed by 2015. Human Resources Information System Shared Service Center in 2017 is to consolidate human resources IT functions and services. However, the target solution is experiencing cost overruns of $14.8 million and VA officials stated that they will not be able to replace all of PAID’s functions. The agency is currently working on a transition plan and will determine whether VA should find another solution for the missing functionality or continue to keep PAID running indefinitely. The U.S. Department of Agriculture”s (USDA) U.s. Forest Service’S Resource Ordering and Status System is being replaced by PAID. ROSS is used to mobilize and deploy a multitude of resources, including qualified individuals, teams, aircraft, equipment, and supplies. The technology used by ROSS is on the verge of technical obsolescence. One of the applications ROSS uses is no longer supported by the vendor, creating vulnerability issues. In addition, in order to use the system, users must download client software. The system supports the basic needs of the first responders and support personnel at an incident location by processing orders and replenishing supplies. onto their local computers, as opposed to accessing the system through the web. In September 2015, the U.S. Forest Service issued a request for information for services to develop ROSS’s replacement. Agency officials estimated that this effort will cost $14 million through fiscal year 2019 and the solution will go live in 2018. In January 2016, Forest Service officials signed a charter to begin this project. The project is expected to be completed in 2018, with a cost estimate of $12 million to $15 million. Sentry is a real-time information system comprised of various modules. It provides information regarding security and custody levels, inmate program and work assignments, and other pertinent information about the inmate population. Sentry is used by the Bureau of Prisons to maintain proper custody of persons committed to their custody. The system is expected to be fully operational by September 2016. It has a life-cycle cost of $571.5 million and plans to update the user interface and integrate system data through September 2016, the agency says. When Sentry was first deployed over 30 years ago, it was comprised of approximately 700 program routines written in COBOL. It became increasingly more difficult and expensive to maintain complex, highly-customized systems written in older programming languages. Sentry’s mainframe operating system, transaction processing software, the system software, and the database software and system were recently updated in 2012 and uses Java and a new database. As part of this, the bureau is using Java to process inmates at all phases of incarceration. migrated the older database, merged the legacy data into the newer database platform. modified the COBOL programs to ensure compatibility with the new software and database. The bureau has plans for updating the user interface and integrating the data through September 2016. According to agency officials, there are no plans to replace Sentry, as the system is the main system used by the bureau.. Department of Defense—Air Force Number of users: 175 users across the agency's various branches, including the Air Force, Navy and Marine Corps. The Strategic Automated Command and Control System is the Department of Defense’s (Defense) dedicated high-speed data transmission, processing, and display system. The system coordinates functions for intercontinental ballistic missiles, bombers, tankers, munitions sites, intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance platforms. Defense is initiating a $60 million full system replacement which is scheduled to be completed in fiscal year 2020. The total estimated life-cycle costs: $135 million through 2032 and $75 million for operations and maintenance. For those in the nuclear command area, the system’s primary function is to send and receive emergency action messages to nuclear forces. The system is still running on an IBM Series/1 Computer, which is a 1970s computing system, and written in assembly language code. It also uses 8-inch floppy disks, which are a1970s-era computing system. The U.S. nuclear system is made up of technologies and equipment that are at the end of their useful lives. storage device; and assembly programming code typically used in mainframes. Replacement parts for the system are difficult to find because they are now obsolete. As of March 2016, Defense is initiating a $60 million full system replacement which is scheduled to be completed in fiscal year 2020. In addition to replacing some legacy functions in the near term, there is a plan underway to replace the floppy disks with secure digital cards. This effort is underway and is expected to be complete in the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2017. Services general public, 1,300+ field offices with 50,000 to 60,000 employees. System start date: 1985 Age: 31 years Investment anticipated end date: None Fiscal year 2016 funding: $9.6 million Total estimated life-cycle costs (through fiscal year 2017): $519.8 million Development costs: $235.7 million Operations and maintenance costs: £284.1 million Plans for retirement or modernization: Agency has ongoing modernization efforts. The Social Security Administration’s (SSA) Title II investment includes the Title II system which determines retirement benefits eligibility and amounts. officials, the Title II investment accomplished its goal to improve service delivery by eliminating antiquated Title II programs. SSA officials stated that Title II is comprised of 162 subsystems and some are still written in COBOL. These systems were also built in a compartmentalized structure by SSA, rather than contractors, because the agency determined that there were not commercial programs that could satisfy the agency’s business needs and the volume of data needed. Most of the employees who developed these systems are ready to use them. SSA does not have plans to retire the Title II system. Rather, the agency plans to continue to eliminate and replace Title II’s older and more costly subsystems. SSA currently is planning to retire four Title II subsystems, including a claims control system, and one that processes changes in earnings transactions. In addition, SSA has other efforts to modernize or consolidate Title II systems, such as its database management systems.retire and the agency will lose their collective knowledge. issues associated with losing knowledgeable employees. SSA officials stated that the agency has rehired retirees to work on the legacy systems. In addition to the contact name above, individuals making contributions to this report included Gary Mountjoy, Kevin Walsh, Scott Borre, Rebecca Eyler, Bradley Roach, Tina Torabi, and Jessica Waselkow. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org for details.