The Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC) was created to address some of the perceived regulatory weaknesses that may have contributed to the magnitude of the financial crisis of 2008. The council has six basic policy tools with which to pursue its mission. The distinction between depository banks and non-bank financial firms is important to understanding the FSOC because many of the new powers attempt to create a regulatory and resolution regime for non-banks that is similar to the way Depository banks are handled. The FSOC may set aside some financial regulations for consumers if the rules might cause systemic risk, under certain circumstances. The 2013 annual report says that there has been significant improvement in mortgage markets, but additional progress is needed. There may be regulatory uncertainty as federal agencies implement changes to regulations related to the mortgage market. The conservatorship agreements (Treasury Preferred Stock Purchase Agreements, PSPAs) have been modified to expedite the wind-down of the retained portfolios of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. Regulatory uncertainty in mortgage Markets may be reduced by the publication of final rules for the Real Estate Settlement Procedures. Act (RESPA), the Truth in Lending Act (TILA), and the Dodd-Frank Act's ability-to-pay standard. Additional work may need to be done to raise GSE guarantee fees to make room for private competitors to the GSEs. The financial infrastructure can also be a source of systemic risk. This is essentially the "plumbing" of the financial system. It includes the environment in which financial trading occurs, communications of the interbank payment system, clearing and settlement of retail payments. The financial infrastructure is vulnerable to natural disasters and human activity. Hurricane Sandy temporarily halted trading on the New York Stock Exchange in October 2012. Malfunctions have disrupted the issuance of securities (such as the initial public offering of Facebook). Reportedly, major financial institutions have been subjected to attempts to access the system. The stability of such systems can be threatened by the potential disruptions to the operational network. It can be difficult to predict the impact of a cyber-attack on the financial system. It is possible that a cyber attack could have a significant impact on financial markets. confidential information or disrupt their telecommunications (cyberattacks). The 2013 annual report noted several initiatives to address operational issues. The SEC recently proposed Regulation Systems Compliance and Integrity (Regulation SCI) to try to address malfunctions in capital markets. Future interest rate changes may be a factor in the future of the capital markets, according to the FSOC's 2013 annual Report. The 2013 report was released on Thursday, November 14. It is available online at: http://www.fsoc.org/. A combination of a global savings glut, deficient aggregate demand, and central bank interest-rate policies have contributed to an extended period of low interest rates. At some point, interest rates are likely to rise, either because the demand for loanable funds rises as the economy improves driving up the rates or because a negative shock causes a spike. Financial intermediaries, including but not limited to banks, can be damaged by rising interest rates if they have not adequately addressed the mismatch between the interest rates on their cost of funds. There are several examples of rising interest rates contributing to stress in the financial system. Rising rates in the 1970s and 1980s created a great deal of stress for banks that had funded long-term mortgages with short-term deposits. In 1994, rising rates in 1994 caused a significant sell-off in the bond market. Rising Rates during 2004-2006 contributed to the financial crisis of 2004-06. In 2008, the U.S. Federal Reserve raised interest rates by 0.25 per cent. to the end of the housing bubble (which would have ended eventually, but perhaps not at that time) Under-reporting of LIBOR rates in 2008 may have given financial regulators an overoptimistic view of the lending ability of major financial institutions during the liquidity crunch. Low interest rates make it difficult for savers to earn significant returns with relative safety. Money market mutual funds are at greater risk because their income stream (from relatively safe bonds) is close to zero, according to the IMF. Pension systems may find it difficult to earn adequate returns safely, especially if they have committed to defined benefits (a preset fixed payment) Other investors may have a greater temptation to "reach for yield" by investing in more risky categories of investments, increasing the likelihood of asset bubbles in other markets. In its 2013 report, the FSOC attributes current interest rates (low yields) to three factors: low yields, low inflation, and low interest rates on long-term Treasury bonds and short-term interest rates. factors. Capital market participants forecast continued low interest rate policies by major central banks globally. The second is the pricing of short-term risk, which is partially caused by the increase in Treasury market purchases by institutions with low-risk sensitivity. The third factor cited by the FSOC is the willingness of bond market buyers to accept credit risk (i.e., the risk that borrowers will not pay back fully and on time) Provisions for credit losses and loan losses have declined recently. The FSOC notes a number of initiatives to mitigate the risks when Investigation and prosecutions related to LIBOR (and similar reference rates) may reduce the incentive to misreport. The FSOC did express concern at potential reaches for yield, noting that the issuance of high yield bonds (riskier classes of bonds) had increased markedly. Underwriting standards for collateralized loan obligations (CLOs) had reportedly loosened. Furthermore, threats to financial stability posed by rising rates are mitigated in part by one of the potential causes of rising rates—improved financial conditions. rates rise for the "wrong" reason, a second credit crunch. The FSOC notes that the measurable financial resilience of major banks (such as capital levels and measures of liquidity) have improved. Typically, recessions cause government revenues to decline and government spending to rise (fiscal policy expands) Economic booms can cause fiscal policy to contract if government revenues expand faster than government spending. Long-term fiscal policy refers to the balance between expected government spending and revenues over an extended period of time. extended time horizon. CBO and other projections of long-term fiscal policy project an imbalance between expected federal revenues and expected federal spending for an extended period of time. Thus far, the United States has not experienced any backlash in bond markets for running extended fiscal deficits. Not only has the yield on U.S. Treasury bonds remained low, but obligations of the United states have been viewed as a safe haven for some foreign investors and central banks. How it Might Go Wrong Fiscal imbalances can cause short-term problems and long- term problems. Unlike Cyprus or Greece, short-term fiscal problems of the U.S. could be cushioned by purchases of Treasury securities by the Fed. A short-run fiscal crisis is often accompanied by the same kinds of poor economic conditions that cause the Fed to expand its monetary policies. In the longer term, the combination of higher interest rates and higher outstanding debt can cause interest payments to crowd out the Fed's purchases of Treasurys and mortgage-backed securities. The Fed has been buying Treasury securities since the 1980s. Financial instability overseas can threaten financial stability in the U.S. There are many channels through which financial instability can cross borders. Changes in the perceived risk of the debt of sovereigns are potential threats to financial stability. No formal way to address a sovereign default (no international bankruptcy law applies to sovereigns) expansionary monetary policies run the risk of competitive devaluation if policymakers fail to coordinate across countries. The 2013 FSOC report addressed several issues related to global financial stability, including the potential for the European Central Bank to purchase sovereign debt. Two companies are affiliated when one owns all or a large part of another. All subsidiaries are affiliates, but affiliates that are less than 50% controlled are usually not treated as subsidiaries. Asset-backed security is a bond that represents a share in a pool of debt obligations or other assets. The holder is entitled to some part of the repayment flows from the underlying debt. (See "Securitization.") Bank holding company is a company controlled by a third company (see "Subsidiary"). The Bank Holding Company Act is the federal statute under which the Fed regulates bank holding companies. Besides the permissible financial activities enumerated in the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act ( P.L. 106-102 ), the law provides a mechanism between the Federal Reserve and the Department of the Treasury to decide what is an appropriate new financial activity for a bank holding company. The law also provides a way for the Fed and Treasury to determine what is appropriate for a financial holding company to do in the future. financial activity for FHCs. Blue sky laws —State statutes that govern the offering and selling of securities. Broker/dealer —An individual or firm that buys and sells securities for itself as well as for customers. Bubble —Self-reinforcing process in which the price of an asset exceeds its fundamental value for a sustained period, often followed by a rapid price decline. Speculative bubbles are usually associated with a "bandwagon" effect in which speculators rush to buy the commodity (in the case of futures, "to take positions") even greater rush to sell the commodity (unwind positions) when prices reverse. Capital requirements help assure that losses that might occur will accrue to the institution incurring them. In the case of banking institutions experiencing problems, capital also serves as a buffer against losses to the federal deposit insurance funds. Capital is the owners' stake in an enterprise. It is a critical line of defense when losses occur, both in banking and nonbanking enterprises. Capital —Assets minus liabilities; what a firm owns minus what it owes. Troubled Asset Relief Program provides financial assistance to U.S. financial institutions through the purchase of senior preferred shares in the corporations. Charter conversion —Banking institutions may, with the approval of their regulators, switch their corporate form between: commercial bank or savings institution, National or State charter. Clearing Organization —An entity through which futures and other derivative transactions are cleared and settled. Also known as a clearing organization may be a division or affiliate of a particular exchange, or a freestanding entity. called a clearing house, multilateral clearing organization, or clearing association. Collateralized debt obligation (CDO)—A bond created by the securitization of a pool of asset backed securities. Commercial bank —A deposit-taking institution that can make commercial loans, accept checking accounts, and whose deposits are insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. National banks are chartered by the National Bank of Canada. (See CDO and CMO.) Collateralize mortgage obligation (CMO)—A multiclass bond backed by a pool. of mortgage pass-through securities or mortgage loans. Commodity Futures Modernization Act of 2000 (CFMA, P.L. 106-554, 114 Stat. 2763)—Overhauled the Commodity Exchange Act to create a flexible structure for the regulation of futures and options trading. Commercial Paper Funding Facility Emergency Program —Created by the Fed in 2008, this program purchased three-month unsecured and asset-backed commercial paper from eligible companies. Community Reinvestment Act 1977 — A federal law which encouraged depository institutions to make loans and provide services. Consolidated Supervised Entities program — Securities and Exchange Commission program that provided voluntary supervision for the five largest investment bank conglomerates. Conservatorship —When an insolvent financial institution is reorganized by a regulator with the intent to restoring it to an ongoing business. Counterparty —The opposite party in a bilateral agreement, contract, or transaction, such as a swap. Credit Default Swap (CDS)—A tradeable contract in which one party agrees to pay another if a third party experiences a credit event. Debt obligation, bankruptcy, or credit rating downgrade. Credit Risk — The risk that a borrower will fail to repay a loan in full. Credit Rating Agency — Private company that evaluates the credit quality of securities and provides ratings on those securities. Credit Union — A nonprofit financial cooperative of individuals with one or more common bonds (such as employment, labor union membership, or residence in the same neighborhood). May be state or nationally chartered. Credit unions accept deposits of members' savings and transaction. The federal regulator for credit unions is the National Credit Union Administration. Commercial banks are typically limited to acting as dealers in specified high-quality debt obligations, such as those of the federal government. A dealer is an individual or financial firm engaged in the purchase and sale of securities and commodities such as metals, foreign exchange, etc., for its own account and at its own risk as principal (see "Broker/dealer"). Depository institution —Customarily refers to commercial banks, savings institutions, and credit unions, since traditionally the greater part of their funding has been in the form of deposits. Deposits are a customer's funds placed with an institution according to agreed on terms and conditions and represent a credit to the depositor. Derivatives are financial contracts whose value is linked to the price of an underlying commodity or financial variable (such as an interest rate, currency price, or stock index) Ownership of a derivative does not require the holder to actually buy or sell the underlying interest. profit if they can successfully forecast price trends. Examples include futures contracts, options, and swaps. It may be used to relieve temporary cash shortages at banks and other depository institutions. Borrowers are expected to have tried to borrow elsewhere first and must provide collateral as security for loans. The term derives from the practice whereby bankers would come to a Reserve Bank teller window to obtain credit in the early days of the Federal Reserve System. The phrase refers to the Dual banking system, which is a system of multiple banks. the fact that banks may be either federally or state chartered. Exchange — A central marketplace with established rules and regulations where buyers and sellers meet to trade futures and options contracts or securities. Federal safety net — A broad term referring to protection of banking institutions through deposit insurance, discount window credit, other lender of last resort support, and certain forms of regulations to reduce risk. Commercial and industrial companies generally lack any of the above-listed safety net protection measures for banks and other commercial and industrial firms. A holding company form authorized by the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act ( P.L. 106-102 ) that goes beyond the limits a of bank holding company. It can control one or more banks, securities firms, and insurance companies as permitted by law and/or regulation. Federal Open Market Committee —Its members are the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and certain of the presidents of Federal Reserve Banks. It oversees market conditions and implements monetary policy through such means as setting interest rates. Financial institutions are differentiated by the manner in which they invest their funds: in loans, bonds, stocks, or some combination; as well as by their sources of funds. Depository financial institutions may accept deposits which are federally insured against loss to the depositor. Non-depository financial institution such as life and property/casualty insurance companies, pension funds, and mutual funds obtain funds through other types of receipts, whose values may fluctuate with market conditions. Financial subsidiary —Under the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act ( P.L. 106-102 ), both financial subsidiary and financial subsidiary. national and state-chartered banks are authorized to form financial subsidiaries to engage in activities that would not otherwise be permitted within the bank itself, subject to certain limits. The law provides a mechanism between the U.S. Department of the Treasury and the Federal Reserve to decide what is an appropriate new financial activity for a financial subsidiary. Financial Stability Oversight Council — A council created by the Dodd-Frank Act ( P.L. 111-203 ) with identifying and monitoring systemic risks to the U.,S. financial system, reducing expectations of extraordinary government intervention. respond to emerging threats to U.S. financial stability. Firewalls —Barriers to the flow of capital, information, management, and other resources among business units owned by a common entity. In case of financial distress of one operation ("fire"), the "walls" are intended to prevent the spread of loss to the other units. Example: losses in a securities subsidiary of a holding company could not be covered by any of the holding company's bank subsidiaries. Foreign bank —Banks and their holding companies headquartered in other countries may have a variety of financial operations in the United States. Federal Reserve is primary federal regulator. States and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency may also regulate them. Government-sponsored enterprise (GSE) is private company with government charters. Government sponsorship typically gives them a funding advantage over purely private competitors. The Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act ( P.L. 106-102 ) called for more functional regulation than in the past. In the U.S. banks are regulated based on activity ("function") rather than organizational structure. computing the value of assets for purposes of capital, segregation, or margin requirements. Hedge funds are pools of invested money that buy and sell stocks and bonds and many other assets, including precious metals, commodities, foreign currencies, and derivatives. Hedging —Investing with a hedge fund is similar to buying and selling shares of a stock or bond with the intention of betting on its future price rising or falling. It is illegal to sell shares of hedge funds with the intent of profiting from their losses. Hedging instrument gains value as the hedged item loses value, and vice versa. Illiquid Assets —Assets that cannot be easily or quickly sold. Insolvent —A firm whose liabilities exceed its assets. Institutional regulation —Regulation that is institution-specific as contrasted with activity specific (see "Functional regulation"). Investment banking functions include underwriting (marketing newly registered securities to individual or institutional investors), counseling regarding merger and acquisition proposals, brokerage services, advice on corporate financing. A holding company for securities firms authorized under the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act. Such holding companies are subject to regulation by the Securities and Exchange Commission. The issuing of securities, where the proceeds accrue to the issuer, is distinct from the secondary, or resale, market. Lender of last resort —Governmental lender that acts as the ultimate source of credit in the financial system. In the United States, the Fed has this role. Leverage —The ability of a company or bank to make a profit by proprietary trading. to control large dollar amounts of a commodity or security with a comparatively small amount of capital. Leverage can be obtained through borrowing or the use of derivatives. Liquidity risk —The possibility that the market for normally-liquid assets will suddenly dry up, leaving firms unable to convert assets into cash. Also, the risk that other firms will refuse to extend credit on any of the firms listed. The ability to trade an asset quickly without significantly affecting its price, or the condition of a market with many buyers and sellers present. terms to a firm that is perceived as distressed. Mark-to-Market — The process by which the reported amount of an asset is adjusted to reflect true the market value. Market risk — The risk that the price of a tradeable security or asset will decline, resulting in a loss to the holder. Money market mutual fund (MMF)—A form of mutual fund that pools funds of individuals and other investors for investment in high-grade, short-term debt and bank deposits paying market rates of return. Mortgage-backed security (MBS) is a bond backed by a pool of mortgage loans. The bondholders receive a share of the interest and principal payments on the underlying mortgages. The cash flows may be divided among different cash flows. Most MMFs offer check-writing redemption features. The tendency of people to take more risks once another party has agreed to provide protection. Regulatory interventions to bail out failing firms are often said to create moral hazard, on the assumption that others will expect to be saved from their mistakes, too. Mutual fund is an investing company that pools the funds of individuals and other investors. Owners of a mutual fund hold proportional shares in the entire pool of securities in which a fund invests. Owners pay taxes on their distributions from a fund; the mutual fund itself is not normally subject to federal or state income taxation. Naked option is the sale of a call or put option without holding an equal and opposite position in the same stock or bond. The naked option is a sale of an option to sell a stock without holding the opposite position. Net Asset Value (or NAV)—Value of an asset minus any associated costs; for financial assets, typically changes each trading day. Operational risk —The possibility that a financial institution will suffer losses from a failure to process transactions properly, from accounting mistakes, from rogue traders or other forms of insider fraud. Office of Financial Research (OFR)—An office created by the Dodd-Frank Act ( P.L. 111-203 ) to support the Financial Stability Oversight Council and member agencies. arising inside the institution. OTC transactions can occur electronically or over the telephone. Receivership —When an insolvent financial institution is taken over with the intent to liquidate its assets. Repurchase Agreement (Repos) —A method of secured lending where the borrower sells securities to the lender as collateral and agrees to repurchase them at a higher price within a short period, often within one day. Savings association —A savings and loan association, mutual savings bank, or federal savings bank. saving (thrift) and home buying through mortgage lending. In recent years, such institutions' charters have been expanded to allow them to provide commercial loans and a broader range of consumer financial services. The federal regulator for most savings associations is the Office of Thrift Supervision. Also known as savings and loans, thrifts, and mutual savings banks. The Securities Investor Protection Corporation (SIPC) is a private nonprofit membership corporation set up under federal law to provide financial protection for the customers of failed brokers and/or dealers.  securitization is the process of transforming a cash flow, typically from debt repayments, into a new marketable security. Holders of the securitized instrument receive interest and principal payments as the underlying loans are repaid. Shadow Banking is financial activities that in some respects parallel banking activities but are subject to less regulation than commercial banks. Institutions include mutual funds, investment banks, and hedge funds. Special-purpose entities (SPEs)—Also referred to as ‘shadow banks’  SPEs are legal entities created to perform a specific financial function or transaction. They isolate financial risk from the sponsoring institution and provide less-expensive financing. The assets, liabilities, and cash flows of an SPE do not appear on the sponsoring institutions' books. Speculation — A venture or undertaking of an enterprising nature, especially one involving considerable financial risk on the chance of unusual profit. State regulation —Under the dual system of bank regulation, states as well as the federal government may charter, regulate, and supervise depository institutions. also have authority over securities companies, mortgage lending companies, personal finance companies, and other types of companies offering financial services. Structured debt —Debt that has been customized for the buyer, often by incorporating complex derivatives. Subordinated debt — Debt over which senior debt takes priority. In the event of bankruptcy, subordinated debt holders receive payment only after senior debt claims are paid in full. Subsidiary — A company whose controlling shares are owned 50% or more by another ("parent") corporation. The term "systemic risk" does not have a single, agreed-upon definition. Systemic risk is defined as the risk that the linkages between institutions may affect the financial system as a whole. Thrift holding company —Also known as a savings and loan holding company, a business that controls one or more savings associations. These holding companies are regulated under the Home Owners' Loan Act by the Office of Thrift and Deposit Guarantee.and reporting purposes with its parent. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. Too-big-to-fail doctrine — An implicit regulatory policy holding that very large financial institutions must be rescued by the government. Tri-Party Repo Market — A repurchase agreement in which a third party agrees to clear and settle the transaction. Umbrella supervision — The term applied to comprehensive regulation of a holding company and its parts by one or more holding company regulator(s) Undercapitalized — A condition in which the business does not have enough capital to meet its needs. meet its capital requirements if it is a regulated entity. Variable Rate Demand Obligation — A security which pays a variable interest rate, and can be redeemed upon the demand of the holder. Write-Downs —Reducing the value of an asset as it is carried on a firm's balance sheet because the market value has fallen. Appendix B. Acronyms for this article include:  ‘’’, ‘””, ’ ’.