The panel was only an initial step in a possible long-term, evolving effort to develop and sustain discussion on ATC modernization. It brought together generalists, rather than specialists, to address broad themes and consider how to organize a more comprehensive approach. Because our scope was limited, we could not include a large number of leading experts, institutions, and networks involved in specialized efforts. Furthermore, although many points of view were represented, the panel was not representative of all potential potential ATC users. stakeholders. Second, even though we, in cooperation with the National Academies, conducted preliminary research and heard from national experts in their fields, a day’s conversation cannot represent the current practice in this vast arena. More thought, discussion, and research are needed to develop greater agreement on what we really know, what needs to be done, and how to do it. Nevertheless, the panel provided a rich dialogue on ATC modernization and the panelists developed strong messages in responding to each of the three questions. Those messages are highlighted below. FAA is “very resistant” to having private organizations, rather than FAA, develop new procedures and systems for FAA to approve and institute, panelists say. Several panelists saw resistance to change as a consequence of federal employment. A government organization is insulated from changes, the panelists said. They identified multiple, currently available options for addressing these factors, but none are currently available. The FAA’s modernization program is expected to be completed by the end of the year. the economic pressures that the private sector faces, one of the panelists indicated. In his view, federal employees do not have the firsthand experience with layoffs and business failures to understand, as private aviation industry employees do. Other panelists emphasized the reluctance of management to change. According to a panelist with experience in restructuring a foreign air traffic organization, the senior and middle managers could not or would not adjust to the change and had to be let go within the first 2 years of the restructuring. The other employees also had difficulty adjusting and were still adjusting in some respects, he said. Getting management on the right page was the real challenge. Another panelist questioned why the ATO’s new COO had replaced only two top managers in theATO and simply reassigned other managers. Still another panelist suggested that cultural change within the AT o alone would not be sufficient to ensure the ATo’S success, because so much of its fate depends on other organizations, including FAA, DOT, the Office of The air traffic controllers’ union is “very political,” several panelists asserted. One panelist charged that it was “hindering the progress’ of a performance-based organization. The union delayed the adoption of technologies such as the User Request Evaluation Tool (URET) because some controllers saw them as a threat to its membership. Another panelist cited the union’s long-term opposition to the implementation of a software program that tracks productivity—a key measure. change can be an issue outside FAA as well as within it, panelists noted. For example, one panelist questioned how much support the ATO was getting from DOT, OMB, and congressional committees for changing “some extremely entrenched political fiefdoms” Another panelist said that he had found the congressional authorizing committees amenable to changes, but the appropriators liked things the way they were. In addition to having a vision, it is important for the ATo to tie that vision to what is expected of them, the panelists said. FAA cannot do everything alone from the inside, because airplanes and airports, for example, need to be equipped with the technologies that will help realize the vision. Employing a team concept could help overcome resistance to the implementation of new technologies, according to another panelist. Putting engineers, finance people, controllers, and electronic technologists together, all on the same team, could unite them as they moved through the stages of implementation, the panelist said. When the time comes to field a technology, the focus would be on getting it up and running. A change in management’s approach could go a long way toward overcoming controllers’ and other employees’ resistance to change. One foreign air traffic organization changed its whole approach to the unions and the staff, started talking to them as people. Union representatives and managers take the same courses together and address issues of affordability together, one panelist said. As a result, controllers�’ pay has increased, costs have dropped, and productivity has increased. The panelist implied that obstructing its implementation because it might threaten jobs was not a good idea. Managers have stopped seeing employees as a problem and have started to see them as part of the solution. The only way to bring about a cultural transformation is to replace those who resist change, either by allowing them to retire or by hiring others to take their places. In the corporate world, one panelist observed, a new executive brings in a new management team to support a cultural turnaround. The new team is then loyal to the company, the panelist said. The key to these positive results is psychological change, he said. to the new executive. Technical as well as cultural factors have impeded ATC modernization. FAA does not have “the engineering technical capability to deal with an extremely complex, highly nonlinear adaptive system,” one speaker said. Another panelist further noted that an executive in the private sector replaced the top 200 people in his organization to achieve the transformation he was seeking, according to several of the panelists. In the view of this panelist, the COO’s hiring of only two new managers and reassignment of other managers would not be sufficient to turn the ATO's culture around. got technical safety risk as a key technical parameter. FAA does not apply rigorous systems engineering expertise early in nonadvocate technical reviews of project proposals. As a result, a number of FAA’s programs had fundamental system engineering technical issues that were not identified early in the program. The risks were not mitigated, and the programs experienced significant cost growth, the panel said. The panel's findings were published in a report titled, “The Future of Air-to-Ground Communications.” FAA lacks a rudder, in a technical sense, for modernization, panelists say. To help address its lack of technical expertise, ATO could obtain advice from an independent board or information from other countries, they say. “The system engineering organization in FAA is nothing more than a process organization,” another panelist said. It doesn’t matter what the systems engineering people do, their job is to keep doing plans and processes, they said. They think that meetings are products. on technologies that they have already adopted. A technical advisory board made up of system engineers could review proposals for FAA and demand the kinds of data and tests needed to scrub the proposals. Hiring skilled engineers instead of relying on contractors might enable the ATO to develop systems more economically and efficiently, one panelist suggested. This panelist described how a foreign air traffic services organization develops new ATC systems in-house and seldom uses contractors. It now employs skilled engineers, rather than contractors, to develop the systems. utilizes its engineers to build systems rather than manage contractors. As a result, he said, it is now developing the systems it needs faster and at less cost. Maximizing the use of commercial inputs was the recommendation of another panelist, who said that FAA needs to get out of the business of designing systems. According to him, most companies no longer develop their own large, complex systems. Instead, they get other people to do that for them in the private sector, he added. commercial systems have a shorter economic service life than the systems that FAA designs. The ATO could profitably take advantage of the experiences of other countries’ air traffic organizations, one panelist said. He maintained that the ATO should institute “a fundamental requirement and a cultural expectation” that it will review existing technologies before it buys or tries to develop its own. With a multibillion-dollar budget for software and other information technology, he said, the ATo has ample opportunity to save money. FAA plans to train or hire people with needed skills to address shortfalls in technical expertise. Recognizing that cultural factors can play a critical role in an organization’s success, the ATO has initiated organizational changes that are designed to create. FAA is addressing some of the cultural and technical factors panelists identified as affecting ATC modernization. The ATO's COO also provides additional information from previous GAO reports and work in progress on how FAA is addressed some of these issues. a foundation for cultural change and deliver benefits to customers efficiently. For example, the ATO established collaborative teams of technical experts and ATC system. It reorganized air traffic services and the research and acquisition organization along functional lines of business. It reduced layers of management from 11 to 7 to help address the hierarchical nature of the organization. It conducted an organizationwide activity value analysis to determine the full range of activities that ATO headquarters is engaged in, and the value customers place on those activities. FAA sent a large number of detailed e-mails in response to a call for recommendations to improve internal communications. FAA’s management culture was “intensely hierarchical, risk averse,” and “reactionary.” Now, FAA is attempting to foster “results-focused, proactive and innovative behavior” Changing the agency’‘s leadership model is also designed to replace a “personality-driven culture” with a sustainable, stable, viable organization. rational decisions that transcend changes in political leadership. The ATO is trying to better align FAA’s priorities and stakeholders’ interests by developing a strategy map. Called the Strategic Management Process, this effort borrows heavily from a private-sector model. According to FAA, the strategy map will enable owners and customers to clearly understand both the services that the ATo is providing and the effects of products in development on those services. The strategy map is expected to be completed by the end of the year. FAA's Strategic Management Process will ensure linkage between FAA’s operating and capital budgets. Future budgetary conversations will revolve around the desired level of service, instead of focusing on a product. Ultimately, the ATO wants to know how much every unit of output costs so that it can satisfy those needs with cost. The ATO created “value-based” performance metrics; that is, it defined its performance in terms of customers’ needs and connected efforts to satisfy those Needs with Cost. allocate and compare costs and measure productivity. Each organizational unit and facility is developing applicable metrics for performance so that the ATO can compare costs, identify factors that affect costs, and use this information to improve performance. For example, each en route facility is determining its hourly cost to control flights. The ATO then compare and analyze these costs to identify positive and negative factors affecting performance and productivity. plan is a response to a congressional mandate, based on a recommendation we made in 2002, that FAA develop a plan for addressing an impending wave of controller retirements. Panelists identified and discussed the impact of funding constraints and the federal budget process on ATC modernization. The most immediate issue is a critical shortage of funds to meet the current modernization program’s plans and users’ demands. Severe reductions in the funding for A TC modernization, if required to address the currently projected shortfall, could exacerbate what one panelist described as the traditional underfunding of the ATC system's capital requirements. The political process influences budget decisions in the administration as well as in Congress. does not reveal synergies between projects. As a result, when the appropriators decide not to fund a project, they may not understand how their decision will affect other projects. Separation of capital and operating costs in FAA’s accounting system may lead, in some instances, to investments in technologies that end up in a warehouse because the ATO can’t afford to operate them. It discourages analyses of life-cycle costs and may lead to investments that are not needed. The firewall makes it difficult to see the relationship between software replacement (capital) and maintenance (operating) costs, panelists said. Decision to postpone purchases of new or upgraded software may save capital investment costs, but rising maintenance requirements may increase operating costs. Eventually, the maintenance costs may “far exceed” the replacement costs, one panelist said. The budget is not integrated to show what investments buy in, other panelists noted. It is also difficult to determine the impact of capital investment decisions on operating costs, they said. terms of productivity, safety, or environmental benefits. FAA’s capital budget fails to show the impact of investments on the country. This can lead to funding projects that will provide limited benefits for users. The ATO could take a number of steps to address its current financial situation, the panelists said. These steps included accepting the budget process as it is and reducing spending to match revenues, developing strategies for presenting the ATO's budget request more clearly to Congress, and implementing regulatory changes. and procedural changes to allow the use of existing cost-saving technologies. contracting with the private sector to provide certain air traffic services. obtaining information on other countries’ ATC technologies and on international technical standards. realistically be funded and to review and cut its programs in light of the current budget constraints. This panelist also recommended looking at longer term alternatives to annual appropriations that are available within the government and work well for other organizations, such as “working capital accounts and all kinds of industrial funding schemes” outages—that is, on replacing equipment that would otherwise fail. This panelist also said that FAA needs a customer-oriented business strategy and a business plan. Improving controllers’ productivity would be another way to save money, a fourth panelist said. But he characterized his suggestion as “touch the ground” with the ATO’s operating costs, which account for about three-quarters of its total costs. He suggested that the upcoming wave of air traffic controller retirements would create “an opportunity to redistribute and even to trim the work force in some areas. third rail of aviation politics. Another panelist emphasized the importance of starting to plan now to accommodate the airplanes that are being bought today to provide service for the next generation. For example, one panelist said that the ATO needed to understand the interconnections between ATC systems and break the big picture into nuggets so that it could clarify for the appropriators why they should not break apart the ATo’s capital investment plan and selectively fund only some components, he said. the firewall between its capital and operating budgets by modifying its budget submissions to show the future cost implications of current investment decisions. The ATO could pursue procedural and regulatory changes that would take advantage of existing technologies to increase capacity. Pilot test contracts with the private sector to provide certain air traffic services, and obtain information on technologies and procedures developed in other countries that could be used in the U.S. could also be pursued by the ATO under its current authorities, panelists said. They said. Panelists discussed the potential benefits of a more widespread use of a concept called area navigation (RNAV)RNAV allows operators of properly equipped aircraft to use onboard navigation capabilities to fly desired flight paths without requiring direct flight over ground-based navigation aids. This provides for more direct routing, avoiding suboptimal routes prescribed by conventional “highways in the sky” that are defined by point-to-point flying over ground. The RNAV concept and a major new method for exploiting it, called required navigation performance (RNP), permit flight in any direction. RNAV and RNP hold promise for saving system users time and money. They could potentially increase the capacity of the ATC system to handle air traffic. RNAV could potentially reduce the required distance (separation) between aircraft equipped with advanced navigation capabilities if the aircraft can safely operate closer to one another than FAA’s regulations currently allow. able to use these capabilities to their ability to fly shorter routes or avoid bad weather. It could also reduce the number of aircraft that need to be certified to meet the required accuracy level for navigation performance. Airlines are “crying for” FAA to approve RNP, one of the panelists said. Aircraft equipped with RNP capabilities could then fly alternative rolling, moving routes to avoid weather delays. Implementing RNP could also eventually lower the ATO’s costs, another panelist said. RNP technologies have been installed on larger aircraft for so long that some aircraft equipped with them are already in service, panelists say. The FAA has not approved procedures for its use in the United States. the technologies have already been retired to the desert, one panelist said. In addition, pilots have been trained to use the technologies, and the technologies are already being used in some other countries, including Canada. As a first step toward obtaining FAA’s approval of procedures for using RNP, the ATO could make policy announcements to set a tone and direction. These announcements would enlist the user community's support at little or no cost, the panelists said, and could be made as early as next year. cost to the ATO, give the ATo an early success, and help tie customers to theATO’s mission. However, it would be important for FAA to implement RNP in a way that did not “disenfranchise” general aviation interests and regional carriers whose aircraft are not already equipped with RNP technologies. Two panelists expressed concerns about the government's approach to regulating the use of onboard navigation equipment. According to one of these panelists, FAA has “the wrong conceptual framework” for developing regulations to implement new procedures. Disproportionate, he said, because it establishes the same safety standards for aircraft of all sizes. FAA needs to revise its approach to assessing and balancing risks. Obtaining information on technologies and procedures that other countries have already developed could help the ATO control costs. A shared vision is crucial for a globally based air traffic system, one panelist said. If contracting for flight service station services proved to be effective, FAA could contract for other air traffic services, such as oceanic, night, en route, or airways facilities. The ATO's organizational placement, combined with its dependence on Congress for funding, limits the COO’s ability to make decisions and take actions, panelists said. The COO is not a Chief Executive Officer, as one of the panelists observed. Instead, he reports to his “owners’—who include the FAA Administrator and the DOT Secretary, who in turn receive direction from the administration and Congress. Consequently, there is no oversight group that is expected to provide constructive criticism of FAA, one panelist said. FAA does not get “the kind of constructive advice that you might hope for.” Europe’s Performance Review Commission provides such constructive advice for EUROCONTROL, the European air traffic management organization. The commission serves as a panel of independent advisers and costs about $2.5 million a year. According to several panelists, the ATO's COO lacks the management tools that would be available to a private-sector CEO. His ability to plan modernization projects, set program priorities, and implement new technologies is constrained. OMB Director can revise his budget request and Congress can make further changes in the ATO’s budget. The 20-year vision of the Joint Planning and Development Office (JPDO) is at odds with the ATo, according to one panelist. Other panelists observed that the controllers’ union influences management’'s decisions. The COO lacks key financial data needed to determine, analyze, and manage the AT o's costs. When he was “parachuted” into theATO, as one panelists put it, he did not have the financial data he needed. have the numbers he needed to know where the ATO stood because FAA did not maintain basic information on the costs and value of existing systems. As a result, he spent most of his first year overseeing the implementation of a cost accounting system and collecting other key data. Their performance is constrained because their terms of employment and compensation are based largely on negotiated agreements rather than on performance. In addition, salary caps limit FAA’s ability to pay for technical expertise. As one panelist observed at the end of the panel, the ATO’s creation did not address the structural conflict of interest that exists because FAA is both the regulator and the operator of air traffic services. Another panelist noted that when his country restructured its air traffic organization, it immediately eliminated the same structural Conflict of interest. According to the first panelist, other countries that have reorganized their air traffic organizations have also done so. The regulator became more effective and the operators’ safety performance “significantly improved,” the second panelist said. instituted arms’ length regulation if they did not have it already. “We remain one of the few places that somehow thinks that self-regulation is a good idea, in spite of sort of overwhelming evidence in lots of arenas that it's not a very good idea," the ATO’s COO said. The ATO is developing a business plan that the FAA is developing to guide and monitor its operations. The FAA is addressing some of the structural changes that panelists proposed to improve the ATOs success over time. improve its operations and financial management, FAA has worked to develop three longer term planning documents. FAA is participating in a multiagency effort, sponsored by the JPDO, to develop a national plan for aviation in 2025 and beyond. It has developed a rolling 10-year effort, called the Operational Evolution Plan (OEP), through which FAA plans to increase the capacity of the NAS by one- third. FAA has published its Flight Plan for 2005 through 2009, a multiyear strategic effort that sets a 5-year course for FAA. Both the OEP and the JPDO’s plan are designed to help the NAS flow smoothly and meet future needs. The restructuring of U.S. air traffic services that has taken place thus far, through the establishment of a performance-based air traffic organization, constitutes “the first building block” of the longer term effort to transform the aviation system envisioned by the FAA. According to FAA, the Vice President of the Operations Planning Service Unit in the ATO is also the Director of the J PDO. in the JPDO’s 20-year plan. According to the COO, this vision of the U.S. aviation system will incorporate both technologies and processes. He acknowledged that the ATO has not yet connected this long- term vision with the financial and other challenges it currently faces. He said that his goal is to establish an organization that can execute the long-term vision and manage not only its finances but also its future. Over time, he said, he plans to expand the OEP to include a strategy and the. JPDO’s long-term vision, thereby “tie the vision to the viability of the future.” The OEP will then be “not just a set of projects,” but a project plan with a vision and a strategy that goes out 20 years. But given the current budget constraints, he conceded, the path to that goal is not clear. In March 2004, FAA created the Air Traffic Safety Oversight Service (AOV), under FAA’S Office of Aviation Safety. Safety oversight of FAA’s traffic function will be provided by a separate part of the agency. Although both organizations remain within FAA, under the FAA Administrator, they are less closely joined than they were previously. This step is a positive move toward providing “arm’S length’ safety oversight, although it doesn’t go as far as placing the two organizations in separate federal agencies or removing one of the agencies from the federal government. The establishment of the AOV responds directly to a recommendation by the 1997 National Civil Aviation Review Commission. Government altogether. For many, the steps taken thus far to create a performance-based organization were insufficient. The ATO still had a long way to go to achieve its goals. Some panelists were united in their desire for the ATO to succeed, but they generally agreed that its opportunities for success were constrained within a government system. At our request, the panelists concluded the panel with their parting thoughts on the day’s discussion, including any advice they had for FAA or for Congress. stressed the importance of progressing by small steps within the existing system. Small steps might include obtaining good performance and cost information, scoping programs in accordance with current budget projections. It was critical, one panelist said, for the ATO to “have some small early practical successes” to enlist the political support of the user community and help tie the customers to theATO’s mission. Other panelists focused on the obstacles within the system that have been identified as a problem. they believed would impede or prevent success. Among the obstacles they cited were the counterproductive incentives inherent in the budget process. It was important, one panelist said, to overcome this opposition by describing “the difference between how things are and how they might be” Still other panelists looked to the future, calling for international help to develop new air traffic technologies. The U.S. government’s refusal to allow newAir traffic technologies to be used, and opposition to organizational and technological change, were cited as obstacles. technical benchmarks to promote efficient development, business models that take into account operational trends. As one panelist said, “we have to target the future mix of real operations that we’re really going to see, not build the world’s most perfect system from 1956” Despite their reservations, the panelists generally agreed that stakeholders should not “allow the concept of privatization to be the enemy of moving forward with the ATO,” they said. The ATO is a government organization. the ATO, as one panelist said, or “sacrifice the good for the better” in the words of another. Instead, taking a two-pronged approach would be the best way, in the view of most panelists, for the ATO to meet its immediate and longer term challenges. Clinton V. Oster, Jr. (Panel Moderator) Professor of Public and Environmental Affairs. Anthony J. Broderick Independent Consultant. Former FAA Associate Administrator for Regulation and Certification. Steven R. Bussolari Assistant Division Head, Tactical Systems Division Manager, Air Traffic Control System Group, Lincoln Laboratory. John W. Crichton President and CEO, NAV Canada. Richard Golaszweski Executive Vice President, Gellman Research Associates (GRA), Inc. Ian Hall Director of Operations, National Air Traffic Services, United Kingdom. Thomas Imrich Chief Pilot, Research, Boeing Commercial Aircraft. Satish C. Fearnsides Professor of Public Policy, George Mason University Chief Strategist and Partner of MJF Strategies. Mohleji Principal Engineer, Center for Advanced Aviation System Development, The MITRE Corp. Robert W. Poole, Jr. Director of Transportation Studies, Reason Foundation Michael Powderly President, Airspace Solutions John A. Sorensen Chief Executive Officer, Seagull Technology, Inc. In addition to the individual named above, Elizabeth Eisenstadt, Brandon Haller, Bert Japikse, Maren McAvoy, Beverly Norwood, and Richard Scott made key contributions to this special product.