The department is facing near and long-term internal fiscal pressures. For more than a decade, DOD has dominated GAO’s list of federal programs and operations at high risk of being vulnerable to fraud, waste, abuse. All of the DOD programs on the High-Risk List relate to business operations, including systems and processes related to management of contracts, finances, the supply chain, and other areas of the agency's operations. The department is trying to balance competing demands to support ongoing operations, rebuild readiness following extended military operations, and manage increasing personnel and health care costs. support infrastructure, as well as weapon systems acquisition. Long-standing and pervasive weaknesses in DOD’s financial management and related business processes and systems have left the department vulnerable to fraud, waste, and abuse. Because of the complexity and long-term nature of DOD's transformation efforts, GAO has reported the need for a new system to manage the department's finances and operations. The department has reported that it is in need of a new financial management system to monitor the financial status and cost of DOD activities. chief management officer (CMO) position and a comprehensive, enterprisewide business transformation plan. In May 2007, DOD designated the Deputy Secretary of Defense as the CMO. DOD financial managers are responsible for the functions of budgeting, financing, accounting for transactions and events, and reporting of financial and other activities. In addition, the National Defense Authorization Acts for fiscal years 2008 and 2009 contained provisions that codified the C MO and Deputy Chief Management Officer (DCMO) positions. Before 1991, the military services and defense agencies independently managed their finance and accounting operations. According to DOD, these decentralized operations were highly inefficient and failed to produce reliable information. On November 26, 1990, DOD created the Defense Finance and Accounting Service (DFAS) DFAS is DOD’s accounting agency to consolidate, standardize, and integrate finance and Accounting requirements, functions, procedures, operations, and systems. The military services play a vital role in that they authorize the expenditure of funds and are the source of most of the financial information. GAO: DOD financial management was designated as a high-risk area by GAO in 1995. Pervasive deficiencies in financial management processes, systems, and controls, continue to impair management’s ability to assess the resources needed for DOD operations, says GAO. Other business operations, including the high- risk areas of contract management, supply chain management, support infrastructure management, and weapon systems acquisition are directly impacted by the problems in financialmanagement, it says. The problems continue to persist, resulting in billions of dollars of wasted resources, reduced efficiency, and inadequate accountability. GAO: DOD has made significant improvements to the FIAR Plan that, if implemented effectively, could result in significant improvement in DOD’s financial management and progress toward auditability. But progress in taking corrective actions and resolving deficiencies remains slow. DOD Comptroller directed the departments of the Army, the Navy, and the Air Force and the Defense Logistics Agency to use a standard process and aggressively modify their activities to support and emphasize achievement of the priorities. The consistent application of a standard methodology can help establish a standard baselines for assessing the components’ current financial management capabilities. to accounting and financial reporting and information technology systems were fully implemented. DOD Inspector General auditors told us that tests performed during the Marine Corps’ fiscal year 2011 SBR audit effort will determine whether and to what extent the problems identified during the fiscal year 2010 audit effort have been resolved. They also confirmed that as of August 25, 2011, the Corps had remediated the problems on 11 of the information technology audit recommendations. Because of the department’s complexity and magnitude, developing and developing and testing systems is difficult. implementing a comprehensive plan that identifies DOD’s internal control weaknesses will not be an easy task. It is a task that is critical to resolving the long-standing weaknesses and will require consistent management oversight and monitoring for it to be successful. Effective financial management in DOD will require a knowledgeable and skilled workforce that includes individuals who are trained and certified in accounting, well versed in government accounting practices and standards. Hiring and retaining such a skilled workforce is a challenge DOD must meet to succeed in its transformation. The National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2006 directed DOD to develop a strategic plan to shape and improve the department’s civilian workforce. The plan was to, among other things; include assessments of (1) existing critical skills and competencies in DOD's civilian workforce, and (2) future critical skills needed over the next decade. In addition, DOD was to submit a plan of action for dev eloping and reshaping the civilian employee workforce to address any identified gaps, according to the report. as well as specific recruiting and retention goals and strategies on how to train, compensate, and motivate civilian employees. In developi the plan, the department identified financial management as one of its enterprisewide mission-critical occupations. Although some aspects of the legislative requirements were addressed, DOD still has significant work to do. For example, while the plan included gap analyses related to the number of personnel needed for some of the mission- critical occupations, the plan did not address the number needed for others. department had only discussed competency gap analyses for 3 mission-critical occupations. Financial management was not included in the department’s analysis. Until DOD analyzes personnel needs and gaps in the financial management area, it will not be in a position to develop an effective financial management recruitment, retention, and investment strategy. The department established a governance structure for the FIAR Plan, which includes review bodies for governance and oversight. The governance structure is intended to provide the vision and oversight for the plan. necessary to align financial improvement and audit readiness efforts across the department. To monitor progress and hold individuals accountable for progress, DOD managers and oversight bodies need reliable, valid, meaningful metrics to measure performance and the results of corrective actions. In May 2009, we reported that the FIAR Plan did not have clear results-oriented metrics. The DOD and the components have established senior executive committees as well as designated officials at the appropriate levels to monitor and oversee their financial improvement efforts. These committees and individuals have also generally been assigned appropriate roles and responsibilities. metrics. DOD has taken action to begin defining results-oriented FIAR metrics. We have not yet had an opportunity to assess implementation of these metrics. Ensuring effective monitoring and oversight of progress will be key to bringing about effective implementation, through the components’ FIPs. However, as noted in our recent report, the components' control over the accuracy of supporting data is a key concern for us. We will continue to monitor the progress made by the components and provide updates as necessary. we found that weaknesses in the Navy and Air Force FIAR Plan implementation efforts indicate that the monitoring and oversight of such efforts have not been effective. More specifically, we found that component officials as well as the oversight committees at both the component and DOD levels did not effectively carry out their monitoring responsibilities. For the two FIPs that we reviewed, neither individual officials nor the executive committees took sufficient action to ensure that the Fips were accurate or complied with the FIAR Guidance. As a result, the Navy concluded that its Civilian Pay was ready for audit, as did the Air Force with respect to its Military Equipment. The DOD Comptroller concluded that neither of these FIPs supported audit readiness. DOD continues to take steps to comply with the Ronald W. Reagan National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2005. The implementation of an integrated, audit-ready systems environment underlies all of DOD’s financial improvement efforts and is crucial to achieving departmentwide audit readiness, the report says. DOD has identified 10 ERPs as essential to its efforts to transform its business operations. We are reviewing the status of two of these ERPs, the Army’s General Fund Enterprise Business System (GFEBS) and the Air Force's Defense Enterprise Accounting and Management System (DEAMS) GFEBS is expected to be fully deployed during fiscal year 2012, is currently operational at 154 locations, including DFAS, and is being used by approximately 35,000 users. DEAMS is intended to provide the. Air Force with the entire spectrum of financial management capabilities and is expected. to maintain control and accountability for approximately $160 billion. The department is heading in the right direction and making progress, says GAO. Some of the most difficult challenges ahead lie in the effective implementation of the department’s strategy. GAO will continue to monitor the progress of and provide feedback on the status of DOD’S financial management efforts, the report says. The department and its military components are fully auditable, and DOD financial management is no longer considered high risk, says the report. The report says the department is making progress and is committed to improving its financial management. financial management improvement efforts. We currently have work in progress to assess implementation of the department’s FIAR strategy and efforts toward auditability. I would be pleased to respond to any questions that you or other members of the Subcommittee may have at this time. For further information regarding this testimony, please contact Asif A. Khan, (202) 512-9869 or khana@gao.gov. For more information on this hearing, please visit the GSA's website at: http://www.gsa.gov/. The first three waves focus on achieving the DOD Comptroller’s interim budgetary and asset accountability priorities, while the remaining two waves are intended to complete actions needed to achieve full financial statement auditability. Each wave focuses on assessing and strengthening internal controls and business systems. The department has not yet fully defined its strategy for completing waves 4 and 5. The next wave is expected to be completed by the end of the year. The Department of Defense is the largest taxpayer in the U.S., with a budget of more than $1 trillion. related to the stage of auditability addressed in the wave. Wave 1 focuses on the appropriations receipt and distribution process. Wave 2 focuses on supporting the budget-related data used for management decision making and reporting, including the Statement of Budgetary Resources. In addition to fund balance with Treasury reporting and reconciliation, other significant end-to-end business processes in this wave include budgeting, apportionment and sub-allotment activity within the department. For more information, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/29/government/audit/index.html#storylink=cpy. Mission Critical Assets Existence and Completeness Audit focuses on ensuring that all assets that are recorded in the department’s accountable property systems of record exist. Wave 4—Full Audit Except for Legacy Asset Valuation includes the valuation assertion over new asset acquisitions and validation of management's assertion regarding new asset acquisition.include procure-to-pay, hire- to-retire, order-to-$ cash, and budget-to report. The mission critical assets audit is designed to ensure the department's assets are consistently categorized, summarized, and reported. new asset acquisitions, and it depends on remediation of the existence and completeness assertions in Wave 3. proper contract structure for cost accumulation and cost accounting data must be in place prior to completion of the valuation assertion for new acquisitions. It involves the budgetary transactions covered by the Statement of Budgetary Resources effort in Wave 2. Wave 5—Full Financial Statement Audit focuses efforts on assessing and strengthening, as necessary, internal controls, processes, and business systems involved in supporting the valuations reported for legacy assets. to ensure control over the valuation of new assets acquired. The existence and completeness of all mission assets are deemed effective on a go-forward basis. Given the lack of documentation to support the values of the department’s legacy assets, federal accounting standards allow for the use of alternative methods to provide reasonable estimates for the cost of these assets. The dual focus on budgetary and asset information offers the potential to obtain preliminary assessments regarding the effectiveness of current processes and controls and identify potential issues that may adversely impact subsequent waves. This is a work of the U.S. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States. The published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from GAO. However, because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material, permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org.