President Donald J. Trump announced the nomination of Judge Neil M. Gorsuch of the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit (Tenth Circuit) to fill the Supreme Court vacancy created by the 2016 death of Justice Antonin Scalia. This report provides an overview of Judge Gorsuch's jurisprudence and discusses how the High Court might be affected if he were to succeed Justice Scalia. The report analyzes majority, concurring, and dissenting opinions, including decisions that Judge Gorsuch participated in while serving by designation on another federal court of appeals. Justice Blackmun authored the majority opinion in Roe v. Wade recognizing a constitutional right to terminate a pregnancy. He was generally considered one of the more liberal voices on the Court when he retired in 1994. The difficulty in attempting to predict how a nominee will approach the job of being a Justice remains even when the nominee has had a lengthy federal judicial career prior to nomination. He viewed the judge's role as interpreting the law, rather than making new law. He considered himself to be a "strict constructionist" The Supreme Court enjoys "almost complete discretion" in selecting its cases. Unlike the Supreme Court, the federal courts of appeals are required to hear many cases as a matter of law. As a result, the appellate courts consider "many routine cases in which the legal rules are uncontroverted" Perhaps indicative of the nature of federal appellate work, the vast majority of cases decided by three-judge panels of federal courts are decided by federal courts. The Supreme Court is bound by Supreme Court and circuit precedent and is not normally in a position to espouse freely their views. Gorsuch's work on the Tenth Circuit may provide some insight into his general approach to particular legal issues. The bulk of the opinions that Judge Gorsuch has authored or joined may not be particularly insightful with regard to his views on specific areas of law, or how he would approach these issues if he were a Supreme Court Justice. Even in closely contested cases where.of appeals are decided without dissent, the overwhelming majority of opinions issued by that court are unanimous. The Tenth Circuit is no exception to this general trend. concurring or dissenting opinions are filed, it still may be difficult to determine the preferences of the nominated judge. The act of joining an opinion authored by another judge does not necessarily reflect full agreement with the underlying opinion. For example, in an effort to promote consensus on a court, some judges will decline to dissent unless the underlying issue is particularly contentious. As one commentator notes, "[T]he fact that a judge joins in a majority opinion may not be taken as indicating complete agreement. Rather, silent acquiescence" Use caution when interpreting a judge's vote isolated from a written opinion. For example, a vote to grant an extension of time for a party to submit a filing generally does not signal agreement with the substantive legal position proffered by that party. And while some observers have highlighted votes by Judge Gorsuch in favor of the Supreme Court, it may be understood to mean something more like 'I accept the outcome in this case, and I accept that the reasoning in the majority opinion reflects what a majority of my colleagues has agreed on' A vote to rehear a case en banc could signal disagreement with the legal reasoning of the panel decision. A judge wants the entire court to have an opportunity to correct a perceived error by the panel. Most of us vote against most such petitions and suggestions even when we agree with them, as one federal appellate judge noted in a dissent from a decision denying a petition for a rehearingEn banc. The Tenth Circuit is a federal appeals court based in Washington, D.C. It has a seat on the U.S. Supreme Court. we think the panel decision is mistaken. We do so because federal courts of appeals decide cases in three judge panels. En banc review is extraordinary, and is generally reserved for conflicting precedent within the circuit. A vote for or against rehearing a case en banc or on other procedural matters does not necessarily equate to an endorsement or repudiation of a particular legal position. Finally, it should be noted that, despite having served on the federal appellate bench for a decade, we think the decision was mistaken. Gorsuch has said little about some areas of law because of the nature of the Tenth Circuit's docket. More than forty percent of the cases that the Tenth circuit hears are criminal law matters or petitions from the federal government. It may be difficult to predict how he might rule on certain issues if he were elevated to the Supreme Court. The Tenth Circuit has a relatively routine caseload when compared to some of its sister circuits. It hears cases from Colorado, Kansas, New Mexico, Oklahoma, Utah and Wyoming. federal or state prisoners, a number in line with the national average for the regional federal courts of appeals. The Tenth Circuit also hears a number of private civil litigation disputes, such as cases on labor, insurance, contract, and tort law. On the other hand, some seven percent of the Tenth Circuit's docket is devoted to administrative agency appeals, a percentage far below that of the D.C. Circuit, where over half the docket consists of administrative matters. Similarly, the Ninth Circuit rarely has the Many commentators have likened the nominee to Justice Scalia. Justice Scalia was a well-known proponent of originalism, textualism, and the view that clear rules should guide the work of the lower courts. In a lecture delivered in April 2016 at Case Western Reserve University School of Law, Judge Gorsuch commended Justice Scalia's approach toward judging. The themes highlighted in his 2016 lecture on Justice Antonin Scalia's legacy previously appeared in several of Judge Gorsuch's opinions on the Tenth Circuit. The nominee rejected the view of the judge as a "pragmatic social-welfare maximizer," arguing for a more limited role for judges. on which he wrote, which, in turn, are assigned by the most senior active judge on each panel. This means that, at least early in Judge Gorsuch's career on the Tenth Circuit, he may not have been assigned to write the most challenging or controversial cases that tend to generate dissent. Perhaps more importantly, because separate opinions are infrequent, the dataset is relatively small, and only a handful of dissents and concurrences distinguish Judge Scalia's numbers from those of his colleagues. judging, the findings in Table 1 and Table 2 may be noteworthy. Professor Michael McConnell of Stanford University described Judge Gorsuch as "unfailingly cordial and collegial" Another former colleague, Robert Henry, now the President of Oklahoma City University, described Judge Neil Gorsuch's "judicial temperament" as "superb" Judge Gorsuch's approach to judging may also differ in substance from that of Justice Scalia. In contrast to the oft quoted "common ground," Judge Gorsuch aims to "find[] common ground" while being "scrupulously respectful" In contrast to Justice Scalia, Judge Gorsuch's writings have generally espoused a more minimalist role for courts. While the nominee has not been immune from criticism that particular majority opinions he wrote swept too broadly. For example, he noted in a 2012 dissent that "[c]aution is always warranted when venturing down the road of judicial overreach" The Supreme Court is expected to vote on the nominee in the next few weeks. For more information, go to CNN.com/soulmatestories. deciding a weighty question of first impression and recognizing a previously unrecognized constitutional right. In a 2009 concurrence, the nominee wrote that "[j]udicial restraint usually means answering the questions we must, not those we can" In a number of opinions the nominee expressly limited the scope of the majority opinions he authored. He has also frequently concurred or dissented to take issue with majority opinions that, in his view, reached issues that were unnecessary to the court's ultimate holding. of law, his opinions at times evidence concern about judges "reshap[ing] the law as they wish it to be" by failing to "attach power to precedent" Of the approximately 180 published majority opinions authored by the nominee, only one has been reviewed in a formal opinion by the Supreme Court, wherein the Court ultimately affirmed the Tenth Circuit decision by a 5-4 vote. Five additional opinions that Judge Gorsuch has authored have not been reviewed by the Court. The Supreme Court has not reviewed any of the five additional opinions. Gorsuch joined have been the subject of a formal opinion by the Supreme Court. Of these five opinions, four were affirmed by the High Court. One opinion that Judge Gorsuch joined, Direct Marketing Ass'n v. Brohl was reversed by the Court in a substantive opinion. As several commentators have noted, Judge Gorsuch can be seen to employ the same general approach to questions of statutory interpretation as President Obama did in his Supreme Court confirmation hearings in 2009. The Supreme Court in recent years has reversed the lower courts in roughly seventy percent of all cases it heard. that Justice Scalia did. This approach—known as textualism —looks to the statutory text, context, and structure when construing laws. Textualism's focus on the wording of the statute is widely shared among contemporary jurists and commentators. But its rejection of extrinsic sources of meaning has been the subject of debate, as have textualist views about judges' proper role in establishing the meaning of statutory text. With Judge Gorsuch in particular, attention to statutory text has often centered upon questions of grammar. nominee once going so far as to diagram part of a sentence in a written opinion. Judge Gorsuch can be seen to resemble Justice Scalia in invoking the "rule of lenity" when construing language that is seen to be ambiguous in favor of criminal defendants. On the other hand, the nominee's recently expressed concerns about " Chevron deference" —judicial deference to the reasonable interpretations by executive branch agencies of ambiguous or silent statutes –distinguish him from Scalia in certain ways. the rule of lenity and Chevron deference—are discussed in more detail later in this report. Consistent with a textualist approach to statutory interpretation, Judge Gorsuch in a number of his written opinions has identified what he views as the "plain text" or "plain language" of the statute in question. The exact words of a statute often formed the starting point for Judge Gorsuch's discussion of questions of interpretation. He has generally accorded such words their customary meaning, as well as their literal meaning. reflected by their dictionary definitions. In his 2015 opinion for a majority of the en banc Tenth Circuit in United States v. Rentz, Judge Gorsuch diagrammed a segment of a sentence in a criminal statute. The specific interpretative question in Rentz was whether multiple charges could be brought against the same person at the same time. In Figure 1 below, the nominee shows how he diagrammed the sentence to help address the underlying interpretativequestion in the Rentz case. For more information, visit the U.S. Supreme Court's website. may be brought under Section 924(c) of Title 18 of the United States Code against a defendant who fired a single shot that hit two separate victims. The total number of charges lodged against a criminal defendant under the statute should never "exceed the number of uses, carries, or possessions" Just as you can't throw more touchdowns during the fourth quarter than the total amount of times you have thrown a touchdown, you cannot use a gun to kill two people at the same time. firearm during and in relation to crimes of violence more than the total number of times you have used a firearm. Previously, in dissenting from the denial of en banc review in United States v. Games-Perez , Judge Gorsuch had expressed similar concerns about reading the mens rea element of a criminal statute. According to Judge Gorsuch, such a reading "defies grammatical gravity and linguistic logic," he said. The Supreme Court is expected to rule on the case in the next few months. characteristic of textualist approaches to statutory interpretation, including resort to the "larger statutory context" The nominee has also invoked a number of canons—or general principles—of statutory interpretation when construing text that is seen to be ambiguous. In so doing, Judge Gorsuch has generally cited to and applied specific interpretative canons. However, in his 2016 opinion for a three-judge court, he cited specific canons without expressly involving himself in the broader debates about the merits. panel of the Tenth Circuit in Lexington Insurance Co. v. Precision Drilling Co., L.P. Judge Gorsuch contrasted canons that he viewed as "finely honed and consistent with the judicial function" with the so called "absurdity canon" This canon is generally said to allow judges to "override even unambiguous statutory texts . . . in order to avoid putatively absurd consequences in their application" Judge Gorsuch expressed concern that broad application of this canon could be dangerous. enable judges to disregard clear statutory text in favor of the jurists' perceived view of Congress's purpose in enacting the statute. Judge Gorsuch's Lexington Insurance opinion can be seen to reflect broader concerns about interpretations of statutory text based on extrinsic evidence of congressional purpose. However, the nominee's discussion of these concerns in Lexington Insurance is arguably notable for its relative length, particularly given that the sole legal authority cited by Judge Gorsuch as supporting purpose-based applications of the absurdity doctrine is an 1892 Supreme Court decision. with the Court in more recent years. The two other judges on the panel would not have reached the questions regarding the absurdity doctrine, concluding instead that the plaintiff had waived the argument. Unlike Justice Scalia, who generally viewed the use of legislative history materials as illegitimate even in support of text-based arguments, Judge Gorsuch has cited them in certain cases. The nominee has expressed concerns, akin to those voiced by Justice Scalia,. about invocations of alleged congressional or statutory purposes that are untethered from or contrary to the express statutory text. of dozens or even hundreds of members. Other concerns appear to be grounded in the nominee's views about the respective roles of the judicial and legislative branches. Much like Justice Scalia, Judge Gorsuch has opined that courts should interpret the law, not create it. As a result, if Judge Gorsuch were to serve on the Supreme Court, his views on the role of the judiciary would likely be more restrictive than those of Justice Scalia or any other justice in the history of the U.S. Supreme Court. Administrative law cases at the Supreme Court are often contentious, resulting in divided decisions on legal issues of national import. The Tenth Circuit's docket does not include as many administrative law cases as other federal courts. In the few cases that have come before the court, the justices have been split 4-4 in favor of the government. On statutory interpretation, the views of the justice he would replace would largely appear to align with those of the Justice he'd replace. On the issue of the scope of an agency's discretion to issue guidance documents to set regulatory policy, the Justice would likely side with the agency in this case. him, Judge Gorsuch has articulated distinct views that may signal how he would approach administrative law matters if he were elevated to the Supreme Court. A central threshold issue in administrative law cases is whether a challenged agency action is suitable for judicial review in the first place, including whether a court has jurisdiction over the case. While this inquiry is often dependent on the facts of a given case, a few trends can arguably be discerned from the various cases raising justiciability issues in which Judge Gorsuch presided. challenge to a federal agency policy and outside of that context, the nominee sided with the majority of the appellate panel in most cases where access to judicial relief was litigated. In the few judicial access cases in which Judge Gorsuch wrote a separate opinion, he has tended to do so on the basis that the court lacked jurisdiction over the suit. For example, in Wilderness Society v. Kane County , a majority in the en banc panel held that the plaintiffs lacked jurisdiction in the case. He has not demonstrated a proclivity towards a notably expansive or restrictive view of jurisdictional issues. prudential standing in a challenge brought against a local government entity under the Supremacy Clause. In Kerr v. Hickenlooper, a suit brought by state legislators claiming that a voter initiative violated the Constitution's Guarantee Clause, the original three-judge panel rejected arguments that the court lacked jurisdiction over the case. Judge Gorsuch dissented from a subsequent denial of rehearing en banc, arguing that the case presented a nonjusticiable political question. He concluded that the Court lacked subject matter jurisdiction in the first place. Under the Administrative Procedure Act (APA), a reviewing court must set aside agency action that is "not in accordance with law" Pursuant to the framework established by the Supreme Court in Chevron, U.S.A., Inc. v. Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc., a court will generally defer to an agency's interpretation of a statute that is seen to be silent or ambiguous on a particular issue. In National Cable & Telecommunications Ass'n v. Brand X Internet Services , the Supreme. Court ruled in favor of the cable company. Court interpreted Chevro n to extend to an agency's interpretation of a silent or ambiguous statute even if a court had previously interpreted the statute in question. As a statistical matter, under the Chevron doctrine, courts have often deferred to an agencies interpretation of its own statutory authority. In engaging in substantive review of agency actions, Judge Gorsuch has questioned the size and power of the modern administrative state. He has declared that the number of regulations issued by agencies has "grown so exuberantly it's hard to keep up" Gorsuch has taken a narrow view of the situations in which Chevron deference is due. The nominee has also raised "questions like whether and how people can be fairly expected to keep pace with and conform their conduct to all this churning and changing 'law" In perhaps the most discussed of Judge Gorsuch's opinions, Gutierrez-Brizuela v. Lynch, he wrote for a unanimous majority. The Supreme Court will vote on whether to confirm the nominee to the high court. panel that declined to defer to an agency's determination under Chevron and Brand X. The nominee wrote a separate concurring opinion calling into the question the wisdom and constitutionality of the doctrines created by both cases. Emphasizing the concept of separated powers envisioned by the Founders, Judge Gorsuch distinguished between the elected legislature's task of setting policy prospectively and the judiciary's duty of neutrally interpreting the law in retroactively adjudicating disputes. For Judge Gorsuch, this assignment of responsibilities ensures liberty by protecting parties who cannot alter their past conduct to the changes in majoritarian politics and bars. Frida Ghitis: Supreme Court nominee's views on Chevron deference differ from those of Justice Scalia. She says if he were to succeed Scalia, he might favor a narrowing of the scope of the deference doctrine. Ghitis says his views may be consistent with Justice Scalia's opposition to the Brand X-of-powers doctrine on the separation of powers grounds, on the other hand, may be in line with his view on other issues. She asks: Does he favor eliminating the doctrine, or at least cabining its application? was unclear, Judge Gorsuch appears to have cabined the circumstance in which these doctrines apply. In De Niz Robles , a precursor to the Tenth Circuit's opinion in Gutierrez-Brizuela , Judge Gorsuch, writing for a unanimous panel, rejected the retroactive application of an agency's adjudication that upset the affected party's reliance interests. In other words, at least in the Tenth circuit, De Nize Robles did not read Brand X to apply when an agency seeks to apply its interpretation retroactively. Gorsuch grounded his decision in principles of separation of powers, due process, and equal protection. He noted the presumptive prospective effect of legislation compared with the retroactive effect of a judicial decision. The more an agency's decision resembles that of a judge, the stronger the case for retroactive application of the decision. But the more the decision resembles legislation, the less likely such a decision should be granted retroactive force, he said. Given this guidepost, De Niz Robles concluded. that when an agency issues an interpretation of an ambiguous statutory provision under Chevron via an adjudication that displaces a contrary judicial decision, it is operating like legislators setting new policies. Per the 2015 ruling, such decisions should presumptively apply only prospectively. Beyond Judge Gorsuch's two major rulings in Gutierrez-Brizuela and De Niz Robles , he has tended to be more skeptical of deferring to agencies on legal questions. For example, in TransAm Trucking, Inc. v. Department of Labor , the panel majority upheld a determination by the Department ofLabor that a truck driver was terminated in violation of the law. of the Surface Transportation Assistance Act. At issue was whether the truck driver engaged in protected activity under the Act by "refus[ing] to operate a vehicle" due to safety concerns. The court deferred under Chevron to the Department's determination that the driver's decision to drive his truck away from his trailer in freezing conditions qualified as protected activity. Judge Gorsuch wrote a dissenting opinion, arguing that the statute's meaning was plain and that he rejected extending Chevron deference to the agency's interpretation. that, in contrast to the majority's reasoning, the absence of a statutory definition did not create ambiguity. Instead, Judge Gorsuch thought the statute was clear and unambiguous, and therefore would have ruled against the agency's interpretation at Chevron 's first step. Discretionary and Factual Review. In contrast to his views on the doctrine of judicial deference to agency statutory interpretations, Judge. Gorsuch does not appear to have expressed strong objections to the mechanics of discretionary or factual review, a second major area of substantive administrative law. to be arbitrary, capricious, [or] an abuse of discretion." The nominee has joined or written several unanimous decisions upholding agency actions. However, the nominee has sometimes departed from his colleagues and written separately to find agency actions arbitrary and capricous. The majority panel upheld the Board's decision to "exclude interim earnings from backpay calculations when the employer has wrongfully reduced employee wages" in National Labor Relations Board v. Community Health Services. The nominee doubted that the parties received fair notice of applicable rules and regulations. The agency had considerable discretion under the National Labor Relations Act to determine how back pay should be calculated. Judge Gorsuch dissented, claiming that the agency's decision failed to explain why it treated similarly situated entities differently. His opinion faulted the agency for essentially announcing a new rule without justification, and arbitrarily distinguishing between situations where terminated employees worked reduced hours, but not terminated employment. The majority noted that while the decision was inconsistent with prior determinations, the agency had plenty of discretion to make the decision. Supreme Court nominee could be influential on future of the death penalty, says Julian Zelizer. If confirmed, he would replace Justice Scalia, who believed death penalty was consistent with the Eighth Amendment, he says. Zelizer: While the nominee is not wholly opposed to scrutinizing a state's imposition, he generally accords a large degree of deference to decisions by state legislators, judges, and executive branch officials on matters relating to the states' imposition and administration of capital punishment. He says the nominee's votes in support of two Tenth Circuit opinions rejecting similar challenges to the method in which a state carried out executions suggests he might provide a fifth vote. jurors because of their alleged bias in favor of capital punishment. All three judges on the panel agreed that the prisoner's convictions should be affirmed. However, Judge Gorsuch disagreed on the question of whether the state court of appeals had neglected to apply controlling Supreme Court precedent properly in assessing the petitioner's claim of juror bias during sentencing. He argued that the court should defer to the state appeals court's statements in its opinion, which indicated that the juror's bias was not severe enough. The Tenth Circuit owed "double deference" to the state criminal appeals court's decision that the state trial court did not improperly fail to exclude the jurors from sentencing proceedings. Judge Gorsuch's concurrence in one capital case in which the majority denied the petition for habeas relief indicates that there are some circumstances in which he may question the state's imposition of the death penalty. In Williams v. Williams, the Tenth Circuit ruled that the.state trial court had applied the correct standard for jury exclusion. Trammel , Judge Gorsuch agreed that the court should deny the petitioner's claim for relief. But he expressed concerns with the state court's apparent willingness to impose capital punishment on an accomplice. The judge wrote that the Eighth Amendment phrase "cruel and unusual punishment" would likely bar such a concept of punishment. He wrote that such a punishment would likely be illegal under the First Amendment's Eighth Amendment clause, which protects the right to a fair trial and the presumption of innocence in a criminal case. accessory liability. He appears willing to scrutinize state court decisions that appear to contravene existing constitutional protections for capital defendants if those protections are clearly articulated in Supreme Court decisions. But he may be reluctant to engage in a broad reading of the Constitution and Supreme Court precedent that would expand the rights of such defendants beyond existing precedent. He has generally demonstrated a propensity to defer to the decisions of state legislators, judges, and executive branch officials in matters relating to capital punishment. He could be influential, were he to be confirmed to the Supreme Court. elevated to the Supreme Court, involves the procedural and substantive limits that federal law imposes on the exposure of defendants to monetary liability in civil cases. This is because Justice Scalia, whom Judge Gorsuch could succeed on the Court, cast critical votes in several closely contested cases that read federal law relatively expansively to restrict the ability of plaintiffs to use class action litigation to facilitate civil recoveries. The case involves lawsuits resulting from allegedly faulty products, discriminatory practices, or fraudulent activities. The judge could succeed if he is confirmed. sue businesses that may have harmed them. In other cases, Justice Scalia cast important votes in cases that more narrowly interpreted the scope of federal law to limit corporate defendants' potential civil liability. Given Justice Scalia's decisions, commentators have considered how Judge Gorsuch might affect the Roberts Court's perceived "warmth" toward businesses on civil liability matters if the nominee were to be confirmed. Pointing to his writings that are critical of the use of class action lawsuits in securities fraud cases, his apparent preference for arbitration over litigation. some commentators suggest that Judge Gorsuch would limit the exposure of civil defendants. Through his judicial and nonjudicial writings, Judge Gorsuch has expressed an interest in issues related to civil liability. This interest is evident in several pointed critiques that he has authored on what he perceives as the misuses or excesses of litigation. In addition, when asked to identify "the 10 most significant cases over which you have an opinion," Judge Gorsuch said he would like to see the case settled in a civil trial. presided" on the Senate Judiciary Committee's "Questionnaire for Nominee to the Supreme Court" Two of the ten cases Judge Gorsuch selected were opinions that affirmed the dismissal of civil claims by the district court. In Cook v. Rockwell Int ernationa l Corp. , for example, the nominee lamented: It took a titanic fifteen years for the case to go to trial. The nominee lamented that the case took 15 years to get to the court because of the nature of the case. case to reach a jury. No doubt a testament to contemporary civil litigation practices that ensure before any trial is held every stone will be overturned in discovery. Somehow, though, this case managed to survive the usually lethal gauntlet of pretrial proceedings and stagger its way to trial. From this sentiment, it might be surmised that Judge Gorsuch may be particularly receptive to curtailing the costly litigation process through strict readings of statutes that create private rights of private property. The case is still pending. In Hammond v. Stamps.com, Inc. , for example, the plaintiff filed a putative class action in state court alleging unlawful trade practices involving allegedly misleading website disclosures. The district court refused to exercise jurisdiction because it found the defendant failed to meet its burden of showing that over $5 million was "in controversy," as required by the statute. On appeal, Judge Gorsuch authored a unanimous opinion reversing the district court based on a detailed construction of the statutory term " in controversy" He found "federal jurisdiction here beyond doubt," thereby allowing the class action to proceed. no actual agreement to arbitrate as there was no meeting of the minds as to how claims that implicated the numerous agreements would be arbitrated. Judge Gorsuch dissented, stating "I just don't see any doubt that the parties before us did intend to arbitrated" In doing so, he noted "the federal policy favoring arbitration embodied in the FAA," and that "[t]he Supreme Court has held that the FAA preempts state laws that single out arbitration clauses for disfavored treatment" Like arbitration, preemption is the circumstance in which federal law supersedes state law. displaces state causes of action, such as tort claims. In determining whether federal law preempts common law tort claims, the nominee's approach is centrally grounded in the words of the federal statute at issue. In Cook v. Rockwell Int ernationa l Corp. , for instance, property owners filed a class action against the company. The judge's approach has resulted in judgments both in favor of and against civil defendants, as well as against the defendants in the case in question. under the federal Price-Anderson Act and state tort law against operators of a nuclear weapons manufacturing plant to recover for damages caused by releases of plutonium and other hazardous substances. After the federal claims failed, the district court disallowed the case to proceed on the state law claims, holding that they were preempted by federal law. Judge Gorsuch disagreed, saying: "Where does any of this language—expressly—preempt and preclude all state law tort recoveries for plaintiffs who plead but do not prove nuclear incidents? We just don't see it" Judge Gorsuch also looked to the "larger statutory structure" and the statute's legislative history to buttress his conclusion. Caplinger v. Medtronic, Inc. affirmed the district court's dismissal of the complaint as preempted by federal law based on a reading of an express preemption clause within the Medical Device Amendments to the Federal Food, Drug, and Medical Devices Act of 1998. The case involved a lawsuit alleging the defendant had promoted an "off label" use of a medical device that resulted in the plaintiff's injuries. Cosmetics Act (FDCA). This provision, however, has a complex history of statutory interpretation by the Supreme Court. Judge Gorsuch noted that one such case articulated the following test for preemption, stating: "[T]ort suits do not impose new 'requirements' on manufacturers and are not preempted so long as the duties they seek to impose 'parallel' duties found in the FDCA" But, Judge Gorsuch stated, "the Court's answer only invited the next question: when exactly does a state law duty 'par parallel' a federal law duty enough to evade preemption?" to judicial exposition." Furthermore, he observed, "the Supreme Court has twice revisited and cut back the scope of its initial decision." Left to reconcile competing statutory interpretations by the High Court, Judge Gorsuch asked: "How are we supposed to apply all these competing instructions? It's no easy task" Ultimately, the court held that the state law claims were preempted because the plaintiff failed to identify a parallel federal requirement based on off-label promotion of a medical device. The nominee applied these principles while referring back to the statute's plain text throughout his analysis. Law in which Judge Gorsuch could be influential if he were to be elevated to the Supreme Court. Justice Scalia's views regarding the scope of constitutional and statutory civil rights protections were established in a number of judicial opinions. However, unlike Justice Scalia, Judge Gorsuch's views on constitutional civil rights questions are less well known because he has had relatively few occasions to address such questions directly in cases before the Tenth Circuit. He has not, for example, had occasion to address affirmative action and issues related to sexual orientation. write on the constitutional limits on affirmative action or the equal protection rights of sexual minorities. Most of the civil rights decisions in which the nominee has participated have centered upon statutory civil rights claims. The nominee's opinions in these cases to date have resulted in a variety of outcomes, some favorable to individual plaintiffs, some unfavorable. Based on these decisions, an argument could be made that Judge Gorsuch's views on statutory civil Rights reflect his textualist approach to construing statutes, instead of a more results-driven judicial philosophy. Gorsuch has authored or otherwise participated in relatively few opinions addressing claims that a government enactment, policy, or practice has deprived persons of equal protection of the law. There is one opinion, Secsys LLC v. Vigil, authored by Judge Gorsuch for a unanimous panel of the Tenth Circuit. This opinion characterizes equal protection as "the law's keystone"; explores the differences between intentional and unintentional discrimination. The opinion was published in the online edition of The Federalist, published by Simon & Schuster.  Secsys is unusual in that the plaintiff corporation alleged that state officials had deprived it of equal protection by requiring it to award a subcontract under a state contract to a specific individual. Judge Gorsuch rejected this claim, in part, on the grounds that the state officials would have required a similar subcontracting agreement from any other contractor, making Secsys' claim moot. The ruling also explains what types of government action may be subject to heightened scrutiny, and explains what type of government actions may be under heightened scrutiny. their actions distinguishable from "a rule saying that African Americans or women may not bid for a state contract or that only those of a certain religious faith may" The nominee also described the plaintiffs as asking the court to endorse a "novel theory" of equal protection in this case to reach issues that were more commonly covered by criminal or civil laws against extortion. This language could suggest that Judge Gorsuch believes that the Constitution's equal protection principles play a crucial role in prohibiting certain government discrimination based on religion. on race or sex, but may be more skeptical of interpreting the Equal Protection Clause expansively to shield against previously unrecognized forms of discrimination. Judge Gorsuch also joined the unanimous decision by a panel of the Tenth Circuit in 2015 in Druley v. Patton. In 2009, in 2009, Judge Gorsuch joined a unanimous decision  in a case involving a transgendered prisoner in an all-male facility. In that case, the court ruled that the prisoner was not entitled to wear female undergarments because she was housed in a male facility. the Ninth Circuit—where he was sitting by designation—in Kastl v. Maricopa County Community College District. In both cases, unanimous panels purported to rely on direct precedent in reaching their conclusions. For example, in Druley , the panel noted Tenth Circuit precedent holding that transsexuals are not members of a class for which heightened heightened protection is required. In Druley, the court held that a transsexual instructor whose contract was not renewed after she had been banned from using the women's restroom "until she could prove completion of sex reassignment surgery" scrutiny is required under the Equal Protection Clause. Because of this, in the panel's view, the state officials' decisions were subject to the less stringent "rational basis review," which the decisions were able to withstand. Similarly, in Kastl , the panel noted, in a short three-page order, that the plaintiff had failed to "put forward sufficient evidence demonstrating that [the school's actions were] motivated by her gender" This, in their view, caused her claims to fail. more federal civil rights statutes. Such statutes include Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title VII), as amended. It appears that his jurisprudence is largely a product of his preferences for textualism and rules based adjudication, as opposed to a preference to rule for a particular side. However, it should be noted that some commentators have criticized certain rulings by Judge Neil Neil Gorsuch in the Supreme Court case "Gorsuch v. United States" The case is expected to be heard in the fall. Judge Gorsuch in this area, taking note of the outcomes in specific cases on the grounds that the discrimination claims of particular victims were "thrown . . . out of court" in favor of a corporate or government entity. While Judge Gorsuch has authored or joined some rulings that were unfavorable to such individuals, this fact may be of limited utility in ascertaining Judge Gorsuch's views about the scope of statutory civil rights protections. Many of the plaintiffs raising federal antidiscrimination claims, especially in the context of employment disputes, rarely prevail before the federal appellate courts. the decisions on statutory civil rights in which the nominee participated involved unanimous rulings to dismiss a particular case. In 2009 in Strickland v. United Parcel Service, Inc. , Judge Gorsuch agreed with two colleagues that the plaintiff should be able to proceed to trial on a FMLA retaliation claim, but differed from his colleagues as to the plaintiff's Title VII claim. In addition, litigation involving statutory civil civil rights claims often turns on the facts of a specific case, as opposed to differences in opinions about the law. case based on the factual record before the court. While the other two judges voted to reverse the district court's grant of summary judgment to the defendant on the Title VII claim, Judge Gorsuch would have affirmed the lower court's decision. In particular, he construed two key depositions relied on by the plaintiff as simply showing that the plaintiff's supervisor "harassed male employees in very much the same manner he harassed Ms. Strickland" In another fact-intensive civil rights case resulting in a different outcome—a ruling for the plaintiffs— Orr v. Orr. City of Albuquerque , Judge Gorsuch wrote the majority opinion. This opinion, much like Strickland , engaged in a "thorough review of the record" And Orr is not the only case in which Judge Gorsuch has ruled in favor of the plaintiffs in a statutory civil rights case. It could suggest that the ultimate outcomes of particular cases are driven by Judge Gorsuch's general judicial philosophy as well as his rulings in Orr and other similar cases. It is not clear whether the Supreme Court will take up the case. The substance of several of the nominee's opinions on federal antidiscrimination law is, at times, telling. The nominee's general views on adjudication may suggest that his approach will shape his approach to the law. For instance, in keeping with his preference for clear rules and his general critique of "needless" complexities in the law, Judge Gorsuch has written multiple opinions questioning the efficacy of a central—but complicated—doctrine. The judge is opposed to a general preference to reach a business or government friendly outcome. Under the McDonnell Douglas test, a plaintiff must first establish a prima facie case of discrimination, and then the burden shifts to the employer to articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its employment action. If the employer meets this burden, the plaintiff can still prevail by offering evidence demonstrating that the employer's explanation is pretextual. In Paup v. Gear Products, Inc. , Judge Gorsuch joined a per curiam opinion that, while acknowledging McDonnell Douglas was "binding on us" in the case at hand, noted criticism that its multipart, burden shifting test is unfair. Gorsuch's most pointed critique of McDonnell Douglas came in a 2016 First Amendment retaliation case, Walton v. Powell. Rejecting the defendant's argument that the test should be applied in a free association case, the nominee noted that the "special and idiosyncratic" McDonnell Douglas test is not "helpful enough to justify the costs and burdens associated with its administration" In Barrett v. Salt Lake County , the nominee highlighted criticism by two colleagues that the Test is "not helpful enough" to justify its administration. Douglas test "has proven of limited value even in its native waters," with the Tenth Circuit finding it inapplicable outside of motions for summary judgment in cases relying on circumstantial evidence. While it is unclear whether the elimination of the McDonnell Douglas test would necessarily favor a particular side in employment litigation, legal commentators have noted that because the test is "bedrock employment law doctrine" any limits Judge Gorsuch might impose on the use of this test could cause a "significant change in how employment discrimination lawsuits are prosecuted and prosecuted" In Almond v. Unified School District #501, the nominee employed a textualist approach in one of the first opinions interpreting the Lilly Ledbetter Fair Pay Act of 2009. Rejecting the view that the phrase "discrimination in compensation" was used in the Act as "some Rorschach inkblot," he concluded that the Act's expanded accrual period for "discrimination" claims applied only to "unequal pay for equal work" claims, not to all claims of discriminatory compensation. to which we may ascribe whatever meaning springs to mind," Judge Gorsuch wrote. He looked to the "language of the Act itself," the Act's structure, and key canons of statutory construction. In another decision, he said a student who had previously settled a lawsuit involving alleged violations of the IDEA was barred from "seeking the same relief" under the ADA, the Rehabilitation Act, and 42 U.S.C. He wrote for the majority in holding that the student was not entitled to same relief. The nominee relied primarily on the "plain text" of the statute. The majority construed that plaintiffs attempting to bring civil actions under other federal laws "seeking the same relief IDEA supplies" must exhaust certain procedures set forth in the IDEA "'to the same extent' as you must to bring a civil action under IDEA itself" The dissenting judge argued that the majority had "misread" the statute in question by viewing Section 1415( l ) of Title 20 of the United States Code as unambiguously imposing certain requirements. also objected that the outcome under the majority's reading ran contrary to Congress's intent by "harm[ing] the interests of the children that IDEA was intended to protect" However, in perhaps a reflection on how his broader views on the role of the judge influence his civil rights jurisprudence, Judge Gorsuch's opinion took a different view of this argument. He opined that the court would be substituting its view of desirable social policy for that of Congress if it were to adopt the plaintiff's proposed interpretation. Judge Neil Gorsuch has helped shape jurisprudence in ways that could be seen to favor criminal defendants. He has written on issues such as the scope of the Fourth Amendment's protections against unreasonable searches and seizures. His views on the Confrontation Clause and scope of self-incrimination rights under the Fifth Amendment are less clear because he has not written on them to a significant extent, writes Julian Zelizer. Zelizer: On the whole, though, his opinions are seemingly shaped by his views on how legal texts are to be construed. that the deputies were not entitled to qualified immunity because the law at the time of the incident clearly established that the conduct alleged was constitutionally excessive. In reaching this conclusion, the nominee proceeded through an analysis of each of the Graham factors. Similarly, but resulting in a contrary outcome, Judge Gorsuch authored the majority opinion in Wilson v. City of Lafayette , finding qualified immunity protected an officer who used a taser on an individual fleeing arrest, resulting in the suspect's death. In doing so, the nominees recited and analyzed each of those factors. Gorsuch: "No one questions that the use of a taser, especially if one probe hits the head, amounts to a significant physical intrusion requiring a correspondingly significant justification" The nominee found the "physical intrusion" in Wilson was not clearly established to be excessive in light of the other Graham factors, including the arrestee actively resisting arrest. In Fisher v. City of Las Cruces, the majority found that a material factual dispute existed as to whether the plaintiff's injuries, which the plaintiff claimed, were excessive. he sustained while being handcuffed after he had shot himself, were sufficient for an excessive force claim. Judge Gorsuch concurred with the majority's use of the Graham factors and its conclusion that the factors suggested the officers may not have acted reasonably. But he faulted the majority for "tak[ing] a detour, asking whether, in addition to satisfying all three Graham factors, Mr. Fisher has also shown that he suffered a 'non- de minimis injury'" Such an inquiry had previously been found to be required only in. cases involving allegations of overly tight handcuffing, and the nominee felt that it was an inappropriate departure from Graham in this case. On another matter of constitutional criminal procedure that has, at times, divided the Supreme Court in recent years, Judge Gorsuch wrote a notable dissent in United States v. Nicholson. The issue in Nicholson was whether a police officer, who mistakenly thought the defendant had violated a local traffic ordinance, could seize evidence from the defendant's car during the resulting stop. Noting a New Mexico court ruling that had concluded that. the ordinance relied on by the police officer did not provide a legal basis for the stop. The majority decision held that a failure to understand the law by the "very person charged with enforcing it" was objectively unreasonable and warranted suppression of the evidence seized. Judge Gorsuch in dissent rejected the view that an officer's mistake of law " always violates the Fourth Amendment" Instead, he argued that, when the law at issue is "deeply ambiguous," the law should be treated as a reasonableness inquiry. and the officer's interpretation [is] entirely reasonable," a totality of the circumstances test should counsel for not suppressing evidence seized because of a mistake of law. A year and a half after the Tenth Circuit's opinion in Nicholson , the Supreme Court effectively sided with Judge Gorsuch's more flexible view of the exclusionary rule. While the approach taken by Judge Gorsuch in his dissent in Nicholson eventually found favor at the Supreme court, the approach he took in this case was not as clear-cut as it could have been. The nominee's dissent in a case on another often litigated issue in constitutional criminal law did not ultimately become the prevailing view at the High Court. In Williams v. Jones , Judge Gorsuch served on a panel reviewing the ineffective assistance claim of a criminal defendant. Three years after Williams , the Supreme Court, in a pair of 5-4 decisions for which Justice Scalia wrote dissenting opinions, held that the Sixth Amendment right to adequate assistance of counsel extends to the negotiation and consideration of plea bargains. At issue was language in the Mandatory Victims Restoration Act stating that the "court shall set a date for the final determination of the victim's losses, not to exceed 90 days after sentencing" The defendant argued that the language was jurisdictional, which would have meant that the court lacked the authority to enter any restitution order after the 90 days had passed. A unanimous panel of the Tenth Circuit in United States v. Dolan ruled in favor of the defendant in the case. The case was decided on a unanimous vote. Gorsuch wrote that the 90-day rule was a claims processing rule intended to promote speed and unconnected to the court's authority. In so doing, the nominee noted various factors, including the "statute's language and structure," as well as an interpretative canon calling for courts to construe statutes as "directory," rather than jurisdictional. Although Dolan was written relatively early in Judge Gorsuch's tenure, it was written early in the judge's tenure as a federal judge. The Supreme Court granted certiorari in the case. A majority of the High Court voted to affirm the Tenth Circuit's decision in Dolan. Justice Scalia joined a dissenting opinion authored by Chief Justice Roberts that viewed the "clear statutory text" to preclude the court from granting restitution more than 90 days after sentencing. It could suggest certain differences between his textualist approach and that of Justice Scalia, writes Julian Zelizer. "This difference between the Tenth Court's textualist interpretation ... seems to have been shaped primarily by the different emphases that Justice Scalia had," Zelizer says. the Tenth Circuit and the Chief Justice gave to different words in the statute. The Tenth Circuit focused on the "notwithstanding" clause, viewing it as mandating restitution in every case. The dissenters on the High Court, in contrast, relied, at least in part, on the phrase "n notwithstanding any other provision of law," which they say requires restitution even if it is not made at sentencing or within 90 days thereof. The Supreme Court's ruling is expected to be appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court. part, on the phrase "when sentencing," which they would have construed to mean that a district court has no power to act after sentencing. On the question of the mens rea—or mental state—requirements of criminal statutes, Judge Gorsuch's textualist approach is sometimes said to have led to "defendant-friendly" results. He dissenting from the denial of rehearing en banc in United States v. Games-Perez. This case centered on whether federal statutes penalizing the possession of firearms by felons require a mental state. the government to prove that a defendant knew of both his own status as a felon and his possession of a firearm, or whether the government needs to prove only that the defendant knowingly possessed a firearm. In his dissent in Games-Perez , Judge Gorsuch opined that reading the mens rea element of a criminal statute as "leapfrogging over the first statutorily specified element and touching down only at the second listed element " "defies grammatical gravity and linguistic logic," among other things. In United States v. Manatau, Judge Gorsuch relied on the plain language of sentencing guidelines to reach a more lenient interpretation of the mens rea requirement. The government had argued that the court should construe the term "intended loss" as used in connection with a sentencing enhancement for bank fraud and aggravated identity theft. However, the court disagreed, finding that the "plain" language of the sentencing guidelines was more appropriate.things. to do in the U.S. language" of the guideline was such that "intended" must be construed to refer to a loss "done on purpose" The court also noted the longstanding tradition in American criminal law of restricting liability to "cases where an intentional choice to do wrong is present" A more stringent approach to mens rea requirements, in which intention or knowledge of wrongdoing is generally construed to be part of the crime, is often associated with concerns about overcriminalization. Judge Gorsuch has criticized in much the same way Justice Scalia did. that could also be seen to be "defendant-friendly"—and to resemble Justice Scalia's approach. In its standard formulation, the rule of lenity "insists that courts side with the defendant 'when the ordinary canons of statutory construction have revealed no satisfactory construction'" Much as Justice Scalia did, Judge Gorsuch has invoked the rule in several criminal cases, including his 2015 opinion for a majority of the en banc Tenth Circuit in United States v. Rentz . Here, Judge Scalia invoked theRule oflenity. in support of a primarily text based interpretation, asserting that "[t]o the extent any ambiguity remains, we don't default to the most severe possible interpretation of the statute" The nominee opined that invoking the rule when construing ambiguous criminal statutes helps to ensure that individuals have "fair warning" when lawmakers want to impose criminal consequences to certain conduct. He also noted that the rule promotes separation-of-powers principles by ensuring that the legislature, and the public, have fair warning. not the prosecution, "decide[s] the circumstances when people may be sent to prison," he said. Previously, in his 2014 opinion for the panel majority in United States v. Smith, Judge Gorsuch had similarly cited a separation-of-powers rationale for the rule of lenity. With the Supreme Court often closely divided on various aspects of environmental law in recent years, Judge Neil Gorsuch could serve as a critical vote on such matters if confirmed to the Court. "It is not the job of independent courts to bend ambiguous statutory subsections in procrustean ways to fit the prosecutor's bill" The nominee has authored few opinions involving environmental law issues. The lack of a robust record for Judge Gorsuch on environmental law matters may not be surprising. The Tenth Circuit does not hear many environmental law cases because many major environmental statutes require parties challenging nationally applicable federal laws or administrative agency actions to file a petition in the D.C. Circuit. The territorial jurisdiction of the Tenth Circuit, however, does cover six western states and parts of Yellowstone National Park, which collectively contain millions of people. It does not have the same jurisdiction as the Supreme Court. Gorsuch has authored or joined opinions in several cases challenging federal agency actions related to the management of federal public lands and natural resources. This constitutes the bulk of the nominee's environmental law record. The outcome of an environmental case often depends on the court's resolution of threshold procedural issues, such as whether a plaintiff has the right to bring a lawsuit in the first place or to join an ongoing lawsuit. If such lawsuits are filed, to proceed, to be heard by the Supreme Court in the fall. to the merits, a plaintiff will need to establish standing, a procedural threshold that has, at times, impeded environmental litigation. While Judge Gorsuch has authored or joined opinions in a few cases, there is no discernible trend in his environmental standing jurisprudence. For example, his opinion for the majority in Backcountry Hunters & Anglers v. U.S. Forest Service provides one example of a case that was dismissed because the plaintiffs lacked standing. In this case, the plaintiffs challenged a temporary U.S. Forest Service order that allowed motorcycles—but prohibited all-terrain vehicles (ATVs)—on certain forest trails. Judge Gorsuch, writing for a unanimous court, determined that the appellants lacked a genuine stake in the outcome of the proceedings. In dismissing the case, the nominee wrote that a victory for the appellant "would seem to do nothing to help—and perhaps much to hurt—[their] cause," which was to reduce vehicles on forest trail. joined a majority opinion determining that an environmental group had standing to challenge the Bureau of Land Management's interpretation of its own prior order that allowed a coal mining project to go forward in Utah's Lila Canyon. The majority opinion concluded that the environmental group would suffer injury from the company beginning mining operations by impairing "the ability of its members to continue enjoyment of the aesthetic and scientific benefits provided by the land in question" Judge Gorsuch has also authored or joined other majority opinions in a number of other cases touching upon environmental issues. court determined that an environmental group or regulated business had standing to sue. The limited number of cases on standing in the environmental context makes it difficult to discern any broad tendencies of Judge Gorsuch on the subject. In 2013, he dissented from a majority opinion holding that environmental groups were entitled to intervene as of right. He wrote that "Judges owe the same obligation of fidelity to the record and the law in all cases and to all persons appearing before them—regardless of who the litigant is" In a lawsuit challenging a Forest Service plan that allowed for limited off-highway vehicle use in New Mexico's Santa Fe National Forest, Judge Neil Gorsuch dissented. He argued that the environmental groups lacked a right to intervene in the case because their interests were already adequately represented by the government. But his dissent implied that he might have voted in favor of the groups joining the litigation if the government had abandoned its efforts to enforce the law at issue. If his views on Chevron deference were to prevail, there is some debate on what impact this would have for environmental law. Tribunal: If confirmed, Neil Gorsuch could challenge use of dormant Commerce Clause to strike down state environmental laws. He says it's unclear to what degree his conclusions reflect his own approach to federalism questions. Tribe: In general, however, in cases implicating federalism concerns, he has exhibited respect for state court decisions, interpretations, and rules. It's unclear how much of a role federalism will play in his decision-making, Tribe says, but he has expressed clear views in support of abstention. Judges have claimed the authority to strike down state laws that unduly interfere with interstate commerce. In Epel , Judge Gorsuch ultimately upheld a state law that required electricity generators to ensure that twenty percent of electricity sold to state consumers came from renewable resources. This conclusion was based on a strict reading of one line of dormant Commerce Clause cases, writes Julian Zelizer. Zelizer: Judge Gorsuch's opinion suggests a skeptical reading of the dormant Commerce clause and an interest in cabining the doctrine to the facts of previous cases. Claims the (anything but dormant) power to strike down some state laws even in the absence of congressional direction. limited number of cases in which the nominee has ruled on other aspects of federalism and the scope of federal power vis-à-vis the states makes it difficult to conclude with certainty that he would, if confirmed to the Supreme Court, be as receptive to federalism based arguments as was Justice Scalia. What is apparent is his clear interest in upholding the "essential principles of federal-state comity" in If confirmed to the Supreme Court, Judge Neil Gorsuch could have a significant influence on the jurisprudence regarding freedom of religion. In recent years, the Court has taken up a number of religious freedom cases, with Justice Scalia voting as part of five-Justice majorities to interpret more narrowly the Constitution's prohibition on the "establishment of religion," while joining the same voting block to more broadly.furtherance of a cooperative federalism by deferring to the states when circumstances so warrant. If confirmed, he would be the fifth member of the Court to vote on the issue. expansively interpret statutory free exercise protections. A central constitutional issue respecting freedom of religion that Judge Gorsuch has considered concerns the reach of the First Amendment's prohibition on the establishment of a national religion. In determining what constitutes an unconstitutional act, the Supreme Court has, at times, read to bar certain government actions that endorse religion. The Supreme Court is expected to make a decision on the nomination by the end of the year or early next year, depending on the results of the Senate's confirmation hearings. endorsement of religion, the Court has in the recent past adopted Justice Sandra Day O'Connor's "reasonable observer test" The test looks to whether an "objective observer," acquainted with the background of the challenged government action, would perceive it as a government endorsement of religion. Judge Gorsuch has, in two dissents, criticized what he viewed as overly expansive interpretations of the reasonable observer test on the grounds that these interpretations needlessly eliminate certain religious symbols and traditions from the public sphere. Judge Gorsuch dissented from the denial of a request for rehearing in a case where the panel had previously enjoined a display of the Ten Commandments on a courthouse lawn. In his dissent, the nominee criticized the Tenth Circuit's formulation of the reasonable observer test, describing the observer utilized by the panel decision as an " unreasonable one" who "gets things wrong" He noted a number of perceived errors made by the "unreasonable observer," which included confusing the donor's intent with the government's message. Government with endorsement. Contending that "like cases should be treated alike," Judge Gorsuch's dissent further argued that the county's "inclusive display" of the Ten Commandments was indistinguishable from the display at issue in Van Orden v. Perry. In that case, the Supreme Court had upheld a display of the decalogue among other monuments and historic markers on the grounds of the Texas state capitol. Given these perceived parallels, the nominee's dissent concluded by noting the "long" custom of displaying the Ten commandments in public places. whether the endorsement test even applies to the dispute. Judge Gorsuch's dissent is reminiscent of recent Supreme Court jurisprudence, where a majority of the Justices, including Justice Scalia, appeared to move to looking to historical practices and understandings to resolve Establishment Clause disputes. Nearly two years after Green , Judge Gorsuch similarly dissented from an order denying en banc rehearing in American Atheists, Inc. v. Davenport. In that case, the panel had relied on the reasonable observer test in holding that the display of twelve-foot high crosses on public lands to memorialize fallen Utah Highway was OK. Patrol troopers violated the Establishment Clause. Judge Gorsuch again raised concerns about the Tenth Circuit's interpretation of Justice O'Connor's test. In particular, the dissent criticized what the nominee viewed as the observer's (1) "biased presumption that the Utah roadside crosses are unconstitutional"; (2) "internal bias" that disregarded "secularizing details" about the cross display; and (3) "selective and feeble eyesight," which resulted in misperceptions about the nature of theCross display. Gorsuch's dissent in American Atheists criticized the concept of the reasonable observer. He said it could be used to strike down laws and policies a conjured observer could mistakenly think respect an establishment of religion. He also said the test differs from other formulations the Court has used in the Establishment Clause context in that it can be used "to strike down law and policies ... a reasonably biased, impaired, and distracted viewer might confuse them for an endorsement of religion" The dissent was published in the online edition of American Atheist. Atheists expressed skepticism regarding interpretations of the First Amendment that discourage accommodation for religious views. He appears to favor an approach that is more restrained in using the power of judicial review in Establishment Clause cases. Judge Gorsuch's most notable writings on freedom of religion may arise in the context of statutory free exercise claims. He authored or joined opinions involving challenges under the Religious Freedom Restoration Act (RFRA) to the contraceptive coverage requirement in the Affordable Care Act. He also joined opinions in two cases subsequently reviewed by the Supreme Court. Care Act (ACA) RFRA provides that federal laws that substantially burden a person's exercise of religion are permissible only if they are the least restrictive means of furthering a compelling governmental interest. In the 2013 en banc decision in Hobby Lobby v. Sebelius , Judge Gorsuch joined the lead opinion of Judge Timothy Tymkovich and wrote a separate concurrence. In Hobby Lobby , two closely held corporations, whose owners chose to "run their business to reflect their religious values," challenged the contraceptive requirement. causes the death of a human embryo." The majority of the Tenth Circuit concluded that the ACA contraceptive coverage requirement likely created a substantial burden on the organization's free exercise rights. The Tenth Circuit deferred to the plaintiff's conception of its religious beliefs, and, viewing the dilemma posed by the contraceptive policy as a "Hobson's choice" in which the corporations and its owners could pay substantial fines for violating the requirement or "compromise their religious beliefs," concluded the policy amounted to a burden. to a substantial burden. On appeal to the Supreme Court, a five-Justice majority (including Justice Scalia) largely agreed with the Tenth Circuit's assessment and affirmed the lower court. Judge Tymkovich's opinion concluded that the existence of a wide range of exemptions to the requirement undermined the government's justifications for the policy and demonstrated that the policy was not the least restrictive means of achieving these goals. Judge Gorsuch's concurring opinion in Hobby Lobby was centrally focused on procedural matters tangential to the case. RFRA claims, did discuss the substantive claims in broader terms than the majority opinion, suggesting that the nominee may have a clear preference for accommodation in free exercise disputes. Noting that RFRA was enacted for the express purpose of "vindicating this nation's long-held aspiration to serve as a refuge of religious tolerance," Judge Gorsuch's concurrence emphasized that courts should largely defer to the assertions about the nature of religious beliefs made by those who sincerely hold these beliefs, both out of respect for religious liberty and because of the judiciary's limited competence to scrutinize such beliefs. Gorsuch emphasized that it made little difference that the burden on the plaintiffs in Hobby Lobby did not stem from the government affirmatively requiring their use of a "particular drug or device" This was because the plaintiffs had argued that the government imposed a religious burden by requiring their "personal involvement in facilitating . . . [the destruction of] a fertilized human egg that their religious faith holds impermissible," he said. As a result, Judge Gorsuch's Hobby Lobby concurrence viewed RFRA as a "tie-breaker" that Congress designed to. "override other legal mandates, including its own statutes, if and when they encroach on religious liberty," he wrote. Two years later, Judge Gorsuch joined an opinion in Little Sisters of the Poor v. Burwell that repeated many of the themes of his Hobby Lobby concurrence. The central issue was whether allowing religious entities that objected to the ACA requirement to fill out a form that would functionally require a third-party insurer to provide the coverage violates the free speech rights of religious groups. Judge Harris Hartz, joined by four other judges, dissented from the decision not to rehear a case dismissing a challenge to this government accommodation policy. Hartz's opinion criticized the panel's refusal "to acknowledge that [the plaintiff's] religious belief is that execution of the [accommodation] documents is sinful" In so doing, the dissent in Little Sisters of the Poor can be seen to have repeated many of the themes from Judge Gorsuch's Hobby Lobby concurrence by Judge Hartz. describing the majority approach as "dangerous . . . to religious liberty" because it is "not the job of the judiciary to tell people what their religious beliefs are" On appeal, the High Court agreed to hear multiple lower court decisions on this issue. In the consolidated case, Zubik v. Burwell , ordered the respective circuit courts to reconsider the cases after affording the parties time to reach a compromise that would provide contraceptive coverage without imposing the alleged burden on the challenging entities. Gorsuch has emphasized the importance of accommodating religious beliefs in other statutory free exercise challenges. For instance, in Yellowbear v. Lambert , Judge Gorsuch, writing on behalf of a three-judge panel, held that a Wyoming prison lacked a right to practice its religion. The close division of the current Court on free exercise matters may reflect the close division on the issue. The Supreme Court is expected to hear the case in the next few weeks. The case will be heard in the Supreme Court's San Francisco branch. a sufficiently compelling interest in imposing a substantial burden on the religious exercise of an inmate who was an enrolled member of the Northern Arapaho Tribe. In so doing, the nominee articulated two relatively pro-plaintiff interpretations of free exercise law. Similarly, in Abdulhaseeb v. Calbone , Judge Gorsuch joined the court in determining a claimant's sincerity. He rejected a conception of the compelling interest inquiry that would allow the government to rely on abstract interests to satisfy its burden under RLUIPA. the majority opinion and authored a concurring opinion reinstating several RLUIPA claims based on an Oklahoma prison's denial of an Islamic prisoner's request for a halal certified diet. In his concurrence, the nominee emphasized that the inmate's charge was that he was denied "all means of accessing food [that] he can eat consistent with his . . . sincerely held religious beliefs" The claim that "lies at [the] heart" of a statutory free exercise claim, he said, is that the prison "effectively forcing him to choose between remaining pious or starving" Gorsuch's concurrence in Abdulhaseeb rejected the prisoner's other claims, including the claim that the prison had violated his rights under RLUIPA merely by placing "jell-o and pudding" on the cafeteria tray. For a plaintiff "to win" under the law "takes no small effort," he said. Such laws do "not offer refuge to canny operators who seek through through," he added. The Supreme Court is expected to hear the case in the coming weeks. subterfuge to avoid laws they'd prefer to ignore. Judge Gorsuch is apt to interpret statutory free exercise laws, much like the Establishment Clause, to embrace the role of religion in society. But there are limits to how far free exercise can go, he says. The Supreme Court should be careful not to over-interpret RFRA, he writes. The court should also be wary of the effect of RFRA on religious freedom, he adds. "There are limits" to free exercise, the court should be aware of. to the degree to which he will defer to the purported interests suggested by claimants seeking to rely upon such laws. The Supreme Court has issued a number of notable opinions over the past decade respecting the First Amendment and freedom of speech. Many of the Court's recent First Amendment rulings have been closely divided, and the eight-member Court split evenly during the October 2015 term on a notable case regarding the First amendment and free speech. Some legal scholars and practitioners have described the Roberts Court as the "strongest First Amendment Supreme Court in our history" Gorsuch's work on the Tenth Circuit has broached the issue of campaign finance regulation and the First Amendment. The nominee has authored or joined a handful of opinions touching on free speech issues. Given this, if confirmed by the Senate, Judge Gorsuch could have a significant influence on the future direction of free speech law. The Supreme Court has invalidated a number of federal and state election laws at the margins. For example, in the en banc ruling in Hobby Lobby, the court invalidated the law. Gorsuch joined the majority opinion that concluded that the "logic" of Citizens United v. FEC "compelled the conclusion that the First Amendment also protects a corporation's religious expressions" A lower court's reliance on Supreme Court precedent may not necessarily signal agreement with that precedent, as noted by one of the concurring opinions in Hobby Lobby , the judge said. The opinion was part of the dissent in Sebelius.v. Hobby Lobby, a case that the Supreme Court ruled in favor of Hobby Lobby. disagreement between the members of the Court in Citizens United was more complex than whether the First Amendment protects a corporation's speech. In other words, Judge Gorsuch's vote in the 2013 en banc case may have limited significance with respect to his broader views on the constitutionality of campaign finance laws. Riddle v. Hickenlooper, a 2014 case that invalidated a Colorado law, may offer more insights as to his views on First Amendment and campaign finance regulation. The case involved whether the "asserted inclinations and advantages of corporations in corrupting officeholders" justified restricting corporate campaign expenditures. allowing major party candidates to accept twice as much in contributions per individual as independent and minor party candidates. Judge Gorsuch agreed with the majority that the Colorado law violated the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. He attempted to allay fears that the ruling "imperiled" any attempts to regulate campaign contributions, citing federal law as a nondiscriminatory model available to the State of Colorado. In so concluding, however, the concurrence broadly concluded that the law was unconstitutional. noted that the "act of contributing to political campaigns implicates a 'basic constitutional freedom," one lying "at the foundation of a free society" The nominee then observed that despite the First Amendment interests in campaign contributions, the Supreme Court "has yet to apply strict scrutiny to contribution limit challenges" Some commentators conclude that the nominee may favor subjecting campaign finance restrictions, including contribution restrictions, to the most stringent standard of review. Other legal scholars have read Judge Gorsuch's opinion in Riddle to "simply highlight the confusion he saw" on the proper level of scrutiny. , Judge Gorsuch wrote broadly about the underlying dangers of suppression of speech by government officials. When public officials feel free to wield the powers of their office as weapons against those who question their decisions, they do damage not merely to the citizen in their sights but also to the First Amendment liberties and the promise of equal treatment essential to the continuity of our democratic enterprise, he wrote. With this backdrop, the nominee rejected the county's argument that the plaintiff's tax assessment challenges did not amount to "constitutionally protected activity" Gorsuch has written or joined a number of opinions that promote the rights of the press at the expense of plaintiffs in certain state tort actions. In Bustos v. A&E Television, he said the First Amendment "extends to matters great and small, public and private" That may align him with the majority of the Roberts Court that has, in recent years, rejected the argument that the first Amendment does not protect certain "low value" speech, says Julian Zelizer, a professor at the University of Notre Dame. Judge says a prisoner who "merely conspired with" the Aryan Brotherhood could not sustain a defamation lawsuit. The First Amendment requires a plaintiff pursuing a defamation claim to prove the underlying falsehood of the statement at issue, he says. Judge Gorsuch joined a panel opinion in Cory v. Allstate Insurance , which dismissed a defamation suit against the insurance company. The decision held that the plaintiff had failed to show the History Channel's statement had a significant impact on his reputation, the judge says. Gorsuch's opinions have recognized limits to the First Amendment's speech protections. He joined opinions that dismissed privacy tort claims on First Amendment grounds. The nominee should not be viewed as a free speech absolutist, writes Julian Zelizer. He says the underlying reported events involved protected speech on matters of public concern. For more information, visit CNN.com/soulmatestories and follow us on Twitter @cnnstl and @julian Zelizer on Facebook. the First Amendment precludes defamation actions aimed at parody, even when involving a private figure on a matter of private concern. In the context of public employee speech, the nominee has authored several opinions limiting or dismissing First Amendment lawsuits brought by government employees against their employers. The speech occurred pursuant to the employees' official duties and, therefore, could be regulated by the government. With regard to challenges to zoning ordinances, he authored a concurring opinion that raised the question of whether constitutionalizing the protections for such parodies was necessary or wise. Gorsuch dissented from the denial of a petition for en banc rehearing. In so doing, he contended that the underlying panel decision interpreted the First Amendment too broadly. In a case raising issues similar to those in a case presently before the Court, Judge Gorsuch joined an opinion holding that a Utah law requiring registered sex workers to register was unconstitutional. He said it made it harder to regulate the secondary effects of adult businesses. The case is Doe v. Shurtleff, which is now before the Supreme Court. offenders to provide the government with their usernames and online identifiers for certain websites was a permissible content-neutral regulation of speech. Justice Scalia's written work and public speeches reflected distinct attitudes toward the use of contemporary foreign law and practice, ratified treaties, and international custom to inform understanding of the U.S. Constitution and federal statutes. In contrast, due in part to the nature of the Tenth Circuit's docket, Judge Gorsuch's jurisprudence offers comparatively little guidance as to his likely approach on such matters. lead him, like Justice Scalia, to eschew consideration of contemporary foreign practice as an aid to interpreting the Constitution's meaning. The Tenth Circuit docket involves few cases touching upon international law issues, and the handful of cases considered by Judge Gorsuch in this area has been unremarkable. In short, if Judge Gorsuch has any distinctive leanings with respect to questions regarding the interpretation or enforceability of international law in U.S. courts, they are not apparent. The nominee has not addressed such matters in the cases that have come before him. in his judicial writings to date. Judge Gorsuch has touched upon the Second Amendment and the constitutionality of firearms regulations briefly in his written opinions while on the Tenth Circuit. However, none of these cases purported to explore the scope of the 2nd Amendment's protections or the Supreme Court's decisions in District of Columbia v. Heller and McDonald v. City of Chicago. These writings suggest that Judge Gorsuch views the2nd Amendment as generally protecting an individual right to bear arms, a position that could be seen as consistent with the originalist approach often ascribed to him. Judge Gorsuch's references to the Second Amendment have generally appeared in cases concerned with how to construe federal criminal statutes. In a dissent from the Tenth Circuit's denial of en banc review in United States v. Games-Perez, he said gun possession is often lawful and sometimes even protected as a matter of constitutional right. The remaining mentions of firearms in Judge Gorsuch's opinions arise in contexts that do not directly raise Second Amendment claims, and could be seen to reflect other factors beyond the nominee's views about gun possession. Supreme Court nominee is a proponent of reinvigorating the non-delegation doctrine. Julian Zelizer: Judge Gorsuch has objected to what he views as Congress foisting legislative authority onto the judiciary. He says the combination of legislative and judicial functions poses a grave threat to liberty, fair notice, and equal protection. Zelizer says if elevated to the Supreme Court, Judge Gorsuch could be expected to reject "functionalist" approaches to the separation of powers."Formalist" approach is an evaluation of strict delineations of governmental powers set forth in the Constitution. Gorsuch has also taken exception to the executive branch engaging in activities he regards as judicial functions. In a pair of cases interpreting two statutory provisions, one permitting the Attorney General to grant relief from removal to aliens and the other prohibiting it, he applied—but objected to—the Supreme Court's precedent in Chevron and Brand X. These two cases, which are discussed in more detail above, generally permit agency decisions to override, he says. The Supreme Court has ruled that agency decisions can be overruled. judicial decisions where statutory ambiguity is identified. In De Niz Robles v. Lynch , Judge Gorsuch established for the majority that there is a presumption of prospectivity to agency exercises of delegated legislative authority unless Congress has clearly authorized retroactivity. In reaching this conclusion, Judge Gorsuch let it be known that, if not bound by Supreme Court precedent, the court would have thought it improbable that the Framers had envisioned that an executive branch agency could ever overrule a federal court in the first place. question, the Board of Immigration Appeals again applied its own reinterpretation of the immigration statutes retroactively. Judge Gorsuch, writing for the majority in Gutierrez-Brizuela v. Lynch , held the retroactive application invalid. He also penned a solo concurrence to take note of the "elephant in the room": [T]he fact is Chevron and Brand X permit executive bureaucracies to swallow huge amounts of core judicial and legislative power, he wrote. He wrote that to do otherwise would raise due process and equal protection concerns. Gorsuch: "Powerful and centralized authorities like today's administrative agencies . . . warrant less deference from other branches, not more" He cites to Justice Felix Frankfurter's concurrence in Youngstown Sheet & Tube Co. v. Sawyer. He dismissed more functionalist arguments in favor of a "titanic administrative state," he says. "Maybe the time has come to face the behemoth," he adds. "It's time to face it" for the first time. noting the dangers of '"unchecked disregard of the restrictions' imposed by the Constitution." Judge Gorsuch's Gutierrez-Brizuela concurrence may suggest that if he is elevated to the High Court, he may embrace a more formalist approach to separation-of-powers questions. The Supreme Court has been divided in recent years in cases involving the substantive component of the Due Process Clauses of the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments. The source for various unenumerated rights that have been recognized by the Court as constitutionally protected. right to an abortion, and the right to marry. Justice Scalia was a vocal critic of the substantive due process doctrine. While serving on the Tenth Circuit, Judge Gorsuch has authored or joined a few opinions that touch on the substantiveDue process. He regularly joined majority opinions that limited the scope of the doctrine. He dissented in cases where the Court recognized new fundamental liberty interests. The nominee's expressed views on the doctrine are arguably less apparent and certainly less voluminous than Justice Scalia's. In 2011 case, Kerns v. Bader, Judge Gorsuch dismissed the substantive due process claims brought by a plaintiff. Noting that the government's "mere collection of information" without any further public dissemination of it is a violation of due process. Judge has never squarely ruled on the right to an abortion or to marry, but his opinions do provide some insights into his views on substantive due Process rights. He has written on behalf of a divided panel in the case, in which a county sheriff had violated the plaintiff's rights to informational privacy. that information does not implicate rights to informational privacy, Judge Gorsuch dismissed the claim on qualified immunity grounds. The dissent, however, called the majority's conclusion on the privacy issue "dismaying" The dissent argued that it was "patently clear" that "individuals have a constitutional right to have their medical records kept private from law enforcement officers pursuing general investigative ends and acting in the absence of any authority to breach that privacy" Nonetheless, while acknowledging the dissent's eloquence, Judge Scalia said, "I don't think there's any reason to think that this case would go the other way" concluded that it was inappropriate to resolve the "complex" Fourteenth Amendment "questions surrounding medical records," especially in the context of a qualified immunity challenge. The second opinion—perhaps the most notable substantive due process opinion authored by Judge Gorsuch—is Browder v. City of Albuquerque. This 2015 opinion held that the plaintiffs' substantive due Process rights had been violated in thecontext of a lawsuit arising from a "terrible crash" that resulted when a police officer raced through the street. A three-judge panel upheld a district court order that declined to dismiss the substantive due process claims brought against the officer by the victims of the crash. In so holding, Judge Gorsuch broadly discussed the substantivedue process doctrine. Describing the doctrine as having a "paradoxical name" and being a "murky area" of law, he noted the view that the doctrine either misplaces the source of due process or misleads the public.city streets of Albuquerque in his police cruiser after finishing his shift. One of the victims died and the other suffered serious injuries. fundamental rights in the Due Process Clause or has no basis whatsoever in the Constitution. The Browder majority continued by explaining that the "doctrine should be applied and expanded sparingly" because of the open ended nature of substantive due process. In particular, relying on concurring opinions authored by Justices Kennedy and Scalia in a 1998 Supreme Court opinion, Judge Gorsuch then observed that "history and precedent" and the plaintiff's state of mind are critical guideposts to cabin the inquiry into the case. whether a fundamental right has been infringed under the Due Process Clause. The extensive discussion of substantive due process and the limits on the doctrine in both the majority and concurring opinions in Browder is notable. The majority decision ultimately concluded that the underlying legal questions raised by the case did not broach "any serious borderline disputes" As a result, the extensive concerns raised by Judge Gorsuch in his Browder opinions may signal the nominee's skepticism toward the application of the Doctrine in cases presenting less egregious fact patterns. extensive writings on fundamental rights and substantive due process are found not in his court opinions, but in his outside work. During the 2006 confirmation hearing for his seat on the Tenth Circuit, Judge Gorsuch stated that, while his "writings" on euthanasia and assisted suicide were, in his view, "consistent with the Supreme Court's decisions . . . and existing law," his "personal views" as expressed in his writings "have nothing to do with the case before me," he said. better than that" and "the law demands more than that." In fact, much of the book has little to do with the law. At its heart, the book explores the various ethical arguments regarding assisted suicide and euthanasia. Judge Gorsuch argues that "the intentional taking of a human life by private persons is always wrong" The book does not address "publicly authorized forms of killing like capital punishment and war," nor does it address assisted suicide or euthanasia as a medical procedure. It ultimately lodging an argument against their legalization "based on secular moral theory" seek to define what is encompassed by the term "human life" In assessing the philosophical arguments related to assisted suicide and euthanasia, the nominee addressed key legal doctrines implicating the right to die. The legal discussion in Judge Gorsuch's book raises broader questions about the substantive due process doctrine and how to assess when a fundamental right is protected by the clause. The book centers on two Supreme Court cases from 1997, Washington and D.C., that addressed assisted suicide, euthanasia and due process. v. Glucksberg and Vacco v. Quill that collectively upheld state laws that outlawed assisted suicide against substantive due process and equal protection challenges. Judge Gorsuch devotes a chapter to questions related to determining whether a right to assisted suicide can be justified by looking at past historical practices. He notes that the test is the subject of "considerable methodological disputes," including "what 'level' of historical abstraction" is needed, and "how far back" in history the test should be evaluated. The book does not expressly reject the historical test for substantive due process, nor does it attempt to resolve the debate over the test's "methodological warts" Instead, Judge Gorsuch, "seeking to apply the history test faithfully," examines the "historical record broadly in terms of time and at different levels of abstraction" He concludes that there is limited support for a historical right to assisted suicide. The book is available at www.look.com/judgegorsong and on Amazon. Gorsuch's 2006 book examines the historical test for determining which liberty interests are protected by the Due Process Clause. He also examines what he calls the "reasoned judgment" approach whereby "moral reasoning" and "critical discourse"dictate what constitutes a fundamental right. The writings of a nominee to the Supreme Court, especially those authored before the nominee became a judge, may not fully represent the nominee's current views, writes Julian Zelizer. Zelizer: If elevated to the Court, Judge Gorsuch could hear takings from the federal government over compensation claims.