The Higher Education Act of 1965 (HEA) is being considered for reauthorization. Title IV of the act authorizes the major federal student aid programs. In FY2003, the federal student loan programs provided $45.8 billion in new loans tostudents and their parents. This report discusses issues concerning theStudent loan programs that are likely to be considered during reauthorisation. The report is organized in the following manner. First it discusses the issues that may be considered when the HEA is reauthorized. provides background informationon the student loan programs and their loans. Then it provides an overview of many of the issueslikely to receive attention in the reauthorization. The federal government operates two majorStudent Loan Programs. These programs provide loansto undergraduate and graduate students and the parents of undergraduate students to help them meet the costs of postsecondary education. Under the FFEL program, loan capital is used to help students pay for their education. The WilliamD. Ford Direct Loan (DL) program is authorized by Part D of Title IV of the HEA. provided by private lenders, and the federalgovernment guarantees lenders against loss through borrower default, death, permanent disability,or, in limited instances, bankruptcy. Under the DL program, operated through the U.S. Departmentof Education, the federal government provides the loans to students and their families. The two programs rely on different sources ofcapital and different administrative structures, but essentially disburse the same set of loans. The DL program was intended to streamline the student loan deliverysystem and achieve cost savings. replace the long-standing FFEL program, the 1998 HEA amendments removed theprovisions of the law that referred to a "phase in" of the DL program. Currently both programs areauthorized and the two programs compete for student loan business. In FY2003, these programsprovided $45.8 billion in new loans to students and their parents. In that year the FFEL programprovided 8,429,000 new loans averaging about $4,009 each. The DL program provided2,937,000new loans averaging approximately $4,.075 each. to undergraduate and graduate students. The interest rates onsubsidized and unsubsidized Stafford loans adjust annually, based on a statutorily established,market-indexed, rate setting formula, and may not exceed 8.25%. To qualify for a subsidized Stafford loan, astudent must establish financial need. The federal government pays the interest on the borrower'sbehalf on the subsidized Stafford loans while the borrower is in school (on at least a half-time basis)and during grace periods and deferment periods. Consolidation loans enable borrowers to lower monthly payments by extending the repayment period. A consolidation loan may be comprised of one underlying loan or multipleunderlying loans. Consolidation loans afford borrowers the opportunity to pursue a more favorable long term interestrate through locking in a fixed interest rate on their student loans, based on the weighted average ofthe interest rates in effect on the loans being consolidated rounded up to the nearest one-eighth.not exceed 9%. The average interest rate for a consolidation loan is 1.9%. of1%, capped at 8.25%. (4) It is generally thecase that enhancements to borrower benefits increase federal subsidy costs. For instance, in theFFEL program, where the government insures and subsidizes loans made by private lenders, federalsubsidy costs increase when less revenue is derived from borrower fees and when interest subsidypayments to lenders are increased. (5) There are underlying tensions inherent in the current design of the loan programs that affect many of the reauthorization issues considered in this report. ensures they receive the difference between the statutorily set borrower rate and a fair market rate. In the DL program,where the government acts as lender, federal subsidy costs are increased when borrower fees orrepayment revenues paid to the government are reduced. Another tension stems from dissimilarities in FFEL and DL program loan terms andconditions. The two programs disburse the same set of loans, but terms and conditions are notperfectly parallel across the two programs. Each program has its supporters. As of July 2006, new Stafford and PLUS loans will carry fixed interest rates. The desirability of thisplanned switch has been the subject of considerable debate. Student loan interest rates were a focal issue in the 1998 reauthorization. The statutory ratesetting formulas were used to establish rates for loans disbursed from July 1, 1998 through June 30, 2006. They were initially enacted in June 1998 and extended in the HEA amendments of June 2000. They are used to set rates for Stafford and Plus loans. The current rate setting formulas were adopted as a result of deliberations that centered on replacing so called "comparable maturity rates" that were set to take effect July 1, 1998. The formula for calculating interest rates on Stafford loans is based on the 91-day Treasury bill rate plus 1.7% while the borrower is in school. Stafford rates are capped at 8.25%. The formula in effect for calculatingInterest rates on PLUS loans isbased on the 90-day treasury bill rate and 3.1% PLUS rates are caps at 9%. rate-setting formula was initially enacted in the Student Loan Reform Act of 1993. The formula afforded the Secretary of Education a great deal of latitude in establishing borrower rates. The decision to move toward a comparable maturity rate was made in 1993 within thecontext of the assumption that the DL program would be phased in over a series of years and eventually replace the guaranteed loan system. (7) In years following the enactment of the SLRA,Congressional support emerged for sustaining both loan programs and, within this context,considerable attention was devoted to replacing the comparable maturity. rate structure before it tookeffect. This led to the adoption of the rate setting formulas currently in effect. However, due to costconsiderations under prevailing budget scoring rules, the HEA amendments of 1998 were only able to install the current formula until June 30, 2003. The interest rate issue was revisited in 2002 with the passage of P.L. 107-139. This measureextended the existing variable rate setting formula through June 30,. 2006. Additionally, it installedfixed interest rates of 6.8% for Stafford loans and 7.9% for PLUS loans disbursed thereafter. It is likely that student loan interest rates will be hotly debated. Part of the debate is likely to focus on enhancing or preserving borrower benefits. Several proposals have beenforwarded recently that call for reductions in borrower fees. In FY2003,borrower origination fees generated approximately $1.3 billion in revenue across the two programs. To limit the federal government'ssubsidy costs, and to limit the amount of debt incurred by borrowers, annual and aggregate Stafford loan caps have been established. finance their studies. In general, those in favor of expanding loan limits suggest loan limits have not kept pace withtuition increases and thus constrain students' ability to finance their education. Those opposed suggest it is undesirable for students to incurmore debt, and question whether the expansion of borrowing opportunities will have any positiveeffect on access, choice or persistence. Also at issue arefederal subsidy costs, because as borrowing opportunities are expanded so are federal subsidy costs. Repayment Plans. Issues concerning repaymentplans that surface with some regularity relate to differences All FFEL borrowers are allowed to choose among standard, graduated, and income sensitiverepayment plans. For new borrowers on or after October 7, 1998, who accumulate (after such date)outstanding loans totaling more than $30,000, a fourth repayment option is available -- an extended repayment plan. All DL borrowers are able to choose between standard and graduated repayment plans. In addition, all DL borrowers can choose extended repayments of up to five years. For more information on the FFEL and DL programs, visit the FFel website. repayment (thereare no restrictions similar to those in FFEL) Income contingent repayment (as opposed to incomesensitive repayment) is available to all DL unsubsidized and subsidized Stafford borrowers. In FFEL, all repayment plans offer a 10-year repayment term with the exception of extended repayment under which repayment must occur within a time period not toexceed 25 years. In DL, standard repayment offers a10-year term. Under the income contingent repayment plan, repayment must be made over a period of time not to exceed 25years. periods for extended and graduated repayment plans vary with the size of the loan. It is likely that some attention may be devoted to adopting more comparable repaymentoptions across the two programs. Some interest exists in adding a new "interest only"repayment option. Under such an option, a borrower would have low "interest-only" payments intheir initial years after graduation, but would also delay the point at which they begin paying downloan principal. In general, the debate pertaining to the fixed rate on consolidation loans is more about interest rates. benefit centers on its cost. As the consolidation loan interest rate formula has been modified byCongress, consolidation loans have evolved into a refinance benefit as well. The current consolidation loaninterest rate formula affords borrowers the opportunity tosecure a fixed rate equal to the weighted average interest rate on the loans at the time of origination. It also enables a borrower to pursue a better interest rate than the current weighted averageinterest rate on loans at origination of $1.5 million. It was originally intended to simplify repayment for borrowers and simplify loan repayments. average of the rates in effect on underlying (variable rate)loans being consolidated rounded up to the nearest one eighth of 1%. In the recent low interest rateenvironment consolidation volume has grown dramatically. Over the last two years, in which very lowrates have been available, an estimated $63 billion in loan volume has been taken out. This has enabled a largenumber of borrowers to secure a valuable refinance benefit. Currently, a borrower who consolidateswhile in the grace period can secure a 2.88% interest rate. consolidated. Whenborrowers exercise their option to lock in low rates permanently the federal government is potentiallyexposed to high subsidy costs. In the FFEL program, this is so because the government hasguaranteed the lenders a market rate of return. Those in favor of the existing fixed rate setting formula assert that in the current low interestrate environment the fixed rate amounts to a valuable benefit to borrowers. At a time of low interest rates, fixed rates are a good thing. Proponents of the existing rate setting formulas say it provides important repayment relief and sends a signal to students and potentialstudents that repayment will be manageable. Opponents say eliminating the opportunity to lock in a fixed rate would be tantamount to taking away a benefit that was available when borrowers received their Stafford loans. The removal of this benefit in a low interest environment would amount to dropping a large share of the interest subsidy currently available to borrowers. Those opposed to sustaining theexisting rate setting formula suggest it would be detrimental to the economy. offers an overlygenerous borrower benefit that is costly to the point of placing future aid in jeopardy. They alsoquestion whether it is necessary to offer a refinance benefit when the rate is already subsidized onStafford loans. Further they question whether a benefit received in the years after postsecondaryschooling contributes in any way to students' postsecondary access, persistence, or choice. They notethe repayment period subsidy is provided without regard to need, over a lengthy period potentiallyextending up to 30 years beyond schooling, and disproportionately benefits students who attendedfour-year private institutions and/or graduate programs. an extension of the debate on the fixed rate benefit. Borrowers who have lockedin fixed rates through consolidation in high interest periods sometimes miss out on moreadvantageous variable rates. Some borrowers fare worse under the high fixed ratesthey lock in. This raises concern, particularly with regard to those using consolidation for repaymentrelief (i.e., extended repayment) One way to address this situation is through offering borrowers borrowers fixed rates on variable-rate loans instead offixed rates on fixed rates. Multiple refinanceopportunities (i.e., offering borrowers with relatively high fixed rates the prospect of securing abetter rate) Any added interest benefit for a borrower, however, would likely expand federal subsidycosts. Another way to address this is to eliminate consolidation loans' fixed rate benefit. Thiswould prevent borrowers from locking in disadvantageous rates in the future, but would not offerassistance to those having already done so. (11) A complex set of provisions has been enacted to regulate competition for consolidation loan refinance business among loan holders within the FFEL program. a consolidation loan through FFELlenders, or that they are unable to secure a FFEL consolidation loan with income sensitive repaymentterms (deemed to be acceptable by the borrower) DL borrowers may pursue consolidation loans within the DL program. It is likely that proposals calling for the elimination of provisions that constrain borrowers'choice among consolidators will receive consideration during reauthorization. Some FFEL lenders object to making a change in this area, asserting they offersome up front discounts on Stafford and PLUS loans based on the assumption they will be able tohold the loan over its life. Borrowers with less than $7,500 in outstanding loans seeking toconsolidate in FFEL may receive a maximum repayment term of 10 years. Married persons, each of whom has eligible loans, are eligible for a joint consolidation loan. Borrowers can lockin as permanent an in-school rate which is lower than the repayment rate (T-bill + 1.7% as opposed to T-bill -2.3%). This affords borrowers greater opportunity to lock in as permanent favorablevariable rates in effect in years when the borrowers are still in school. one of the borrowers mustmeet the full set of individual eligibility requirements for a new consolidation loan. However, eachagrees to become jointly and severally liable for repayment of the note regardless of any changes inmarital status. It is likely that proposals to eliminate joint consolidations will receive consideration in the reauthorization. While joint consolidation can simplify repayment for a married couple, concerns have beenraised in recent years about disadvantages that may be associated with joint consolidation for someborrowers. For instance, borrowers with a joint consolidation loan must both meet the requirementsfor a deferment or forbearance in order to receive those benefits. Had the loans not been joined, eachborrower could qualify for these benefits based upon their own status. Concerns have been raised about complications that may ensue for unsuccessful marriages given that both partiesagree to be liable for the total repayment of the joint consolidation loan. Also, in instances involving a spouse who becomes permanently disabled, a disability discharge is provided for that spouse but each spouse remains liable for repayment of remaining loan amount. Guaranty agenciesadminister the federal government's loan guarantee. The role guarantors play within the FFELprogram has evolved a good deal since the program's inception. Initially, the federal governmentintended to encourage the growth of state loan insurance programs. Over time the federalgovernment assumed the role of providing the insurance and now guaranty agencies service the federal guarantee and perform various program administrative tasks. Changes adopted during the 1998 reauthorization focused on strengthening therelationship between revenues and activities, and improving efficiency. The 1998 amendments adopted a "risk-based" approach to the FFEL program, with the aim of making it more efficient. sharing" approach. Under this approach, uses ofreserves are restricted, and guarantors are afforded flexibility in the use of their operating funds. There is a clearer distinction between reserves and operating funds, and clearer direction about wherevarious revenue streams are to be deposited -- and ultimately about how these sources of revenueare to be used. It is likely that some attention will be devoted to the issue of how the federal government will manage its reserves in the event of an economic downturn in the U.S. solvency of Federal Funds (i.e., locallyheld federal reserve funds) and the size of Operating Funds -- which can be used to support agencyoperations and also for discretionary student financial aid expenditures. Some concerns have been raised aboutshrinking reserves and robust Operating Funds. Some proposals have already called for mandatinginsurance premiums to strengthen reserves. Some observers have suggested guarantor fees for loancollections and defaulted loan rehabilitation work may be too high thus inflating operating funds. loan subsidy known as a special allowance payment(SAP) The SAP amount is determined on a quarterly basis by a statutory formula which is tied to a financial index. The SAP is designed to compensate lenders for the difference between the below-market,statutorily set interest rate charged to borrowers and a market set interest rates that is intended as fairmarket compensation on the loan asset. In some instances lenders receive interest income from borrowers exceeding the amountcalled for by the SAP calculation. The amount of income lenders receive above the government SAPrate is often called "floor income" The SAP affords lenders necessary protection in high interest environments during which thestatutorily established borrower rate may provide lenders insufficient below-market rate returns. Some argue that since the SAP is designed to approximate fair market compensation it isunnecessary to compensate lenders at levels that exceed the SAP rate. It is often noted that in anearlier period, "excess interest provisions" were adopted that essentially installed the SAP in the system. SAP rate as thesole lender reimbursement rate for loans. Some FFEL program loans provide lenders a guaranteed interest rate of atleast 9.5% (hereafter, these loans are referred to as 9. 5% floor loans). This guarantee is provided inthe SAP formula applied to these loans, which requires the federal government to supplementborrower interest payments. Several recent proposals have called for reducing federalsubsidy costs by establishing the SAP rate asThe SAP rate is the sole lender reimbursed rate. for lenders. There seems to bebroad Congressional support for curbing this rate guarantee for future loans. The legislativedevelopments that led to the enactment of the guarantee are briefly described below. As part of an effort to ensure the FFEL program would be fully capitalized in the program'searly years, provisions that served to encourage the issuance of tax-exempt student loan bonds were included in the Tax Reform Act of 1976. Such bonds are exempt from federal taxation, and are usedby states to finance below market interest rate loans for students. state authorities are able to raise "low cost"funds, and then re-lend the funds at higher rates. The 1980 HEA amendmentstook steps to curb the profitability of tax-exempt loans by reducing by half the SAP rate on loans. The amendments also established minimum SAPs,for loans disbursed on or after October 1, 1980, which ensure a minimum return of $1,000,000. The student bond volume began to grow rapidly, andconcerns about the profits of tax exempt student loans surfaced. 9.5% on theseloans. (16) The discourse on the profitability of tax-exempt student loans continued through the 1980son into the early 1990s. The Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1993 ( P.L. 103-66 ) contained a provision eliminating the floor on tax- exempt loans supported through tax- exempted financing forissuances on or after October 1, 1993. These loans were afforded the same SAP rates as wereavailable for taxable loans. 9.5% floor loans comprise a relatively small percentage of all outstanding loans. They have accounted for a very large proportion of federal SAP subsidies. In recent years lenders havebeen using a variety of refinancing techniques, and also invested earnings from existing 9. 5% floorloans to make or purchase new ones. There appear to be a number of ways for banks to finance 9.5%, including by using the proceeds from the sale of existing loans and by using earnings from new loans. There is some debate about how best to phase out theguarantee for nonprofit lenders. The Taxpayer-Teacher Protection Act of 2004 ( P.L. 108-409 );signed October 30, 2004, curbs growth in 9.5% loans, for one year. It does not curtail the guaranteeon new loans stemming from "recycling"of proceeds from outstanding 9. 5% loans. These loans were issued on orafter October 1, 1980 and prior toOctober 1, 1993. A phase out of the 9.5% guarantee would produce savings in mandatory spending. Thesesavings could be used to offset new expenditures. Proceeds from the sale of the bank would be used for new 9.4% loans. The proceeds from the sales of the Bank of Canada’s stake in the Bank for International Settlements (BOCS) would also be used as a source of funding for the Bank. The BOCS is a joint venture between the BSC and the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (BRC).