The IG Act created independent IG offices at 30 major departments and agencies with IGs appointed by the President, confirmed by the Senate. In 1988, the IG Act was amended to establish additional IG offices located in 33 DFEs defined by the act. The presidentially appointed IGs and the DFE IGs reported to us total budget authority for fiscal year 2010 of about $2.2 billion. Although not in the scope of our review, there are 10 IGs established by other statutes with provisions similar to those in the IG act. GAO obtained information on the accomplishments of the IGs as reported to the IG Council for fiscal year 2009. We also obtained information reported by the Recovery Board on its mission and accomplishments in providing oversight of Recovery Act funds. The IGs reported pay that was at the specified levels required by the Reform Act for IGs appointed by the President and consistent with those of other senior- level officials as required for DFE IGs. We believe that the information and data obtained, and the analysis conducted, provide a reasonable basis for any findings and conclusions. and 2010. Only one, a presidentially appointed IG, had used the 7-day letter during this time frame. On May 6, 2009, the IG delivered a report to the acting head under the IG Act provisions for a 7- day letter. The IG’s report gained the interest of congressional members and the issues were resolved by the President. The report was provided to the chairmen of numerous congressional committees on May 12, 2009. It was within the7-day time frame for the IG to deliver the report. Generally, issues have been resolved more informally before getting to the point of using a 7-day letter. Provisions of the Dodd-Frank Act amending the IG Act are intended to provide an additional degree of oversight. In 1999 we reported that no IGs had used the 7- day letter during the period of January 1990 through April 1998. In 1988, the House Committee on Government Operations in 1988 found that the IGs viewed the use of the 7 day letter as a last resort to force appropriate action by the agency. The Dodd-Frank Act requires two-thirds of the members of these DFE boards and commissions for the removal or transfer of their IGs. Twenty-six of the 33 DFE IGs are in DFEs with boards or commissions. Of these 26 IGs, 14 reported that the act’s provision that the head of the DFE with a board or commission is no longer subject to the judgment of a single individual was not applied to them. The act also requires the written concurrence of two- thirds of the member of these boards. designating the boards and commissions as the DFE heads enhances their independence, and 20 responded that their independence is enhanced by requiring a two-thirds majority for their removal. A smaller number of affected IGs stated that these provisions had no effect on their independence. One DFE IG affected by the provisions did not respond to these survey questions. Also, a former D FE IG stated that reporting to his commission would reduce his independence, according to the survey. The survey was carried out by the European Commission. because the commission has both federal and state members. The current IG who took office during our review stated that the primary concern is how nonfederal members would exercise their authority over a federal IG. The Reform Act amended the IG Act to require that IG budget requests include certain information and be separately identified in the President’s budget submission to the Congress. In addition, along with the separately identified IG budgets, the IGs may include comments with respect to the budget if the amount of the IG budget submitted by the agency or the President would substantially inhibit. the IG from performing the duties of the office. These budget provisions are intended to help ensure adequate funding and additional independence of IG budgets. One presidentially appointed IG office was newly established and not included in the full fiscal year 2011 budget process. However another IG subject to these budget provisions was not included. The fiscal year2011 budget included amounts for 28 of the 30 presidentiallyappointed IGs. It did not include amounts for one IG that was not part of the full budget process, however. requirements did not have a specific budget amount separately disclosed in the President’s budget. Only 7 of the 33 DFE IGs had specific budget amounts for the fiscal year 2011 budget. There were four newly established D FE IGs that were not part of the full fiscal year2011 budget process. The President's budget did not contain specified budgets for the newly established IGs. Only 1 IG commented that the budget would substantially inhibit the IG from performing the duties of the office.. 22 remaining DFE IGs subject to these requirements. We notified the IG Council that most of the D FE IGs and one presidentially appointed IG did not have separate budget amounts included in the President’s budget submission to the Congress. The IG Council has responded that it will review and assess this matter and, if necessary, work with congressional and administration officials to resolve this issue. The IGs’ effectiveness was reflected in a range of reported accomplishments, such as potential dollars to be saved by the government. effectiveness was demonstrated in their efforts to help prevent fraud, waste, and abuse. For example, IGs in agencies receiving Recovery Act funds have reported providing oversight in the areas of establishing and maintaining controls to help ensure the funds are used properly. Also, the IGs’ effectiveness was demonstrated by their reporting on oversight of management challenges identified at their agencies. In their annual report to the President, the IG Act identified billions of dollars in savings and cost recoveries and other accomplishments resulting from their work in fiscal year 2009. fiscal year 2009, these IGs identified $43.3 billion in potential savings from audits and investigations. Over 5,900 criminal actions, 1,100 civil actions, 4,460 suspensions or debarments, and over 6,100 indictments resulted from their work. Based on this information, the potential dollar savings reported by these IGS represent a return on investment of approximately $18 for every IG dollar spent. In addition to measurable accomplishments, IGs also reported actions taken to prevent problems within their agencies. the IGs assisted in the oversight of expenditures authorized by the Recovery Act by reporting on preventive measures taken to help reduce the vulnerability of Recovery Act disbursements to fraud, waste, and abuse. The Recovery Act established the Recovery Board whose members include 12 IGs and an additional IG as the chair, to coordinate and conduct oversight of funds distributed under the act in order to prevent fraud and waste. It requires IG reviews of concerns raised by the public about investments of stimulus funds and provides IGs the authority to examine records. fraud, waste, and abuse. In addition, the board is charged under the act with establishing and maintaining a user friendly website to foster greater accountability and transparency in the use of Recovery Act funds. To help prevent fraud and other potential wrongdoing, the IGs offered training to federal, state, and local employees, as well as contractors, private entities, and award recipients. The IGs’ training was intended to improve awareness of the legal and administrative requirements of the Recovery Act programs. As of June 2011, the Recovery Board received over 7,000 complaints of wrongdoing associated with Recovery. The Recovery Board reported that IGs have provided over 2,000 training sessions to almost 139,000 individuals on the requirements of Recovery Act programs. The identification of management challenges reported annually by federal agencies is key to focusing on effective IG oversight, the Recovery Board said. The report said IGs opened over 1,500 investigations, and completed over 1,.400 reviews of activities intended to improve the use of Recovery. Act funds. In addition, the report said, IGs had provided over 1.5 million training sessions on how to prevent and report fraud. management challenges by the IGs began in 1997. Congressional leaders asked IGs to identify the 10 most serious management problems in their respective agencies. This request began a yearly process that continues as a result of the Reports Consolidation Act of 2000. Not all agencies with IGs have requirements to report management challenges. Fifty-four of the IGS we surveyed reported having certain responsibilities for certain management challenges in their agencies. The report was compiled by the Center for Management and Budget at the University of Maryland. 27 of the IGs appointed by the President and 27 of the DFE IGs reported their agencies’ management challenges. Most of the 203 management challenges they reported for fiscal year 2010 focused on issues specific to their agencies' missions and performance management. For example, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration’s IG reported that major changes to the direction of the agency were needed to make the agency more efficient, effective and effective. The responses from the IGS appointed by. the President show that most of the203 management challenges that they. reported for Fiscal Year 2010 were related to their missions. Department of Health and Human Services IG cited the management challenges associated with delivery of the nation’s health care. The other management challenges addressed by the IGs relate to information technology, procurement, financial management, and human resources. In addition to providing oversight coverage of management challenges, the presidential IGs issued reports that addressed about 93 percent of themanagement challenges identified. These reports contained recommendations for improving the weaknesses specified by theManagement challenges. For example, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation IG recommended strengthening specific controls over managing the space program. closing process for failed financial institutions which is a key aspect of FDIC’s mission regarding insured depository institutions. Also, the Social Security Administration IG identified transparency and accountability issues as an agency management challenge. The DFE IGs reported 124 management challenges for fiscal year 2010, with a focus on their agencies’ missions, information technology, and performance management. For example, the Farm Credit Administration's IG reported management challenges related to the safety, soundness, and mission accomplishment of the Farm credit System. was often identified as a management challenge. The performance management issues the DFE IGs identified as management challenges included timely implementation of IG recommendations by the Peace Corps. Concerns over internal controls, improper payments, and the security of federal property were also included in the “other’s” category. In addition, the D FE IGs issued reports that addressed almost 90 percent of the management challenges identified and addressed. The report was released on Tuesday. It was compiled by the Federal Maritime Commission, the National Labor Relations Board and the National Archives and Records Administration. contained recommendations for corrective actions. For example, the Farm Credit Administration IG assessed the agency’s readiness to take enforcement actions related to its mission. The 62 federal IGs responding to our survey reported information on their expertise and qualifications. The IGs’ information showed a wide range of backgrounds, skills, and professional certifications relevant to their work consistent with the areas of demonstrated experience specified by the IG Act. The Postal Service IG provided recommendations to improve the efficiency of postal operations related to performance management in sorting the mail. Figure 3 summarizes the background experiences of the 62 IGs who responded to our survey. Most of the IGs reported having degrees in areas that are relevant to performing in an IG position. Additional degrees were reported by both presidential and DFE IGs in areas of criminal justice, investigations, law enforcement; management analysis; and public administration. Other academic degrees reported by presidential and IGs included mathematics, science, sociology, education, psychology, and English. With respect to academic degrees, we also obtained information on the academic degrees obtained by the62 IGs. professional certifications, 6 IGs appointed by the President reported having professional certifications. 28 DFE IGs reported they possessed at least one professional certification related to their IG responsibilities. For the presidential IGs, 2 were certified fraud examiners, 1 reported being a certified internal auditor. 6 reported they are certified public accountants and 6 reported that they were certified internal auditors. Additional certifications reported by the D FE IGs include 6 certified government financial managers, 4 fraud examiner, 3 certified information managers and 2 had certifications in additional separate areas. systems auditors, and 7 with other certifications such as a certified government auditing professional. We received comments from the IG Council (reprinted in app. V), on September 13, 2011. The council commented that the draft provided useful information on the independence, activities, and accomplishments of the federal inspectors general. We also received, and incorporated as appropriate, technical comments from several IG staff members, including a certified information officer and a certified inspector general. (See fig. 5.) We will send copies of this report to members of the IG Council. We will also send copies to the Chairman and the Ranking Member of the Senate Committee on Finance. If you have any questions or would like to discuss this report, please contact me at (202) 512-8486 or raglands@gao.gov. Contact points for our Offices of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of the report. The full report can be found at: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/29/politics/congress/gfo-survey. IGs established by the IG Act of 1978, as amended, with appointment by the President and Senate confirmation. The Department of State IG provides oversight of the Broadcasting Board of Governors, which is a designed federal entity. The IG is a member of the Recovery Accountability and Transparency Board. In addition to the contact named above, Jackson W. Hufnagle, Assistant Director; Jacquelyn Hamilton; Werner F. Miranda Hernandez; Rebecca Shea; and Clarence A. Whitt made key contributions to this report.