MRAPs are a family of vehicles with a "V"-shaped hull and armor plating designed to provide protection against mines and improvised explosive devices (IEDs) The Army and Marines first employed MRAPs in limited numbers in Iraq and Afghanistan in 2003, primarily for route clearance and explosive ordnance disposal (EOD) operations. As of July 21, 2011, 14,749 MR APs had been delivered to Afghanistan, including 6,980 M-ATVs. MRAP-All Terrain Vehicle (M-ATV) designed to better handle the rugged terrain of Afghanistan. DOD reportedly concluded a $245 million dollar contract with Oshkosh to acquire 5,100 sets of armor. Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology & Logistics Ashton Carter supposedly intends to outfit all of the almost 7,000 M-ATVs in Afghanistan with these armor kits. There are concerns that additional armor might have an adverse impact on vehicle mobility, which was the prime consideration for the development of the M- ATV. Their current classified capability. While additional armor and interior improvements could improve M-atV survivability up to a point. Congress appropriated $38.346 billion for all versions of the MRAP. The full FY2011 DOD budget request of $3.4 billion was authorized by the Ike Skelton National Defense Authorization Act for FY2011 ( P.L. 111-383 ). In the President's FY2012 DOD budget proposal, there was no request for procurement funds for the MR AP program. Citing an operational requirement for 27,344 MRAPS to support CENTCOM operations, DOD requested $3,195 for theMRAP vehicle program for FY2012. The House and Senate Armed Services Committees recommended fully funding the FY2012 OCO budget request. As previously noted, many older MRAPs shipped to Afghanistan are reportedly not being used because their size and weight severely limit their effectiveness. If a large number of MRAPS are, in fact, not being use, the budget request could be in jeopardy. The House Committee on Appropriations recommended fully Funding the FY 2012 OCO Budget request. The FY2012 budget request includes $.765 billion for survivability and mobility upgrades; and $.03 billion for automotive and ballistic testing. Pentagon agreed to loan 300 MRAPs in Afghanistan for one year to 15 allied nations currently. If these vehicles are not being used, is there a better use for them elsewhere or are they to be left in country after the eventual departure of U.S. forces? Some say the vehicles were shipped to Afghanistan, as some say, for symbolic as opposed to operational reasons and, if so, what is the total cost for these unused vehicles to be shipped and maintained in theater? About 85 MRAPs are already out on loan to Poland, Romania, Georgia, and the Czech Republic. All countries that are loaned MR APs can request an extension on the loan and the borrowing countries are responsible for the costs associated with maintaining these vehicles. The Government Accountability Office (GAO) says the loans could help to reduce allied casualties and help to recoup some of the associated procurement costs of the vehicles. In August 2009 briefings to the House Armed Services Committee Air and Land Forces, and Seapower and Expeditionary Forces Subcommittees, the GAO said that the loans would help reduce casualties in Afghanistan. noted that "the introduction of MRAP, M-ATV and eventually the JLTV creates a potential risk of unplanned overlap in capabilities," a risk that needs to be managed. Defense officials have also been asked if there is a need for the MRAP/M-ATVs and JL TV programs, as these programs share as many as 250 requirements. Some analysts question the need for three distinct tactical wheeled vehicle programs, particularly in light of anticipated defense budget cuts. look for "the next best thing" in terms of tactical wheeled vehicles instead of committing to the M-ATV and JLTV programs. They could run the risk of significant redundancies and not being able to afford recapitalizing and replacing the HMMWV fleet. Substituting MRAPs whenever operationally feasible might be a more timely and cost-effective option as opposed to DOD's plans to arbitrarily uparmor approximately 7,000 M- ATVs. The use of larger and more lethal IEDs by Afghan insurgents has necessitated adding additional armor to M-atVs.