Calls to reform the UN began soon after its creation in 1945. Despite cycles of reform, UN member states continue to have concerns about inefficient management operations. The United States, through the Department of State in Washington, D.C., and the U.S. Mission to the United Nations in New York, continues to advocate reform of UN management processes. In July 1997, the Secretary-General proposed a broad reform agenda to transform the UN. The UN is the largest contributor of 192 member states. In May 2000, we reported that while the Secretary-General had substantially reorganized the Secretariat’s leadership and structure, he had not yet completed reforms in human resource management and planning and budgeting. In September 2002, to encourage the full implementation of the 1997 reforms, he released a second set of reform initiatives, some expanding on those introduced in 1997 and others reflecting new priorities. In February 2004, we. reported that 60 percent of the 88 reform initiatives in the 1997 agenda and 38 percent of. the 66 initiatives in the 2002 agenda were in place. In 2004 and 2005, a series of UN and expert task force reports recommended a comprehensive reform of UN management and the UN human rights apparatus. In September 2005, world leaders gathered at the UN World Summit in New York to discuss global issues such as UN reform, development, and human rights. The outcome document from the World Summit, endorsed by all members of the UN, outlines broad UN reform efforts in areas such as oversight and accountability. In April 2006, we reported on weaknesses in the UN’s oversight and procurement systems. The document also called for the Secretary-General to submit proposals for implementing reforms to improve management functions of the Secretariat. We found that UN funding arrangements constrained the ability of the Office of Internal Oversight Services (OIOS) to operate independently and direct resources toward high-risk areas as needed. In addition, we found serious weaknesses in procurement internal controls. Specifically, the UN lacked an effective organizational structure for managing procurement. In October 2006, we reported slow progress in five key UN management reform areas. Numerous reform proposals were either awaiting General Assembly review or had been recently approved. Many of the proposed or approved reforms lacked an implementation plan with time frames and cost estimates for the goals stated in the 2005 outcome document. We also identified several factors that could affect the UN’s ability to fully implement the goals of its reform programs. The UN had not adopted specific ethics guidance. It had not made a commitment to improving its procurement workforce. The UN has taken steps to improve organizational ethics since the fall of 2006. In the past year, the ethics office has hired a permanent director and additional staff and has developed and provided ethics standards, training, and guidance. The office has begun to enforce a whistleblower protection policy, but concerns have been raised about the policy’s lack of jurisdiction over UN funds and programs. The UN ethics office had made some progress in developing and circulating ethics standards and guidance and had begun to develop a systemwide code of ethics. The UN has made substantial progress in enforcing a whistleblower protection policy. The ethics office has begun receiving complaints of retaliation, and several concerns have arisen during the handling of cases. Between August 1, 2006, and July 31, 2007, the ethics office received 52 complaints of whistleblower retaliation. The office was copied on six complaints that were primarily addressed to other offices or departments in the UN. In these instances, the office keeps track of and follows up on any pending action by other offices. UN and State officials have raised concerns regarding the UN’s whistleblower protection Policy. The success of the UN’s whistleblower protection policy could be, in part, dependent on successful reform of the internal justice system. Some UN staff members might not trust the current system to be fair or impartial and, consequently, might not come forward with claims of retaliation. In its August 2007 annual activities report, the ethics office expressed a concern that it had not had an opportunity to provide input into its role in the proposed new internal Justice system. The Government Accountability Project is a non-profit public interest group. UN and State officials told us another concern about the whistleblower protection policy is its lack of jurisdiction over UN funds and programs. In August 2007, after initially reviewing a whistleblower retaliation case of an employee at the UN Development Program, the ethics office and the Office of Legal and Procurement Services concluded that the UN’s whistleblower Protection policy applies only to employees directly under the Secretary-General. The Government Accountability Project has criticized the effectiveness of the current UN whistleblower protectionpolicy. In his August 2007 report on the activities of the ethics. office, the secretary-general recommended that the General Assembly consider broadening. the scope of the office. The UN has made some progress in collecting and analyzing financial disclosure forms for 2005 and 2006. Financial disclosure forms have been collected from UN staff members, and a private contractor has begun to review them. The primary purpose of the financial disclosure program is to identify potential conflicts of interest arising from staff members’ financial holdings, private affiliations, or outside activities. About 1,700 staff members were required to file financial disclosure or about 1,200 were asked to provide information on their personal finances. declaration of interest statements for 2005. About 98 percent of staff complied, and the remaining 2 percent were referred to the Office of Human Resources Management for disciplinary action. A total of 2,548 staff members were required to file forms for 2006. The office reported that the increase in staff required to filing likely reflects an increased awareness of the program by the heads of departments and their staff members. In addition, as a confidence-building measure, the current UN Secretary-General and Deputy Secretary- General voluntarily made their recent financial disclosure forms public. a private contractor and analyzed to determine any potential conflicts of interest between the staff members’ confidentially disclosed private interests and their official duties and responsibilities. In May 2007, the contractor identified potential conflicts. of interest in 17 of the cases reviewed, or about 1 percent. Of these cases, 14 staff members accepted the advice of the private contractor to address the potential conflict and 3 cases were referred to the ethics office for final resolution. The 2006 review is not yet complete. The deadline for submitting forms for 2006 was delayed until May. A private contractor developed an online e-filing system in liaison with the ethics office to simplify and expedite filing requirements. The ethics office plans to review the online financial disclosure form and accompanying guidelines in consultation with other UN offices to decide whether modifications need to be made. The process for the 2006 review was ongoing, and, as a result, the compliance rate was not finalized as of September 2007, according to the UN ethics office. The online financial Disclosure Form is available online at www.un.org.uk.  Steps have been taken to improve UN oversight capabilities. Member states established an Independent Audit Advisory Committee (IAAC) in June 2007. The committee is not expected to be operational until January 2008. UN funding arrangements continue to constrain OIOS’s ability to audit high-risk areas. The General Assembly has not authorized OIos’S financial and operational independence. In June 2007, member states established IAAC to provide an external, independent assessment ofUN oversight capabilities based on best practices in the private sector as well as the experiences of other international institutions. 5 individuals, preferably from a pool of at least 10 candidates proposed by member states, based on regional and geographical representation and selected by the General Assembly. The guidelines and requirements represent a compromise among the member states. Member states disagreed on some of the initially proposed responsibilities of IAAC. The five members of the newly created IAAC were elected in November 2007, and the committee is expected to be operational in January 2008. OIOS has made progress in reducing its range of functions and improving the capacity of its evaluations and inspections sections. been made in strengthening the procedures for its procurement staff and suppliers, developing a comprehensive training program for procurement staff, and developing a risk management framework. However, the UN has made little or no progress in establishing an independent bid protest system and creating a lead agency concept for procurements. In addition, since our October 2006 report, other organizational issues have arisen that may affect the UN’s procurement reform efforts. Progress on UN procurement reform is shown in the UN's procurement reform report from October 2006. The UN Secretariat has made some progress in strengthening the operating procedures for its procurement staff and suppliers. In December 2006, the Secretariat issued a bulletin on postemployment restrictions for former UN staff involved in procurement. The bulletin was issued following several incidents in recent years in which UN officials and former officials were involved in unethical and improper procurement activities. Former UN staff members, for 1 year following UN employment, are prohibited from accepting employment or compensation from any UN contractor. For 2 years, they are prohibited to act on behalf of UN contractors. A proposal to increase the minimum threshold for contracts required to be reviewed by the Headquarters Committee on Contracts from $200,000 to $500,000 has not been approved. The UN also issued, in May 2007, a revised supplier code of conduct. The code requires that suppliers are responsible for adhering to the postemployment restrictions by not employing former UN staff members for at least 1 year following a staff member’s separation from the UN. OIOS previously recommended that the threshold be increased, and, according to Procurement. The UN Procurement Division has made some progress in developing a comprehensive training program. The program is not expected to be formally in place until early 2008. The training is part of a development plan to provide a career path for procurement staff. Those who complete the training will be eligible to be certified by internationally recognized procurement institutions. In addition, according to UN procurement officials, all procurement staff will be trained in contracting, acquisition, and other specialized subjects. It is expected that the training program will be completed by the end of the year. The UN expects to have provided the training to all field staff by the end of March 2008. The UN Procurement Division has made some progress in its efforts to develop a risk management framework. In July 2007, a Planning, Compliance, and Monitoring Section was established and a chief was appointed to establish tools to detect potential transaction problems and minimize risks. Also, a proposal for implementing the concept of best-value-for-money is under development. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. The UN Department of Management is in the initial planning stages of establishing a UN-wide risk management framework. As of September 2007, the concept is still in the planning stages, time frames and costs for its implementation have not been established, and risks associated with procurement activities remain. For example, the OIOS Procurement Task Force reported in October 2007 that it had found multiple instances of fraud, waste, and mismanagement—including 10 instances of Fraud and Corruption. The concept is expected to be put into practice by theprocurement Division in March 2008. in cases with an aggregate value of over $610 million—resulting in misappropriation of resources or the unjust enrichment of vendors and their agents in excess of $25 million. The task force reported that a number of cases have been referred to national authorities for criminal prosecution or to the UN for consideration of subsequent legal action. It has also recommended civil recovery of monetary damages. As of October 2007, an independent bid protest system had not been established. The lack of an independentbid protest system limits the transparency of the procurement process. vendor to protest the outcome of a contract decision to an independent official or office. Such a system would provide reasonable assurance that vendors are treated fairly when bidding. The draft process, which includes an emphasis on best practices from public- and private-sector procurements, is expected to be finalized by the first quarter of 2008. Officials told us that, in the meantime, they have enhanced communications with vendors, including developing a more systematic debriefing procedure for vendors. The UN Procurement Division is based in Geneva, Switzerland. whose bids were unsuccessful. The UN has made little or no progress in establishing a lead agency concept. For example, the World Food Program might be best suited to procure items for air transport needs. In a report on procurement reform submitted to the General Assembly in June 2006, the UN projected that implementation of the lead agencies concept would take 6 to 12 years. The World Food Programme is the world's largest food producer, followed by the UN Food and Agriculture Organization and the UN World Health Organization. The U.N. Inter-Agency Procurement Services Office is best at procuring vehicles. months. In December 2006, the General Assembly did not approve a proposal to adopt the concept. Issues that are currently unclear include operational procedures, such as establishing lines of communication. The General Assembly didn't consider several procurement reform issues during the recently completed 61st session because of the UN’s June 2007 reorganization of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO), the Procurement Division said. In the absence of the General assembly’S approval, Procurements officials told us they have established informal relationships with several UN organizations. The UN has taken actions to improve some of the management operations of the Secretariat. The reorganization of the DPKO created several procurement-related concerns that have not yet been addressed. Many reform proposals still have not moved forward. Some progress has been made in some areas, but more needs to be done in other areas, the UN says. The UN has also taken steps to improve the efficiency of its procurement system. The U.N. Secretary-General has called for a review of the U.S. government's procurement practices. Since our October 2006 report, the UN Secretariat has issued several reports on management operations. Little or no progress has been made in reforming the UN’s internal justice system, reforming certain budgetary and financial management functions, and improving the delivery of certain services. The General Assembly is expected to consider these issues during the current (62nd) session. The UN has made some progress in improving human resource functions, while little progress on reforming the financial management of the Secretariat is shown in figure 4. The UN has issued several reports with proposals that, if implemented, could improve some human resource functions. The proposals are, in large part, still awaiting General Assembly review. The UN has made some progress in improving information technology. The Secretariat plans to present reports to the General Assembly during the 62nd session, on topics such as the governance of information technology and the internal justice system, the report says. The report concludes that effective reform of the UN is not possible without an efficient, well-resourced and independent, independent justice system that safeguards the rights of staff.