Most residential users dial in to an ISP over a telephone line. Large businesses often purchase dedicated lines that connect directly to Internet backbone networks. For a residential customer, the ISP sends the user’s Internet traffic on to the backbone network. To perform this function, ISPs obtain direct connections to one or more Internet backbone providers. Small business users may also connect to a backbone network through an ISP, however, large businesses often buy dedicated lines. For small business users, a dedicated line that connects directly to the Internet backbone network is more common. provider’s network at a facility known as a “point of presence.” Backbone providers have points of presence in varied locations, although they concentrate these facilities in more densely-populated areas. Figure 1 depicts two hypothetical Internet backbone networks that link at interconnection points and take traffic to and from residential users through ISPs and directly from large business users. Once on an Internet backbone network, digital data is able to reach distant points of Presence over telecommunications lines. If an ISP or end user is far from a point of presence, it is able from there to access other parts of the network. signals that were split into separate pieces or “packets” at the transmission point are separately routed over the most efficient available pathway and reassembled at their destination point. The standards that specify most data transmissions are known as the Internet Protocol (IP) Suite. Under part of this protocol, streams of packets are routed to their destination over themost efficient pathway. Other aspects of the protocol facilitate the routing of packets to their appropriate destination by examining the 32-bit numeric identifier— or IP address—attached to every packet. Currently, IP addresses for North America are allocated by the American Registry for Boardwatch reports 41 backbone providers with a national network and many other regional backbones. Approximately five to eight of these national providers are considered to be “Tier 1” backbone providers. Unlike telecommunications services, the provision of Internet backbone service is not regulated by governmental communications agencies. A Tier 1 provider is defined by Boardwatch as having a network of wide geographic scope, having many IP addresses, having extensive information for traffic routing determinations, and handling a large percentage of transmissions. For more information, visit Boardwatch. The Telecommunications Act of 1996 sought to increase competition in other communications sectors, primarily the local telephone market. No provisions were contained in the 1996 act pertaining to Internet backbone services. However, the act did provide for the creation of a “telecommunications’ and “information” commission. The commission was created to regulate the Internet backbone market, but it was later expanded to include all Internet services, including voice and data services. The agency is now looking at how to regulate data-processing services on the Internet. treatment of these more established communications services and infrastructures under the Communications Act of 1934 has indirectly affected the Internet medium. Two types of facilities are used for the exchange of data traffic by interconnected Internet backbone providers. The first type of facility, known as a “network access point” (NAP), enables numerous backbone providers to interconnect with each other at a common facility. Internet data traffic is also exchanged at the NAP. The act provided FCC and states the authority to take actions to encourage the deployment of advanced telecommunications capability. Two types of financial arrangements exist among backbone providers for traffic exchanges. In a “peering” relationship, backbone providers exchange data destined only for each other’s network generally without the imposition of a fee. Transit payments, which involve the payment by one backbone provider to another for the mutual exchange of traffic and for the delivery of traffic to other providers, have become more common with time. A NAP facilitates the interconnection of multiple backbone providers. In the early to mid-1990s, the NAPs were common. National Science Foundation designed and partially funded four NAPs, each of which was managed by a different company. Since that time, other interconnection points have been constructed, and for purposes of this report, the term "NAPs" refers to approximately 10 major traffic exchange points that host backbone providers. NAP's are not uniform facilities; differences exist in terms of equipment, software, and data transmission rates. In the first years of their existence, Naps became congested with the rapid rate of growth. in Internet traffic. Two of the providers with whom we spoke said that some NAPs were not well managed. If traffic exchange at a NAP became congested, service quality could be compromised. Two typical problems that congestion causes include latency (delay in the transmission of traffic) and packet loss (when transmitted data are actually lost and never reach their destination). For example, one backbone provider told us that the loss of data was so great that the company had to shut down its network.  congestion and poor quality of connections at the NAPs led backbone providers to engage in another type of traffic exchange known as “private interconnection.” Private interconnection refers to the exchange of traffic at a place other than a NAP. Of 17 backbone providers with whom we spoke, 15 used both N APs and private interconnections. Only one company said that it was likely to make greater use of Naps in the future. of the 17 companies that we met with, 10 provided estimates of how their mix of private interconnection and NAP use would likely change. While peering generally entails traffic exchange between two providers without payment, transit entails payment by one provider to another for carrying traffic. Transit agreements constitute a supplier-customer relationship between some backbone providers. Currently, there is a segregation of backbone providers into “tiers’ The top tier or “Tier 1” providers generally peer with each other and sell transit to smaller backbone providers, the authors say. The “tiering” of Internet backbone providers and the dual system of peering and transit agreements have caused controversies. Market forces may be relieving some of these problems, authors say. No official data sources were identified that would provide information on the structure and competitiveness of the Internet backbone market. Some non-Tier 1 backbone providers do not want to peer with the largest backbone providers, they say. The choice of local telephone companies providing access to Internet backbone networks may be limited, the authors say, creating problems for providers of Internet services. They say FCC does solicit public comments on the deployment of underlying telecommunications infrastructure. Internet backbone market appears to be competitive, but another market may be less so. Most ISPs and other end users connect to a backbone provider’s point of presence through the local telecommunications infrastructure. These systems are typically owned and operated by incumbent telephone companies. Many of the market participants with whom we spoke noted that local telephone markets are, in their view, close to monopolistic. Some companies spoke with concern about slow deployment of high-speed Digital Subscriber Line (DSL) service in rural areas.