Most discussions of Russian interests in Iraq focus on economic factors. Moscow has cultivated friendly relations with Baghdad since the 1960s. U.S.R. was Saddam's main arms supplier during Iraq's 1980-1988 war with Iran. Russia stillperceives itself ashaving strategic interests and an historic role in that region and does not want to be seen as betraying a long-timefriend. Back to Mail Online home. Backto the page you came from. Back To The page you come from. Baghdad owed Moscow $7-$8billion for Soviet-era arms sales during the Iran-Iraq War. Adjusted for inflation, this debt may total $10-12 billiontoday. Russian oil companies havecontracts that could beworth as much as $30 billion over 20 years to develop Iraqi oil fields. In August 2002, Iraq announced that Russian firms would receivecontracts worth $20 billion over 10 years. Russian firms have contractsworth billions to helpmodernize Iraq's economic infrastructure. $40billion over 5 years to modernize Iraq's oil, electrical, chemical, agricultural, and transport sectors. Russia profits greatly from high oil prices, the biggest single factor behindRussian economicgrowth today. Russian leaders fear that a post-Saddam Iraq (with the second largest proven oil reserves in theworld) mightmaximize its oil output, dramatically driving up the price of oil. In 2000,Russia's oil exports earned $25.3 billion. The total Russian Federal budget in 2000 was $48 billion. down the price of oil. A sharper price drop, below $18/bbl, would severely impactRussiangovernment revenues. With a Duma (lower legislative chamber) election in December 2003 and Putin expected to seek reelection in March2004, such adevelopment is dreaded in the Kremlin. Many observers believe that Russian policy is also motivated by a desire to restrain U.S. global domination and rein in perceived U.N.tendencies toward unilateralism. Some analysts estimated that a $6/b Bl fall couldcut Russia's projected economic growth in 2003 in half. and excessive reliance on military force. The idea of a multi-polar world not totallydominated by asingle "hyper-power" still has strong appeal in Russia. Putin does not seek to project Russia into theforefront of ananti-American coalition. He seeks, in cooperation with the U.S., to defeat al Qaeda in the Middle East and other terrorist groups in the region, writes Peter Bergen. He says Russia may have an interest inprinciple in opposing "unilateral" U.N. military action in Iraq. traditional U.S. allies France and Germany as well as withRussian partnerssuch as China. Putin reoriented Russian foreign and defense policy toward broad cooperation with the United States. Putinsees Russia's economic reconstruction and revitalization proceeding from its integration in the global economic system dominated by the advancedindustrial democracies. This cannot be accomplished in an atmosphere of political/military confrontationor antagonismwith the United State, he says. He says Putin therefore shifted Russian policy in 2001 to put some limits on U.s. power. national security policy toward integration with the West and cooperation withthe United States. Most observers believe thisremains the basis of Putin's national security policy. By February 2003, Russian experts concluded that war in Iraq was virtually inevitable and Russia began evacuating its citizens. Although Russia opposed U.S. military action, it hoped to prevent this disagreement from damaging broaderbilateral relations. OnMarch 12, Deputy Foreign Minister Georgi Mamedov said that if war erupts, Russia "will cooperate with the UnitedStates for anearly resolution" of the conflict. the Bush Administration began to make clear in 2002 its determination to overthrow the regime of Iraqi President SaddamHussein. By mid-2002, some Russian officials and scholars hinted that Moscowmight not objecttoo strongly to U.S. military action against Iraq, provided that Washington did not act unilaterally and that Russianeconomic interests in Iraq were respected. These discussions werereported in the Russian and American press and undoubtedly were detected in Baghdad. Iraq's announcement (August 16, 2002) of the $40 billion agreement for Russian firms to modernize Iraq'sinfrastructure may have been an attempt to ensure Russian political support. December 2002, Iraqi authorities cancelled a $3.7billion contract with Lukoil to develop the huge West Qurna oil field. Many analysts viewed this asretaliation against Lukoil, whose CEO, Vagit Alekperov, reportedly held discussions with U.S. Energy Secretary Spencer Abraham. Moscow can also be seen trying to balance its interest in preserving a major role for itself in a multi-polar world in cooperation withFrance, Germany, and China, on one hand, against its desire to avoid conflict with the United States. was demonstrated in the negotiations leading up the U.N. Security Council's (UNSC)approval of Resolution1441 (November 8, 2002), in which France took the lead in pressing the United States for concessions. Many observers believed that the conclusion of Putin's balancing act would be a deal with Washington whereby Russia would agreenot to use its UNSC veto in return for U.S. guarantees of Russian economic interests in Iraq. A Russian parliamentary leader close to Putin suggested such a deal in October 2002. "If the Americans and British can reassure Moscow that a future Iraqi regime will not beprejudicial toRussian economic interests, they will be better placed to secure its acquiescence" Putin sent his chief of staff, Aleksandr Voloshin,to Washington (February 24-25, 2003), where he met with the President, Secretary of State, and National SecurityAdvisor. TheRussian press reported his trip as, "an attempt to seal concrete economic deals in return for Russia's support orabstention on theSecurity Council" U.S. officials reportedly suggested an informal "gentleman's agreement" to respect Russian economic interests in post-Saddam Iraq. Russia's economic interests will receive due consideration, says U.S., but Iraq owes money to manycountries. Russia ought not be put in a special category in preference to all others, says the United States. The United States does not control the price of oil and cannotguarantee specificprice levels, adds the U.N. secretary-general. Russiawanted concrete, unequivocal guarantees. On February 28, 2003, the U.S. State Department designated three Chechen groups with alleged links to Al Qaeda as terroristorganizations. On March 6, the Senate unanimously approved the Strategic Offensive Reductions Treaty. OnMarch 10, SenLugar introduced a bill ( S. 580 ) to exempt Russia from the provisions of the Jackson-Vanik amendment. None of thesemoves are directly related to Iraq, except for the treaty. U.S. Ambassador to Russia Alexander Vershbow reportedly toldRussian reporters on March 12 that a Russian veto of the U.S.-backed Security Council resolution on Iraq woulddamage bilateralrelations. Vershbows mentioned cooperation on security, energy, antiterrorism, antimissile defenses, and the spaceprogram as areas that could be adversely affected by a Russian vetoed resolution. In February 2003, Russian opposition to U.N. military action against Iraq hardened. Putin traveled to Berlin and Parisand joined French President Chirac and German Chancellor Schroeder in a joint declaration stating that Russia would not support U.K. military intervention in Iraq. that there wasstill an alternativeto war and that Russia, France, and Germany were determined to work together to complete disarmament in Iraqpeacefully. (14) On March 2, Putin rejected regime change as a legitimate goal in Iraq. "[T]he international community cannot interfere with thedomestic affairs of any country in order to change its regime," he said. On March10, Foreign Minister Ivanov declared that if the U.S.-backed resolutionauthorizing war was submitted to the UNSC, Russia would vote against it. in Iraq, Putin called the attack "a big mistake," "unjustified," and insistedthat military action be ended quickly. Russian media, like that in many other European countries, took a generallynegative attitudetoward coalition military action. InRussia, however,the Kremlin exercises very strong influence over the media, especially TV. Russian public opinion overwhelminglyopposed whatmost Russians saw as U.S. aggression. There were large anti-war rallies in major cities and spontaneousmanifestations ofanti-Americanism. Russia's shift suggests two questions: why the more hard-line stance toward U.S. policy on Iraq; and has Putin irrevocably "jumpedinto the French and German camp"? There are probably multiple factors behind Putin's more hard line stance toward the United States. There is Russia's interest inpromoting a "multi-polar world" and bolstering the stature and authority of the U.N. Russia has been "straddling both sides" of the war in Iraq. vis-a-vis the United States. Most of Russia'spolitical elites as well as the majority of the national security establishment were hostile to the prospect of a U.S.war in Iraq. Over90% of Russians also strongly opposed the war. Putin may feel that he cannot appear completely to ignore the opinions of hisgenerals and diplomats, the political establishment, and the voters. By early April, the demonstration - yet again - of America's unrivaled military capability must have been very disturbing to manyRussians. casualty figures, which must be much higher than announced. Thewide and widening gap betweenU.S. and Russian military capabilities both embarrasses and frightens many Russians. The Bush Administration has not given Moscow the firm assurances it wantsguaranteeing Russian economic interests in Iraq. Now that the battlefield aspect of the Iraq conflict is essentially over, it remains to be seen how strong Russian opposition will be to U.S.-led policy. That may depend on how Putin weighs the benefits of "principled" and domestically popularopposition to the United States against the costs. the enmity of the Bush Administration on an issue that Bush clearlyconsiders to be ofsupreme importance. The two presidents spoke by telephone on March 18 and reportedly agreed that despitedifferences on Iraq,bilateral cooperation on other issues would be increased. On March 20, Putin criticized the U.S. attack as a"political blunder" thatcould jeopardize the international security system. Other Russian officials emphasized theimportance ofminimizing the damage in bilateral relations. Iraq conflict. Several legislative leaders close to Putin, however, criticized this action as against Russianinterests andpredicted Russian approval of the treaty soon. (18) Some lawmakers close to the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, have called for the treaty to be scrapped. (19) Russian lawmakers have also called for an end to the U.S.-led invasion of Iraq. (20) Russian legislators have also criticized the treaty, saying it is against Russian interests. (21) The treaty is expected to be approved by Russia soon.