FPS assesses risk and recommends countermeasures to GSA and tenant agencies. Risk management is limited because resource allocation decisions are the responsibility of GSA. Security equipment that FPS recommends may not be implemented if tenant agencies are unwilling to fund it. FPS faces challenges in ensuring that its fee-based funding structure accounts for the varying levels of risk and types of services provided at federal facilities, the authors say. They say FPS’s basic security fee does not account for the risk faced by specific buildings, the level of service provided or the cost of providing services. FPS does not have a strategic human capital plan to guide its current and future workforce planning efforts. Instead, FPS has developed a short-term hiring plan that does not include key human capital principles, such as determining an agency’s optimum staffing needs. FPS has been transitioning to an inspector-based workforce, thus eliminating the police officer position and relying primarily on FPS inspectors for both law enforcement and physical security activities. In the absence of a strategichuman capital plan, it is difficult to discern how effective an inspector.-based workforce approach will be. example, FPS officials in some of the regions we visited said they implement their own procedures for managing their workforce. Additionally, FPS does not collect data on its workforce’s knowledge, skills, and abilities. These elements are necessary for successful workforce planning activities, such as identifying and filling skill gaps and succession planning. We recently recommended that FPS improve how it collects data to help it better manage and understand current and future workforce needs; and use these data in the development and implementation of a workforce plan. long-term strategic human capital plan that addresses key principles for effective strategic workforce planning. DHS concurred with our recommendations. FPS did not meet its fiscal year 2008 mandated deadline of increasing its staffing level to no fewer than 1,200 full-time employees by July 31, 2008, and instead met this staffing level in April 2009. FPS’s staff has steadily declined since 2004 and critical law enforcement services have been reduced or eliminated. For example, FPS has eliminated its use of proactive patrol to prevent or detect criminal violations at many GSA buildings. visited, not providing proactive patrol has limited its law enforcement personnel to a reactive force. FPS officials stated that in the past, proactive patrol permitted its police officers and inspectors to identify and apprehend individuals that were surveilling GSA buildings. In contrast, when FPS is not able to patrol federal buildings, there is increased potential for illegal entry and other criminal activity. In one city we visited, a deceased individual had been found in a vacant GSA facility that was not regularly patrolled by FPS. months. FPS does not fully ensure that its contract security guards have the training and certifications required to be deployed to a GSA building. FPS requires that all prospective guards complete about 128 hours of training including 8 hours of X-ray and magnetometer training. However, in one region, FPS has not provided the X-rays or magnetometers needed for this training. We have noted that the effectiveness of a risk management approach depends on the involvement of experienced and professional security personnel. Further, that the chances of omitting major steps in the risk management process increase if personnel are not well trained in applying risk management. magnetometer training to its 1,500 guards since 2004. X-ray training is critical because guards control access points at buildings. For example, at a level IV federal facility in a major metropolitan area, an infant in a carrier was sent through an X-rays machine due to a guard’s negligence. In that region, a woman with her infant in an infant carrier attempted to enter the building with the infant. She was stopped by a guard and the infant was sent back to the mother. The guard was not paying attention and the machine's safety features had been disabled. FPS investigated the incident and dismissed the guard. The guard subsequently sued FPS for not providing the required X-ray training. FPS could not produce any documentation to show that the guard had received the training, an FPS official said. In addition, FPS officials from the facility could not be reached for comment for this article. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. that region could not tell us whether the X-ray machine’s safety features had been repaired. FPS does not have a fully reliable system for monitoring and verifying guard training and certification requirements. 62 percent of the guards had at least one expired certification, including a declaration that guards have not been convicted of domestic violence, which make them ineligible to carry firearms. Some guards were not provided building-specific training, such as what actions to take during a building evacuation or a building building fire. Lack of training may have contributed to several incidents where guards neglected their assigned responsibilities. At a level IV facility, the guards did not follow evacuation procedures and left two access points unattended, thereby leaving the facility vulnerable. FPS has limited assurance that its guards are complying with post-emergency procedures, according to the report. The report was published by the Center for Security Studies at the University of Florida. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. FPS does not have specific national guidance on when and how guard inspections should be performed. Inspections of guard posts at GSA buildings are inconsistent and the quality varied in the six regions we examined. Guard inspections are typically completed by FPS during regular business hours and in locations where FPS has a field office, and seldom on nights or weekends. However, on an occasion when FPS officials conducted a post inspection at night, they found a guard asleep at his post after taking a pain-killer prescription drug. high-security facilities where guards neglected or inadequately performed their assigned responsibilities. For example, a guard failed to recognize or did not properly X-ray a box containing handguns at the loading dock at a facility. FPS became aware of the situation because the handguns were delivered to FPS. Because guards were not properly trained and did not comply with post orders, our investigators passed undetected through access points controlled by FPS guards at 10 of 10 level IV facilities in four major cities where GAO conducted covert tests. components for this device, items used to conceal the device components, and the methods of concealment that we used during our covert testing are classified. Of the 10 level IV facilities our investigators penetrated, 8 were government owned and 2 were leased facilities. The two leased facilities did not have any guards at the access control points at the time. The facilities included district offices of a U.S. Senator and aU.S Representative as well as agencies of Homeland Security, Transportation, Health and Human Services, Justice, State, and others. of our testing. Using publicly available information, our investigators identified a type of device that a terrorist could use to cause damage to a federal facility and threaten the safety of federal workers and the general public. The device was an IED made up of two parts—a liquid explosive and a low-yield detonator—and included a variety of materials not typically brought into aFederal facility by employees or the public. Although the detonator itself could function as a IED, investigators determined that it could also be used to set off a liquid explosive to cause significantly more damage. safety during this testing, we took precautions so that the IED would not explode. For example, we lowered the concentration level of the material. To gain entry into each of the 10 level IV facilities, our investigators showed a photo identification (a state driver’s license) and walked through the magnetometers without incident. Our investigators also placed their briefcases with theIED material on the conveyor belt of the X-ray machine, but the guards detected nothing. We did not receive any secondary searches from the guards that might have revealed the Ied material that they brought into the facilities. At security checkpoints at 3 of the 10 facilities, our investigators noticed that the guard was not looking at the X-ray screen as some of the IED components passed through the machine. A guard questioned an item in the briefcase at one of the10 facilities but the materials were subsequently allowed through theX-ray machines. At each facility, once past the guard screening checkpoint, our Investigators proceeded to a restroom and assembled the Ied. At some of those facilities, the restrooms were locked. Our investigators gained access by asking employees to let them in. in a briefcase, our investigators walked freely around several floors of the facilities and into various executive and legislative branch offices. Leveraging technology is a key practice over which FPS has somewhat more control. FPS does not have a comprehensive approach for identifying, acquiring, and assessing the cost-effectiveness of the security equipment that its inspectors recommend. Individual FPS inspectors have considerable latitude in determining which technologies and other countermeasures to recommend. But the inspectors receive little training and guidance in how to assess the relative cost- effectiveness of these technologies. FPS inspectors receive some training in identifying and recommending security technologies as part of their initial FPS physical security training. Since FPS was transferred to DHS in 2003, its refresher training program for inspectors has primarily focused on law enforcement. Consequently, inspectors lack recurring technology training. FPS does not provide inspectors with specialized guidance and standards for cost-effectively selecting technology. In the absence of specific guidance, inspectors follow the Department of Justice minimum countermeasure standards. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. FPS uses BSA executive summary to convey countermeasure recommendations to GSA. Document includes cost estimates but no analysis of alternatives. GSA and tenant agencies have limited assurance that investments in technologies are cost-effective, consistent across buildings, and best available alternatives. In 2006, FPS had had an explosives detection dog used to screen mail that is distributed elsewhere. For example, at one location we visited, an explosives Detection Dog was used to screens mail that was distributed elsewhere in the building. recommended, based on the results of its risk analysis, the use of this dog and an X-ray machine. The dog and handler work 12-hour shifts Monday through Friday when most mail is delivered and shipped. The GSA regional security officials we spoke with questioned whether this approach was more effective and efficient than using an on-site enhanced X-rays machine that could detect biological and chemical agents as well as explosives and could be used anytime. In accordance with the GSA's recommendation, the dog was being used at the time of our visit. FPS conducted a BSA of the site in 2008 and determined that using an enhanced X-ray machine and an explosives detection dog would bring the projected threat rating down from moderate to low. FPS included estimated one-time installation and recurring costs in the BSA and executive summary, but did not include the estimated cost and risk of the following mail screening options. Consequently, tenant agency representatives would have to investigate the possibility of using the dog only, according to the report. The report concluded that the use of the dog and the additional countermeasure would reduce the threat rating at the site. cost and risk implications of these options on their own to make an informed resource allocation decision. It is critical that FPS and GSA have well-established lines of communication with each other and with tenant agencies to ensure that all parties are aware of the ever- changing risks in a dynamic threat environment. FPS is the provider of law enforcement and related security services for GSA buildings. GSA is the manager of these properties and is responsible for security on the grounds of federal buildings in the U.S. levels are inconsistent, and overall, FPS and GSA disagree over what information should be shared. FPS is only required to meet formally with GSA property managers and tenant agencies as part of the BSA process. FPS had not been providing them consistently across all regions. GSA security officials said that these briefings mostly focused on crime statistics and did not constitute comprehensive threat analyses. FPS resumed the practice in October 2008, but GSA officials said it was not a comprehensive threat analysis. It is required to provide quarterly briefings at the regional level. We identified information sharing gaps at several level III and IV sites that we visited. In some cases these deficiencies led to decreased security awareness and increased risk. At one location, we observed during our interview with the BSC that the committee members were confused about procedures for screening visitors who are passengers in employees’ cars that enter the building via the parking garage. One of the tenants recounted an incident in which a security guard directed the visitor to walk through the garage to an appropriate screening. We found that in some cases this led to increased risk and decreased security. At one location, FPS had received inaccurate square footage data from GSA. The GSA property manager knew the appropriate screening procedure, but told us there was no written policy on the procedure that members could access. GSA officials at this location told us that they invite FPS to their property management meetings for that location, but FPS does not attend. The agency suggested that increased communication among the agencies would help them be more effective managers of their properties and provide tenants with better customer service.station. FPS, GSA, and tenant agency representatives did not all meet together regularly to make security preparations or manage security operations during construction. FPS officials told us they had not been invited to project meetings, although GSA officials said they had invited FPS and that FPS attended some meetings. In May 2008, FPS discovered that specific surveillance equipment had been removed. As of May 2009, FPS officials tell us they did not know who had removed the equipment and were working with tenant agency reps to recover it. that they believed FPS was fully aware that the equipment had been removed in December 2007. GSA tenant agencies had mixed views about some of the services they pay FPS to provide. On average about one-third of tenant agencies could not comment on how satisfied or dissatisfied they were with FPS’s level of communication of its services, partly because they had little to no interaction with FPS officers. Although FPS plans to remove the equipment, the agency says it has no immediate plans to replace it. 53 percent of e-mail addresses and 27 percent of the telephone numbers for designated points of contacts were missing from FPS’s contact database. Complete and accurate contact information is critical for information sharing and an essential component of any customer service initiative. FPS needs to improve its services to GSA and other tenant agencies to improve customer service to them and their clients. The agency is working with the GSA to improve the service it provides to tenant agencies and their tenants. The GSA is also working with FPS to improve service to its tenants. tenant agencies, we recommended that FPS collect and maintain an accurate and comprehensive list of all facility- designated points of contact. DHS concurred with our recommendations. FPS and GSA fundamentally disagree over how much of the information in the BSA should be, the report said. The report said the two organizations are partners in protecting and securing GSA buildings, but that they disagree on how much information should be included in the building's BSA. It said FPS should develop and implement a program for education and outreach to GSA and tenant agencies. shared. GSA security officials told us that FPS does not consistently share BSA executive summaries across all regions. Instead, GSA wants to receive BSAs in their entirety so that it can better protect GSA buildings and the tenants who occupy them. In a post-September 11th era, it is crucial that federal agencies work together to share information to advance homeland security and critical infrastructure protection efforts. The ability to share security-related information can unify the efforts of federal agencies in preventing or minimizing terrorist attacks. GAO: GSA is limited in its ability to assess the effectiveness of its efforts to protect GSA buildings. GAO: FPS does not have a reliable data management system that will allow it to accurately track these measures. Without this ability, FPS has difficulty determining whether it has mitigated the risk of GSA facilities to crime or a terrorist attack, GAO says.GAO recommends that GSA develop and implement specific guidelines and improve how it collects and analyzes data to help it better understand and protect its efforts. is unclear whether FPS will meet the implementation goals established in the program’s proposed timeline. Until RAMP components are fully implemented, FPS will continue to rely on its current risk assessment tool, methodology, and process. FPS does not have adequate controls to monitor and track whether its 11 regions are completing these new requirements. FPS is also taking steps to implement a more systematic approach to technology acquisition by developing a National Countermeasures Program, which could help FPS leverage technology more cost-effectively. the cost- effectiveness of alternative technologies into FPS’s planned improvements in the security acquisition area would represent an enhanced application of this key practice. We recently recommended that FPS develop a methodology and guidance for assessing and comparing the cost-effectiveness of technology alternatives, and DHS concurred with our recommendation. Another concern is that FPS had planned to implement the program throughout fiscal year 2009, but extended implementation into fiscal year 2010. Until the National Countermeasures Program is fully implemented, FPS will continue. FPS had anticipated that X-ray machine and magnetometer contracts would be awarded by December 2008. In May 2009, FPS officials told us that the X-rays machine contract was awarded on April 30, 2009. They anticipated awarding the magnetometer contract in the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2009 and an electronic security services contract for surveillance and intrusion detection systems during the second quarter of 2010. We recently recommended that FPS not rely on individual inspectors to make technology decisions. We recommend that FPS stop relying on individual Inspectors to make tech decisions. that FPS provide the Secretary of Homeland Security with regular updates on the status of the National Countermeasures Program. DHS concurred with this recommendation and stated that FPS will submit a monthly report to the Secretary. Finally, as we stated at the outset, the protection of federal real property has been and continues to be a major concern. Therefore, we have used our key protection practices as criteria to evaluate the security efforts of other departments, agencies, and entities. For more information, visit www.fps.gov. The National Park Service does not manage risk servicewide. The Park Service has implemented a range of security program improvements in recent years that reflected some aspects of key practices. We have made recommendations to promote greater usage of key practice in ensuring the security of public spaces and of those who work at and visit them. For example, we have examined how DHS and the Smithsonian Institution secure their assets and identified challenges. Most recently, we evaluated the National Park service’s (Park Service) approach to national icon and park protection. or ensure the best return on security technology investments; (2) lacks a servicewide approach to sharing information internally and measuring performance; and (3) lacks clearly defined security roles and a security training curriculum. With millions of people visiting the nation’s nearly 400 park units annually, ensuring their security and the protection of our national treasures is paramount. More emphasis on the key practices would provide greater assurance that Park Service assets are well protected and that Park service resources are being used efficiently to improve protection. the government are facing. Our key practices provide a framework for assessing and improving protection practices. The Interagency Security Committee is using our key facility protection practices as key management practices to guide its priorities and work activities. For example, the committee established subcommittees for technology best practices and training, and working groups in the areas of performance measures and strategic human capital management. The committee also issued performance measurement guidance in 2009. Without greater attention to key protection practices, FPS will be ill equipped to efficiently and effectively fulfill its responsibilities of assessing risk, strategically managing. its workforce and contract guard program, recommending countermeasures, sharing information and coordinating with GSA and tenant agencies to secure GSA buildings. implementing our specific recommendations related to areas such as human capital and risk management will be critical steps in the right direction. Overall, following this framework would enhance FPS’s chances for future success and could position FPS to become a leader and benchmark agency for facility protection in the federal government. Mr. Chairman, this concludes the report on GSA facility protection. our testimony. For further information on this testimony, please contact Mark L. Goldstein at (202) 512-2834 or by e-mail goldsteinm@gao.gov. Individuals making key contributions to this testimony include Tammy Conquest, John Cooney, Elizabeth Eisenstadt, Brandon Haller, Denise McCabe, David Sausville, and Susan Michal-Smith. This is a work of the U.S. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States. The published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission. from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. For more information on suicide prevention in the UK, visit www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org. The Samaritans can also be found on the Internet.