USDA’s CBAs provide services such as farm loans and conservation assistance. Under the E- File Act, these agencies were required to establish an electronic filing and retrieval system. The law further mandated that by June 20, 2002, agricultural producers be able to file paperwork electronically with USDA if they choose to do so. By the end of December 2000, none of the 100-plus RD forms that the CBAs expected to have deployed on the Web site by the deadline were available. We reviewed measures being taken by the department to implement the Freedom to E-File Act. On November 15, 2000, we briefed your staff on the results of our review up to that point. We performed follow-up work to update USDA’s progress implementing the act through December 31, 2000. The results of all of our work are summarized in this report. As agreed with your office, unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier, we plan no further distribution until 30. days from its date. At that time, we will send copies to Representative Eva Clayton, Ranking Minority Member, Subcommittee on Department Operations, Oversight, Nutrition, and Forestry, House Committee on Agriculture. We will also send them to Senator Richard Lugar, Chairman, and Senator Tom Harkin, Ranking Member, Senate committee on Agriculture, Nutrition and Forestry. We are also sending them to Representative Larry Combest, Chairman of the House Agriculture Committee, and Representative Charles Stenholm, Ranking minority Member, House committee on agriculture. and Representative Janice Schakowski, Ranking Minority Member, Subcommittee on Government Efficiency, Financial Management and Intergovernmental Relations. We will also send copies to the Honorable Ann M. Veneman, Secretary of Agriculture; the Hon honorable Mitchell E. Daniels, Jr., Director, Office of Management and Budget; and other interested parties. Copies will also be made available to others upon request. Should you have any questions on matters discussed in this report, please contact me at (202) 512-6257 or Stephen A. Schwartz, Senior Assistant Director, at (Washington, D.C.) 512-6213. Conservation Service (NRCS), and Rural Development (RD) mission area--hereafter referred to collectively as County- based Agencies (CBAs), and the Risk Management Agency (RMA) to establish an electronic filing and retrieval system. Provides separate requirements for the CBAs and RMA. an Internet-based system enabling agricultural producers to access all forms and shall submit to Congress a report that describes the progress made. Not later than June 20, 2002, the system shall be expanded to enable producers toaccess and file all forms. Congress a plan to allow agricultural producers the option of obtaining, over the Internet from approved insurance providers, all forms and other information and filing all paperwork required for participation electronically. Not later than December 1, 2001, RMA should complete implementation of the plan. RMA administers the federal crop insurance program, under which insurance policies are sold and serviced by private companies to help protect agricultural producers against crop losses due to drought, flooding, and other unavoidable causes. By 2003, federal agencies provide the public, where practicable, the option to submit, maintain, or disclose information. information--such as employment records, tax forms, and loan applications-- electronically, instead of on paper. On the basis of guidance issued by the Office of Management and Budget (OMB), agencies are preparing plans for implementing GPEA, including the use of electronic signatures. Secretary issued a memorandum to the undersecretaries for the affected agencies, requiring that one shared plan be developed and implemented to meet E- File Act requirements and the plan be submitted to Office of Chief Information Officer (OCIO) no later than September 30, 2000. area leaders with collective responsibility for developing and implementing e-file activities and gave OCIO the role of coordinating/facilitating e- file implementation planning. The report included two separate sections covering the CBAs and RMA. establish and define all major activities and milestones, dependencies among activities, and resources necessary to complete them. assign a senior-level official with overall responsibility and accountability for managing and. managing e-File activities. The CIO was given the task of coordinating andfacilitating the implementation planning of e- files. implementing all the separate e-file activities. purchased an on-line common forms software tool for selected a total of 219 forms (57 from FSA, 6 from NRCS, and 156 from RD) coordinated with OMB to develop a user-friendly format and are working to obtain OMB approval for each new electronic form. designed and is implementing a common Internet Web site that can utilize a single Internet address to provide user access with common search and retrieval functions for all forms. E-File Act requires USDA to continue providing services in the traditional way to customers who choose not to use the Internet. CBAs must support dual service delivery functions--one electronic and one paper-based. USDA has not yet developed and documented a comprehensive e-file implementation plan. E-file Act provides that the Secretary is to reserve, from applicable accounts of the CBAs, not more than $3 million for fiscal year 2001 and $2 million for each subsequent fiscal year. Decisions on use of these accounts and funding are still pending.