The Volcker Rule prohibits banks from engaging in risky, short-term, speculative trading and investing in private equity and hedge funds. These are practices long condemned by the Rule's namesake, former Federal Reserve Chairman Paul A. Volcker. Congress has delegated extensive discretion to the federal financial regulators to craft the Rule to meet a list of widely divergent objectives, the authors say. The rule applies to community and global banks, every variety of insurance firm, securities firms, and foreign banking institutions operating in the United States. The Volcker Rule's restrictions applies to "banking entities" "Banking entity" is defined as FDIC-insured depository institutions. The rule applies to the approximately 10,000 "community banks" scattered across the country. It also applies to global financial conglomerates like Bank of America, Citigroup, JPMorgan, Wells Fargo, and Goldman Sachs, which are organized as FHCs and thus control at least one depository institution. The rules likely will modify and clarify the requirements through regulations and guidance. "banking entity," as discussed below. Because they may engage in little or no activities that are banned by the Volcker Rule, the recordkeeping and reporting requirements and other compliance standards that apply to community banks and their subsidiaries and affiliates generally will not be as onerous as those imposed on the country's largest FHCs. As another example, foreign banks and foreign affiliates of U.S. banking entities may not be subject to the same recordkeeping requirements as their American-based counterparts. The Volcker Rule establishes an outright prohibition on proprietary trading by a "banking entity" Subsequent provisions of the legislation provide activities that are excluded from the definition of "proprietary trading" The exact language provides a broad prohibition. It reads, "a banking entity shall not … engage in proprietary trading,” but there are exceptions to the general ban as long as various conditions are met.under certain circumstances will be permitted to trade foreign government obligations, but these activities generally are prohibited. Under the statute, "proprietary trading" covers buying and selling of "financial instruments" by banking entities as "principal" for their "trading accounts" "Financial instruments" include securities, derivatives, and contracts for future sale or for options on any commodity other than foreign exchange or currency, but not loans. The regulation focuses on restricting short-term trades. It establishes a rebuttable presumption that any financial instrument held for fewer than 60 days is a banned proprietary trade unless all relevant facts and circumstances rebut the presumption. "Trading account" also covers trades by banking entities that are securities dealers and swap or swap-based securities dealers. The Rule, embodied in the regulations, expressly provides that certain activities are not included in the trading account category. The trading account is used to buy or sell one or more financial instruments "principally" for "short-term resale," to benefit from " short-term price movements," or to hedge any of these. It also covers market risk capital transactions and hedges. in the definition of "proprietary trading," including the following: acquisitions or sales of financial products pursuant to a repurchase and reverse repurchase agreement. "highly liquid" securities as part of a valid liquidity management plan, which "the banking entity does not reasonably expect to give rise to appreciable profits or losses" as a result of short-term price movements. "Derivative clearing activities," such as in connection with a judicial or administrative proceeding, are also included in the definition. The rule lists permitted activities and sets conditions under which those activities may be conducted. The ban on proprietary trading does not apply to a banking entity's underwriting activities. The regulation's requirements include that the amount, types, and risks of the financial instruments are designed not to exceed, on an ongoing basis, the reasonably expected near term demands of clients, customers, or counterparties. The regulators may impose additional capital and quantitative limits as "appropriate to protect the safety and soundness of banking entities engaged in such activities" The Volcker Rule defines "covered fund" to largely encompass entities that are exempt from various registration requirements with either the SEC or CFTC. The rule explicitly excludes a number of activities and products from the " covered fund" definition. In addition to outright exclusions, certain activities that would fall under the general prohibition against sponsoring or investing in a covered fund could still be barred by the Volcker rule if it meets one of the permissible exceptions described below. However, even if one of these exceptions is found to be permissible, the rule could still bar it from trading.