The Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2008 ( H.R. 2764 ), was passed by the House on December 17, 2007, and the Senate passed a measure the next day, December 18. The bill was signed into law ( P.L. 110-161 ) on December 26. The Military Construction and Veterans Affairs and Related Agencies Appropriations Act of 2008 (MILCON-VA Appropriations Act) was included as Division I of P. l 110-160. Under P.l 110-162 , the total amount of funding for the Veterans Health Administration was increased by $1.2 billion. $2.6 billion was designated as contingent emergency funding and was available for obligation only after the President submitted a budget request to Congress. Table 1 provides funding levels for VA and VHA as included in the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2008. The Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) provides a range of benefits and services to veterans who meet certain eligibility rules, including disability compensation and pensions, education, and health care. The VA is responsible for providing health care, pensions, disability compensation, and other benefits to veterans. training and rehabilitation services, hospital and medical care, assistance to homeless veterans, home loan guarantees, and death benefits that cover burial expenses. The VA carries out its programs nationwide through three administrations and the board of veterans appeals (BVA) The Veterans Health Administration (VHA) is responsible for health-care services and medical research programs. The Veterans Benefits Administration is responsible, among other things, for providing compensations, pensions, and education assistance. The National Cemetery Administration (NCA) isresponsible for maintaining national veterans cemeteries. The VA's budget includes both mandatory and discretionary spending accounts. Mandatory funding supports disability compensation, pension benefits, vocational rehabilitation, and life insurance. Discretionary funding supports a broad array of benefits and services, including medical care. The VHA operates the nation's largest integrated direct health-care delivery system. The VA's health- care system is organized into 21 geographically diverse regions. The agency's budget authority of approximately $80 billion is about 48.1% of the total VA budget authority. defined Veterans Integrated Service Networks (VISNs) Although policies and guidelines are developed at VA headquarters to be applied throughout the VA health-care system, management authority for basic decision making and budgetary responsibilities are delegated to the VISNs. Congressionally appropriated medical care funds are allocated to VISNs based on the Veterans Equitable Resource Allocation (VERA) system, which generally bases funding on patient workload. Prior to the implementation of the VERA system, resources were allocated to facilities primarily on the basis of their historical expenditures. In FY2007, the VHA operated 155 medical centers, 135 nursing homes, 717 ambulatory care and community-based outpatient clinics (CBOCs) The VHA also pays for care provided to veterans by private-sector providers on a fee basis under certain circumstances. Inpatient and outpatient care is also provided in the private sector to eligible dependents of veterans under the Civilian Health and Medical Program of the Department of Veterans Affairs (CHAMPVA) In addition to the grants for construction of state-owned nursing homes and During FY2007, the VHA had an estimated total enrolled veteran population of 7.9 million. According to VHA estimates, the number of unique veteran patients is estimated to increase by approximately 110,000. As shown in Table 3 , there would be a 2.4% increase in the total number ofunique patients (both veterans and non-veterans), from 5.7 million to 5.3 million in FY2008. The VHA collaborates with the Department of Defense (DOD) in sharing health-care resources and services. In FY2007, the VHA estimates that it will spend approximately 64.8% of its medical services obligations on outpatient care. The total number of outpatient visits, including visits to Vet Centers, reached 60.2 million during FY2006 and is projected to increase to 64.4 million in FY2007 and 67.4million in FY2008. Unlike Medicare or Medicaid, VA health care is not an entitlement program.in FY2007 to 5.8 million inFY2008. To understand some of the issues discussed later in this report, it is important to understand eligibility for VA health Care. Not every veteran is automatically entitled to medical care from the VA. Prior to eligibility reform in 1996, provisions of law governing eligibility for VA care were complex and not uniform across all levels of care. All veterans were technically "eligible" for hospital care and nursing home care, but eligibility did not by itself ensure access to care. The Veterans' Health Care Eligibility Reform Act of 1996, P.L. 104-262 , established two eligibility categories and required the VHA to manage the program. P.L. 104-262 authorized the VA to provide all needed hospital care and medical services to veterans with service-connected disabilities, former prisoners of war, veterans exposed to toxic substances and environmental hazards such as Agent Orange. These veterans are generally known as "higher priority" or "core" veterans (see Appendix A , discussed in more detail below). The other category of veterans are those whose attributable income and net worth are not greater than an established "means test," and veterans of World War I. with no service-connected disabilities and with attributable incomes above an established means test (see Appendix C ). P.L. 104-262 also authorized the VA to establish a patient enrollment system to manage access to VA health care. The Act would direct the Secretary, in providing for the care of 'core' veterans, to establish and operate a system of annual patient enrollment and require that veterans be enrolled in a manner giving relative degrees of preference in accordance with specified priorities. At the same time, it would vest discretion in the Secretary. P.L. 104-262 was clear in its intent that the provision of health care to veterans was dependent upon the available resources. The provision of hospital care and medical services would be provided to "the extent and in the amount provided in advance in appropriations Acts for these purposes," the report says. As stated previously, the bill required the establishment of a national enrollment system to manage the care provided to veterans. To determine the manner in which such enrollment system would operate, the legislation needs to be amended. delivery of inpatient and outpatient medical care. The new eligibility standard was created by Congress to "ensure that medical judgment rather than legal criteria will determine when care will be provided" For most veterans, entry into the veterans' health-care system begins by completing the application for enrollment. Some veterans are exempt from the enrollment requirement if they meet special eligibility requirements. A veteran may apply for enrollment by complete the Application for Health Benefits (VA Form 10-10EZ) at any time during the year. Once a veteran is enrolled in the VA health-care system, the veteran remains in the system and does not have to reapply for enrollment annually. Those veterans who have been enrolled in Priority Group 5 (see Appendix A , discussed in more detail below) based on income must submit a new VA Form 10-10EZ annually with updated financial information demonstrating inability to defray the expenses of necessary care.at any VA medical center or clinic, or mailing or faxing the completed form to the medical center and clinic of the veteran's choosing. Veteran's status is established by active-duty status in the military, naval, or air service and an honorable discharge or release from active military service. People enlisting in one of the armed forces after September 7, 1980, and officers commissioned after October 16, 1981, must have completed two years of active duty or the full period of their initial service obligation to be eligible for VA health-care benefits. Servicemembers discharged at any time because of service-connected disabilities are not held to this requirement. who completed the term for which they were called, and who were granted an other than dishonorable discharge, are exempt from the 24 continuous months of active duty requirement. National Guard members who were called to active duty by federal executive order are also exempt from this two-year requirement. When not activated to full-time federal service, members of the reserve components and National Guard have limited eligibility for VA health-care services. Members of the Reserve components may be granted service-connection. The National Guard may be given service- connection. for any injury they incurred or aggravated in the line of duty while attending inactive duty training assemblies, annual training, active duty for training, or while going directly to or returning directly from such duty. Reserve component service members may be granted service-connection for a heart attack or stoke if such an event occurs during these same periods. The granting of service- connection makes them eligible to receive care from the VA for those conditions. National Guard members are not grantedService- connection for any injury, heart attack, or stroke that occurs while performing duty ordered by a governor. state emergencies or activities. After veteran's status has been established, the VA next places applicants into one of two categories. The first group is composed of veterans with service-connected disabilities or with incomes below an established means test. These veterans are regarded by the VA as "high priority" veterans, and they are enrolled in Priority Groups 1-6 (see Appendix A ). Veterans in need of care for a service- connected disability; veterans who have a compensable service-connections condition; veterans whose discharge or release from active military, naval, or air service was for a compensative condition. disability that was incurred or aggravated in the line of duty; veterans who are former prisoners of war (POWs); veterans awarded the Purple Heart. The VA looks at applicants' income and net worth to determine their specific priority category and whether they have to pay co-payments for nonservice-connected care. In addition, veterans who were exposed to hazardous agents (such as Agent Orange in Vietnam) while on active duty are considered a priority category for the VA's care. veterans are asked to provide the VA with information on any health insurance coverage they have, including coverage through employment or through a spouse. The VA may bill these payers for treatment of conditions that are not a result of injuries or illnesses incurred or aggravated during military service. The second group of veterans is composed of those who do not fall into one of the first six priority groups.primarily veterans with nonservice-connected medical conditions and with incomes and net worth above the VA-established means test threshold. These veterans are enrolled in Priority Group 7 or 8. The VHA is mandated to provide priority care for non-emergency outpatient medical care for any condition of a service-connected veteran rated 50% or more. According to VHA policies, patients with emergency or urgent medical needs must be provided care, or must be scheduled to receive care as soon as practicable, independent of service- connected status and whether care is purchased or provided directly by the VA. These veterans are enrolling in Priority Groups 7 and 8. Veterans rated less than 50% service-connected disabled need to be scheduled to be seen within 30 days of the desired date. When VHA staff are in doubt as to whether the request for care is for a service- connected condition, they are required to assume, on behalf of the veteran, that the veteran is entitled to priority access and schedule. Veterans in other priority groups are to be treated as if they were in the same condition as those in the 50% rated disabled group. According to VHA policies, all outpatient appointment requests must be acted on as soon as possible. VHA guidelines state that veterans with service-connected conditions cannot be prioritized over other veterans with more acute health-care needs. The total level of funding for VHA increased between FY2006 and FY2008, and most of this increase has been due to the increase in spending on medical services. As a percentage of total VHA funding, as seen in Figure 1, medical services account is the largest. VHA spending on medical facilities, medical administration, and medical and prosthetic research has been fairly stable. In addition to direct appropriations for the above accounts, the Committees on Appropriations include medical care cost recovery collections. The Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1985 ( P.L. 99-272 ), enacted into law in 1986, gave the VHA the authority to bill some veterans and most health-care insurers for nonservice-connected care provided to veterans enrolled in the VA system. The Balanced Budget Act of 1997 ( P.L. 105-33 ) gave the VHA the authority to retain these funds in the Medical Care Collections Fund (MCCF) Instead of returning the funds to the Treasury, the VA can use them for medical services for veterans without fiscal year limitations. To increase the VA's third-party collections, the act also gave the VA authority to change its basis of billing insurers from "reasonable costs" to "reasonable charges" This change in billing was intended to enhance VA collections to the extent that reasonable charges result in higher payments than reasonable costs. the Administration's budget requested consolidating several medical existing collections accounts into one MCCF. The conferees of the Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2004 ( H.Rept. 108-401 ) recommended that collections that would otherwise be deposited in the Health Services Improvement Fund (former name), Veterans Extended Care Revolving Fund (Former name), Special Therapeutic and Rehabilitation Activities Fund ( former name) and Medical Facilities Revolving fund (formername) should be deposited into MCCf. The Consolidated appropriations act of 2005 provided the VA with permanent authority to deposit funds from these five funds. The funds deposited into the MCCF would be available for medical services for veterans. These collected funds do not have to be spent in any particular fiscal year and are available until expended. The purpose of this pilot project is to provide a "comprehensive restructuring of the complete revenue cycle including cash-flow management and accounts receivable" The conferees included this provision because the FY2006 Military Construction, Military Quality of Life and Veterans Affairs Appropriations Act required the VA to establish a revenue improvement demonstration project. Appropriation Committees were concerned that the VHA was collecting only 41% percent of the billed amounts from third-party insurance companies. The VHA has established a pilot Consolidated Patient Account Center in VISN 6. MCCF collections increased by 31%, from $1.5 billion in FY2003 to $2.0 billion inFY2006. In FY2006, first-party collections represented approximately 43% of total MCCf collections. The Administration requested $32.7 billion for the program in FY2007. On May 19, 2006, the House passed its version of the Military Construction, Military Quality of Life, and Veterans Affairs Appropriations bill (MIL-CON-QUAL-appropriations bill) for FY2007. H.R. 5385 provided $32.7 billion for the VHA, a $3.4 billion (11.4%) increase over the FY2006 enacted amount of $29.3 billion and about the same as the President's request. The Senate passed the bill on November 14, 2006. On February 15, 2007, the President signed into law the Revised Continuing Appropriations Resolution, 2007. $32.7 billion for the VHA for FY2007, a $14.7 million increase over the President's request and $3.3 billion above the FY2006 enacted amount. On May 24, 2007, the House and Senate approved the U.S. Troop Readiness, Veterans' Care, Katrina Recovery, and Iraq Accountability Appropriations Act, 2007 ( H.R. 2206 ). The bill was signed into law on May 25 ( P.L. 110-28 ). For FY2008, the Administration requested $27.2 billion for medical services. $818 million increase over the Administration's request. Increase in funding to address insufficient funding levels in the advanced planning fund and to compensate for cost adjustments to previously appropriated major construction projects. The Appropriations Committees included several major areas of interest to the Appropriations Committees, and incorporated some report language from H.R. 2764 and S.Rept. 110-85. The Appropriation Committees approved the Consolidated Appropriations Act for FY2008. The Act provided funding for specific VA construction projects as requested by the Administration. have urged both DOD and VA to seek every opportunity to partner to improve the continuity of care for veterans. Joint clinics; joint Centers of Excellence for Post Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) and Traumatic Brain Injury (TBI) Joint research and/or treatment; and the development of joint clinical practice guidelines for polytrauma injury, TBI, burns, and amputee care, among other things. Currently, there is no medical diagnostic code specific to TBI. It is a challenge to quantify the number of TBI cases. International Classification of Diseases-9 th Revision (ICD—9) codes to better reflect the TBI patient population within both DOD and VA. Beginning with FY2009, the appropriators are directing the Administration to include TBI as a select program within the medical services account. The Appropriation Committees expressed concern about insufficient funding levels for mental health and substance abuse services in the FY2008 budget request. The Administration's budget request had included a reduction in the number of inpatient beds for psychiatric care and an anticipated increase of less than one. The Consolidated Appropriations Act ( H.R. 2764 , P.L. 110-161 ) includes increased funding for substance abuse services. The appropriators also directed the VA to reexamine the policy for a reduction in psychiatric inpatient care, taking into account the needs of returning OIF and OEF veterans. Furthermore, the bill directs the VA not to reduce the number of inpatient psychiatric beds at any facility that currently has a waiting list. The bill is expected to become law by the end of the year. in remote rural areas has been a long standing issue. To address this issue the appropriators have directed the VA to provide a report to the committees that includes a description of the unique challenges and costs faced by veterans. The report should also identify the need to fund alternative sources of medical services in areas where VA medical facilities are not accessible to veterans without them leaving such areas. Moreover, the report should identify the needs for funding to provide care in these areas without the need for veterans to leave the area. The Consolidated Appropriations Act directs the DOD and VA to provide a joint report to the Committees on Appropriations detailing the actions being taken by each Department to achieve an interoperable electronic medical record (EMR) system. The report should also contain an assessment of the potential for increasing local access to medical services for veterans in remote rural areas through strategic partnerships with other government and local private health care providers. The bill was passed on a bipartisan basis and is expected to be signed into law by President Barack Obama. In its FY2008 budget request, the Administration has put forward several legislative proposals. These proposals are similar to previous ones included in the Administration's budget requests for FY2003, FY2004, FY2005, FY2006, and FY2007 and rejected by Congress each year. However, unlike previous budget proposals, revenue from the proposals in the FY 2008 budget request would not be deposited in the Medical Care Collections Fund (MCCF), but would be classified as mandatory receipts to the Treasury. Similar language has been included in a Defense Appropriations conference report ( H.Rept. 110-434 ). The President's FY2008 budget request includes three major policy proposals. Assess a tiered annual enrollment fee for all Priority 7 and 8 veterans based on the family income of the veteran. Increase pharmaceutical co-payments from $8 to $15 (for each 30-day prescription) for all enrolled veterans in Priority Groups 7 and8. Bill veterans receiving treatment for nonservice-connected conditions for the entire co-payment amount. A detailed description of these budget proposals can be found in the budget request. The Administration is proposing a tiered annual enrollment fee, which is structured to charge $250 for Priority 7 and 8 veterans with family incomes from $50,000 to $74,999. The VA has estimated that this proposal would contribute more than $138 million to the Treasury annually, beginning in FY2009. The MILCON-VA Appropriation Act ( P.L. 110-161 ) does not include any bill language that would give the VA money for the tiered enrollment fee. The Administration proposes increasing the pharmacy co-payments from $8 to $15 for all enrolled Priority Group 7 and Priority Group 8 veterans. The Administration put forward this proposal in its FY2004, FY2005, FY2006, and FY2007 budget requests as well, but did not receive any approval from Congress. At present, veterans in Priority Groups 2-8 pay $8 for a 30-day supply of medication, including over-the-counter medications. When veterans reach the annual cap, they continue to receive medications without making a co-payment. medication co-payment will be increased to $8 for each 30-day supply of medication furnished on an outpatient basis for treatment of a nonservice-connected condition. The annual cap for veterans enrolled in Priority Groups 2-6 will be $960. The VA estimates that if the current proposal to raise the co- payment were enacted, it would contribute $311 million to the Treasury in FY2008 and will increase revenue by $1.6 billion over five years. The MILCON-VA Appropriation Act ( P.L. 110-161 ) does not include any bill language that would give the VA the authority to increase co-payments. According to VA estimates, of the 5.8 million unique patients that it expects to see in 2008, 111,000 may choose not to use the system if an enrollment fee is imposed. The Administration is requesting that Congress amend the VA's statutory authority by eliminating the practice of reducing first-party co-payment debts with third-party health-insurance collections. The VA asserts that this proposal would align the VA with the DOD health-care system for military retirees and with the private sector. Under current law, the VA is authorized to collect from third-party health insurers to offset the cost of medical care furnished to a veteran. If the VA treats an insured veteran for a nonservice-connected disability, and the veteran is also determined by the VA to have co-payment responsibilities, theVA will apply the payment collected from the insurer to the veteran's care. The VA also established co-payments from veterans for this care. In 1986, Congress authorized theVA to collect payments for the treatment of veterans with nonservices-connected disabilities. Under the current co-payment billing process, in cases where the cost of a veteran's medical care for a nonservice-connected condition appears to qualify for billing, the VA sends the bill to the insurance provider. The veteran's co- payment obligation is placed on hold for 90 days pending payment from the third-party payer. If no payment is received from theThird-Party payer within 90 days, a bill is sent to the veteran. Under the Administration's proposal, veterans receiving medical care services for treatment of non-service-connected disabilities will receive a bill for their entire co- Payment. This proposal would apply to all veterans who make co-payments. According to VA estimates, this proposal will increase revenue by $44 million in FY2008 and $217 million over five years. The House and Senate Appropriations Committees have not addressed this issue because it is an issue in the purview of the authorizing committees. On February 15, 2007, the Congressional Budget Office (CBO) testified that "assuming no major changes in policy ... that [VHA] medical spending would increase from $35 to $35" The House and Senate Appropriations Committees have expressed concern that the President's budget has not accurately projected the future cost of health care for veterans from FY2008-FY2012. The House Appropriations Committee expressed doubt in the actuarial model currently used to project health-care demand for Operation Enduring Freedom (OEF) and Operation Iraqi freedom (OIF) veterans. The Senate Appropriations Committee has included a general provision in H.R. 2642 directing the CBO to submit a CBO report on the issue. report projecting the annual funding level necessary for the VHA to continue providing health care for veterans from FY2009 through FY2012. Appendix A. Priority Groups and Their Eligibility Criteria Appendix B. Veterans' Payments for Health-Care Services, by Priority Group Appendix C. Financial Income Thresholds for VA Health- Care Benefits Appendix D. VHA Appropriations for FY2005 and FY2006. Report projecting the Annual Funding Level for VHA for FY 2009 through FY 2012. Report projected the annual Funding Levels for VHAs for FY2009 and FY2012, respectively.