The EU's Emissions Trading System (ETS) is a cornerstone of the EU's efforts to meet itsobligation under the Kyoto Protocol. It covers more than 11,500 energy intensive facilities acrossthe 25 EU Member countries, including oil refineries, powerplants over 20 megawatts (MW) incapacity, coke ovens, and iron and steel plants, along with cement, glass, lime, brick, ceramics, and paper installations. Covered entities emit about 45% of the European Union's carbon dioxide emissions. The figures in this column indicate the number of installations with active registry accounts on 30 April 2006. They differ from figurescommunicated in earlier press releases because they are updated for installations that opted-out for the first trading period, opted-in, andinstallations without open accounts. As all data are held in the CITL and national registries, no data are available for those Member States without an active registry. a. The figures are allowances allocated to existing installations at the start of the scheme. installations at the start of the scheme but put aside mainly for new entrants andauctioning (in the cases of Denmark, Hungary, Ireland, and Lithuania). d. Due to technical problems in the national registries of the Czech Republic, France, the Slovak Republic, and Spain, the CITL did not receivewholly reliable information on the installation level surrenders from these Member States. Some commentators have suggested that annual average 2005-2007 allocations that are actually 44.1. The Climate Action Network (CAN), a network of 365non-governmental organizations, stated the following: Emissions limits set by MemberStates for the first phase were a major disappointment. CAN: To ensure maximumenvironmental benefit of the ETS and the overall success of the system as awhole, they need to be strengthened considerably. The Kyoto targets requireambitious caps with new entrants. The EU is not on the path to the Kyoto requirements nordeveloping the trading market. This "over-allocation" does not includethe 73.4 million metric tons of allowances held in reserve by the various countries. absolute reductions for the phase 2008-2012. In general, the EC has seen the over-allocation issue as part of the"learning-by-doing" process that should help the EU in implementing the secondtrading period beginning in 2008. The new 2005 emissions data givesindependently assessed installation-level figures for the first time and so providesMember States with an excellent factual basis for deciding upon the caps in their national allocations plans. The plans are subject to approval by theCommission, which will also be making extensive use of the new data. The EU-ETS traded 362million metric tons of CO 2 in 2005, valued at 7.218 billion euro. Brokers wereresponsible for 57% of the volume, exchange markets did 15%, and bilateraltransactions accounted for 28%. Of the exchange market volume, the EuropeanClimate Exchange (ECX) had the largest share at 63%. The average price for an allowance traded in 2005 was 19.9 euro, withbrokered and exchanged allowances averaging 20.6 euro and bilateral transactionsaveraging 18.2 euro. in 2005, as indicated in Figure 1 below. Inparticular, allowance prices dropped from almost 30 euro to about 9-11 euro inApril and May, sparked by a series of reported over-allocation of allowances inseveral Member States. The EU-ETS is a maturing but still narrow market. Monthly volumes areincreasing, but have never exceeded a 1.6% monthly average. By July 2006, allowance Prices had recovered to about 17euro in July. Figure 1. CO2 Market: Even If No "Big" News Highly Volatile Source: Margus Kaasik, Eesti Energia, Carbon Market: EUETS (May 9, 2006),p. 14. share of phase 1 allocations. Modestvolume for a new system is not surprising; trading volumes under the U.S. CleanAir Act Title IV sulfur dioxide trading program were very thin in the beginning. Even after several years of operation, SO 2 allowances prices can changeunpredictably and inexplicably. Some reasons for ETS allowance price derivatives are explicable. ETS market responded to a variety of regulatory,climatic, and economic events over the first trading period. Regulatory eventsinclude the late approval of NAPs for several countries, along with the resultingover-allocation causing the sudden market correction in May. Climaticevents influencing prices include cold weather, which increased energy usage, anddry conditions, which decreased the availability of hydroelectric power. During 2005, Point Carbon analysis indicates 79% of the variance (R 2 ) inallowance prices was explained by changes in fuel prices (particularly for electricpower), with 23% ofthe variance explained by the weather. This linkage betweenallowedance prices and the power market is not a linkage between power market and CO2 prices, according to Point Carbon. surprising, as the power sectorconducted the majority of trades in 2005 and therefore significantly influencedprice development. Kaasik argues that the evidence from the past year indicates that fuelprices influence carbon prices, but not the reverse. He sees allowance prices as a derivative of natural gas and coal pricing, at least in theshort-term. Assuming natural gas-fired and coal-fired generation are the marginalcost suppliers of power, allowance prices will respond positively to increasingnatural gas prices or decreasing coal prices. electricity price byinfluencing the marginal price of electricity. The EU-ETS has provisions for linking its trading scheme to the JointImplementation (JI) and Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) components of the Kyoto Protocol. How this has evolved during the firsttrading period is illustrated by Figure 3 . Figure 3. There is a Very Long-Term Correlation Between CO2 and Electricity Price: Link Via Marginal Producer Source: Margus Kaasik, Eesti Energia, Carbon Market: EUETS (May 9, 2006) p.11. CDM. TheEC's linking directive allows operators to fulfil their allowance obligations underthe EU-ETS using credits derived from JI and CDM projects. Their credits areequivalent to allowances in environmental and economic terms, but are notinterchangeable. "Certified Emissions Reductions" (CERs) under the CDM mustbe issued by the Clean Development Mechanism Executive Board and may beused in either the first or banked for use in the second trading period. Emissions Reduction Units (ERUs) under JI are transferred from one country toanother. Several EU countries have established carbon funds topursue JI and CDM opportunities. In general, CER and ERU credits have sold at a discount to ETS allowanceprices. The degree of discount has depended on the riskiness of the project. CERand ERU Credits are available only when the projects are completed. Thus, wherebuyers take the risk, they are entered into the surrendered allowance table. The amount of CERs and ERUs that can used by an affected unit is limited by a percentagespecified by its country. of non-delivery, such as an emissions reduction purchaseagreement (ERPA), prices are in the range of 8-12 euro. In contrast, for CERsalready issued, or where the sellers take the risk, prices are  13-15euro. The real impact of CDM and JI on theEU-ETS system will not be fully known until the second trading period, when EUdemand for credits will increase substantially and other non-EU countries wouldbe implementing their own Kyoto compliance strategies. companies, governments, industryassociations, market intermediaries, and non-governmental organizations (NGOs) asked which of 12 topics they felt were most important to them. Table 3 indicates thetop five topics according to governments surveyed, along with their correspondingranking by other stakeholders. The five issues are discussed below. Source: European Commission, Review of EU Emissions Trading Scheme (November 2005), p. p. 1. The European Commission's review of the ETS was published in November 2005. 13. With the over-allocation issue in the first trading period, it is likely that theEC will take a harder stance in reviewing NAPs for the second trading period. In general, the originalEU-15 countries have to reduce their emissions caps the most to meet their share of the EU's requirements under the Kyoto Protocol. Several countries facingdouble-digit percentage reductions. As indicated, EU-15 states, on average, have toreduce their emissions on an annual basis. caps 6.8% (119 million metric tons) from their current level. In contrast, as a group, the newer countries and the EU as a whole are in substantiallybetter shape. At first glance, it would appear that the EU would have little difficulty meeting its Kyoto Protocol requirements during the second trading period. However, some sectors not covered by the ETS may growfaster than sectors covered byThe ETS. Attempts to balance the burden between ETS and non-ETS sectors have already created tension in Germany. questionnaire conducted by theEuropean Environmental Agency's Topic Centre on Air and Climate Change. Most Member States would welcome harmonization of the treatment of new entrants and closures across the EU. Analogous to the U.S. acid rain program, EU states have set up reserves toprovide allowances to new entrants. In general, these allowances are provided free,as that is widely seen as helping boost new investment. Most states have yet to dip intotheir reserves for new entrants; however, the importance of the reserve will increase as the ETS enters its second, and eventually third, phase. third, trading period. Allocating allowances according to output and not differentiatingaccording to the carbon intensity of the project would provide an incentive to developlow carbon alternatives. An example provided by Grubb and Neuhoff: New entrant reserves should be basedon output or capacity, and avoid differentiating according to the CO 2 -intensity of thenew investment. In particular, giving more to coal than gas plants would be an incentive for development of low-carbon alternatives. The manner inwhich new entrants receive allowances may have a significant effect on the long-termdirection of investment -- whether it is directed toward low- carbon opportunities orused to support continuation of current economic development. rewardsinvestment in new coal facilities, which would conflict with objectives to tackleclimate change. The damaging effects would be amplified ifcarbon-intensive new entrants not only receive free allowances for the period2008-2012 but also receive promises for subsequent periods. The proposed treatment of coal-fired powerplants by the German Government shows how difficult it will be to direct future investment toward low-carbon projects. However, it could be argued that the long-term success of the ETS and theEU's commitment to Kyoto rests on such agreements. aredirection with respect to new entrants and long-term investment. Another area in which several Member States would like more harmonizationacross the EU is the definition of a combustion installation. Concernsrevolve around ambiguity in the current definition. The ETS applies to energyactivities for all sectors with combustion installations above 20 MW of thermal rated input, oil refineries, coke ovens, and, subject to size criteria, iron and steel, cement,lime, glass, ceramics, and pulp and paper facilities. Small installations (between 20MW and50MW) account for 30% (about 3,000) of the total facilities covered under the ETS. 36% of the covered installations produced less than 10,000 metrictons of CO 2 annually. Germany is attempting to have some planned coal-fired powerplants, which will be large producers ofCO 2, able to opt-out of the Ets for 14 years. The somewhat weak emissions data available at the time of the EU questionnaire suggest this is unlikely to happen. that while three-quarters of all emissionsare produced by the largest 7.5% of installations, the small installations are responsible for less than 1%. Whether the ETS shouldcontinue to cover the roughly 3,500 facilities under 10,000 metric tons annuallyremains a hotly debated issue. In choosing a gradual, incremental approach to emissions trading, the EU isrelying on other programs to control greenhouse gas emissions in other sectors, suchas transportation. The difficulties the EC may encounter in not choosing acomprehensive approach to begin with is suggested by its survey of stakeholders. in terms of increasingcoverage is toward incrementally adding more economic sectors, rather thanaddressing the more complex issue of a comprehensive system. Based on the survey,the focus is currently on the chemical, aviation, and aluminum industries. At first glance, the ETS would appear an effective vehicle for the EU to meetits Kyoto Protocol obligations during the second trading period. The anticipateddeficit between the second and third trading periods is estimated to be around $1.2 billion. The European Commission has not set a date for the full implementation of its ETS. period for the original 15 Member States can becovered by trading with the newer Member States that anticipate a surplus. Table 6 provides one series of estimates ofavailable allowances for the Kyoto Protocol's five-year compliance period.Obviously, not all these allowances may be available to the EU alone. Othercountries, such as Japan and Canada, may decide to incorporate emissions tradinginto their implementation strategies and acquire allowances from these sources. Yet,the totals suggest that all else being equal, the supply of allowances would beadequate. The availability of surplus credits created via JI and CDM is restricted by the EC linking directive. Each country is tospell out what "supplemental" means in its NAP for the second trading period.Individual countries are likely to define that term differently -- restricting allowancetrades and purchases in some countries. Another consideration is the availability of credits to be used for domestic emissions reduction efforts. The availability of Credits to be Used for Domestic Emissions Reduction Efforts is also restricted. is the overall commitment of the Kyoto Protocol. The ETS only covers a percentage of the overall greenhouse gasemissions in the various Member States of the EU. Some sectors not covered by theETS may grow faster than sectors cover by the ETS. It is too early to tell whether the Ets market signal and individualcountries' NAPs will move investment in low-carbon technologies. The transportation area is already a major source ofconcern. A final consideration for the E TS is its suitability for directing long-terminvestment toward a low- carbon future. the appropriate direction. Germany is attempting to direct its second NAP toward carbon-intensive, coal-fired electric generating facilities rather than low-carbon alternatives. Reluctance by countries to redirecttheir NAPs and an inconsistent price from the ETS make the long-term effect of theETS uncertain. Norway, a non-EU country, also has an emissions trading system that beganoperating on January 1, 2005. Norway's system covers 51 facilities in the energy andprocess sectors such as oil refining and iron and steel processing. The carbon tax is levied on about 64% of the country's CO 2 emissions. Other parts of Norway's industry, particularly its offshore oiland gas sector, are covered by a carbon tax of almost 40 euro per metrictonne of CO 2. The firstphase of the trading program covers the period 2005-2007, with a second, expandedphase to begin in 2008. The government had indicated earlier that it would consider expanding the system from 2008 to include as many sources of emissions as practical.