The key objectives of U.S. public diplomacy are to engage, inform, and influence overseas audiences. Public diplomacy is carried out through a wide range of programs that employ person-to-person contacts. Since the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, State has expanded its public diplomacy efforts. The State Department’s efforts have focused on foreign elites. However, the dramatic growth in global mass communications and other trends have forced a rethinking of this approach, and State has begun to consider techniques for communicating with broader foreign audiences. its public diplomacy efforts globally, focusing particularly on countries in the Muslim world considered to be of strategic importance in the war on terror. In May 2006, we reported that this trend continued with funding increases of 25 percent for the Near East and 39 percent for South Asia from 2004 to 2006. The BBG supports U.S. public diplomacy’s key objectives by broadcasting news and information about the United States and world affairs. It serves as a model of how a free press should operate. State and the BBG spent close to $1.5 billion on public diplomacy programs in fiscal year 2006. As others have previously reported, in recent years anti-American sentiment has spread and intensified. For instance, favorable attitudes toward the United States in Indonesia declined from 75 percent in 2000 to 30 percent in 2006 and from 52 percent to 40 percent in 2005. The Pew Global Attitudes Project has found that the decline in favorable opinion of the U.S. is a worldwide trend.. to 12 percent over the same time period in Turkey. Numerous experts, expert groups, policymakers, and business leaders have expressed concerns that anti-Americanism may harm U.S. interests in various ways. While individual opinion polls may reflect a snapshot in time, consistently negative polls may. reflect the development of more deeply seated sentiments about the United States. The Council on Foreign Relations has claimed that the loss of goodwill may harm the U.N.’s ability to influence world leaders. The Defense Science Board states that “damaging consequences for other elements of U.s. soft power are tactical manifestations of a pervasive atmosphere of hostility” Anti-American sentiments may negatively affect American economic interests, U.S. foreign policy and military operations, and the security of Americans. According to Business for Diplomatic Action, anti-Americanism can cause boycotts of American products, a backlash against American brands, and increased security costs. A report from the Princeton-based Working Group on Anti-Americansism also found that anti-America sentiments have had a negative impact on U.s. security and foreign policy. The report was based on a survey of more than 1,000 people. The Travel Business Roundtable has reported significant declines in the U.S. market share of the worldwide travel market and a decline in overseas visitors to the United States since 9/11. According to the Defense Science Board, the Brookings Institution, and others, anti-Americanism around the world may reduce the U.-S.’s ability to pursue its foreign policy goals, including efforts to foster diplomatic relationships with other foreign leaders and to garner support for the global war on terror. The Council on Foreign Relations also has identified potential consequences of anti- Americanism on the security of individual Americans. U.S. public diplomacy efforts seek to counter anti-Americanism sentiment. State Department has not yet developed a comprehensive strategy to guide the Department’s efforts to engage the private sector. State has begun to take credible steps towards instituting more systematic performance measurement practices, consistent with recommendations GAO and others have made. State indicated that the interagency public diplomacy strategy will address assessment of marking and publicity programs and will include governmentwide marks and publicity guidance. The administration has made a number of unsuccessful attempts to develop such a strategy. the absence of such research, programs may lack important information about appropriate target audiences and credible messages and messengers. Based on prior reports by GAO and others, the department has begun to institute a more concerted effort to measure the impact of its programs and activities. The department created (1) the Office of Policy, Planning, and Resources within the office of the Under Secretary. The Public Diplomacy Evaluation Council to share best practices. The Department established an expanded evaluation schedule that is designed to cover all major public diplomacy programs. department also has called on program managers to analyze and define their key inputs, activities, outputs, outcomes, and impact to help identify meaningful performance goals and indicators. In 2001, the BBG introduced a market-based approach to international broadcasting that sought to “marry the mission to the market.” This approach was designed to generate large listening audiences in priority markets. The department recently launched a pilot public diplomacy performance measurement data collection project that is designed to collect, document, and quantify reliable annual and long-term outcome performance measures. The Board’s vision is to create a flexible, multimedia, research-driven U.S. international broadcasting system. Implementing this strategy has focused on markets relevant to the war on terrorism, in particular in the Middle East through such key initiatives as Radio Sawa and the Alhurra TV network. The BBG subsequently created a new strategic plan to implement its new approach. We found that the plan did not include a single goal or related program objective designed to gauge progress toward increasing audience size. The strategy focuses on the need to reach large audiences in priority markets. single strategic goal to focus on the key objective of maximizing impact in priority areas of interest to the United States. However, we found that weaknesses in the BBG’s audience surveys create uncertainty over whether some of Radio Sawa’S or Alhurra's performance targets for audience size have been met. We recommended that the Middle East Broadcasting Networks be re-evaluated by the U.S. Federal Communications Commission. We found that methodological concerns call into question the potential accuracy of this key performance measure. BBG accept our recommendation and has informed us that it is currently considering how it will do so. Public diplomacy efforts in the field face several other challenges. Post officials have consistently cited a general lack of staff, insufficient administrative support, and inadequate language training. The BBG’s disparate organizational structure has been viewed as a key challenge. The U.S. State Department has a responsibility to improve its public diplomacy efforts, the authors say. They recommend the BBG improve its audience research methods, including identifying significant methodological limitations. State Department had 887 established public diplomacy positions (overseas and domestic) as of March 31, 2007, but 199, or roughly 22 percent, were vacant. Compounding this challenge is the loss of public diplomacy officers to temporary duty in Iraq, which, according to one State official, is a major problem. Several embassy officials stated that, with current staffing levels, they do not have the capacity to effectively utilize increased funds. The U.S. State Department has a responsibility to focus and direct its international broadcasting efforts. Staffing shortages may also limit the amount of training public diplomacy officers receive. Public diplomacy officers at posts are burdened with administrative tasks, and thus have less time to conduct public diplomacy outreach activities than they did previously. One senior State official said that administrative tasks have drawn down field officers even further. The number of field officers has remained the same in fiscal years 2004 and 2006, the State Department says. The State Department is repositioning several public diplomacy Officers as part of its transformational diplomacy initiative. duties, such as budget, personnel, and internal reporting, compete with officers’ public diplomacy responsibilities. Another official in Egypt stated that she rarely had enough time to strategize, plan, or evaluate her programs. These statements echo comments we heard during overseas fieldwork and in a survey for our 2003 report. In that survey, officers stated that, although they manage to attend public outreach and other functions within their host country capitals, it was particularly difficult to find time to travel outside the capitals to interact with other communities. The average length of tour at posts in the Muslim world is about 22 percent shorter than tour lengths elsewhere. Public affairs officers who have shorter tours tend to produce less effective work than officers with longer tours, a senior official at State said. In our May 2006 report, we reported that the prevalence of 1-year tours in theMuslim world was high. To see the full report, go to CNN.com/soulmatestories. To read the rest of the report, click here: http://www.cnn.org/2006/01/29/world/features/world-diplomat-tours-in-mideast. GAO: State Department continues to experience significant foreign language proficiency shortfalls in countries around the world. Report noted this problem was particularly acute at posts in the Muslim world where Arabic—classified as a “superhard” language by State—predominates. Officials at State said that the Management bureau is currently considering options for reducing the administrative burden on posts, including the development of centralized administrative capabilities offshore. In 2003, GAO recommended that the Secretary of State designate more administrative positions to overseas public affairs sections. countries with significant Muslim populations. In Arabic language posts, about 36 percent of language- designated public diplomacy positions were filled by staff unable to speak Arabic at the designated level. In addition, State officials said that there are even fewer officers who are willing or able to speak on television or engage in public debate in Arabic. The information officer in Cairo stated that his office does not have enough Arabic speakers to engage with the public in public debates in the city. The State Department said that the number of Arabic speakers in Cairo has declined over the past few years. State has begun to address these language deficiencies by increasing its overall amount of language training and providing supplemental training for more difficult languages at overseas locations. State has also made efforts to ensure that its public diplomacy staff receive appropriate language training. For example, State’s Foreign Service Institute recently offered a week of intensive media training for language-qualified officers that provided guidance on how to communicate with Arabic-speaking audiences. Security concerns have limited embassy outreach, and the State Department is working to address this. Security concerns are particularly elevated in countries with significant Muslim populations. Threat level for terrorism is rated as “critical” or “high” in 80 percent of posts. Security and budgetary concerns have led to the closure of publicly accessible facilities around the world, such as the U.S. Embassy in Cairo. The U.N. has a responsibility to ensure the safety and well-being of its personnel and their families, and to protect its facilities and facilities from harm. The United Nations has a duty to protect the safety of its citizens and its facilities. as American Centers and Libraries. In Pakistan, for example, all American Centers have closed for security reasons; the last facility, in Islamabad, closed in February 2005. These same concerns have prevented establishing a U.S. presence elsewhere. As a result, embassies have had to find other venues for public diplomacy programs. Some activities have been moved onto embassy compounds, where precautions designed to improve security have had the ancillary effect of sending the message that the United States is unapproachable and distrustful. use of cell phones and pagers within the embassy. According to one official in Pakistan, visitors to the embassy’s reference library have declined to as few as one per day. Other public diplomacy programs have had to limit their publicity to reduce the risk of becoming a target. A recent joint USAID-State report concluded that “security concerns often require a ‘low profile’ approach during events, programs or other situations.” This constraint is a result of the U.S. decision to limit the use of pagers and cell phones in the embassy, the report said. particularly acute in Pakistan, where the embassy has had to reduce certain speaker and exchange programs. State has responded to security concerns and the loss of publicly accessible facilities through a variety of initiatives. American Corners are centers that provide information about the United States, hosted in local institutions and staffed by local employees. According to State data, there are currently 365American Corners throughout the world, including more than 200 in the Muslim world. However, two of the posts we visited in Pakistan were closed. October 2005 were having difficulty finding hosts for American Corners, as local institutions fear becoming terrorist targets. The Broadcasting Board of Governors has its own set of public diplomacy challenges, including trying to gain large audiences in priority markets. As noted in the BBG’s strategic plan, “diverse organizations with different missions, different frameworks, and different constituencies’ makes it a challenge to bring all the separate parts together in a more effective whole” As we reported in July 2003, the Board hoped to. address this key challenge through two primary means. First, it planned to treat the component parts of U.S. international broadcasting as a single system with the Board in the position of actively managing resources across broadcast entities. Second, it intended to realign the BBG’s organizational structure to reinforce the CEO with a host of responsibilities. In addition, in 2006, we found that MBN, which received $79 million in, was the largest broadcaster in the United States, followed by ABC. funding in fiscal year 2006, faces several managerial and editorial challenges that may hinder the organization’s efforts to expand in their highly competitive market. While MBN has taken steps to improve its process of program review and evaluation, it has not yet implemented our recommendations. Mr. Chairman, this concludes my prepared statement. I would be happy to respond to any questions you or other members of the subcommittee may have at this time. For questions regarding this testimony, please contact Jess T. Ford at (202) 512-4128 GAO: State Department Efforts to Engage Muslim Audiences Lack Certain Communication Elements and Face. GAO: Staffing and Foreign Language Shortfalls Persist Despite Initiatives to Address Gaps. U.S. International Broadcasting: Management of Middle East Broadcasting Services Could Be Improved. GAo: Actions Needed to Better Assess the Impact of Agencies’ Marking and Publicizing Efforts. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. Significant Challenges. GAO-06-535. U.S. Public Diplomacy: State Department Efforts Lack Certain Communication Elements and Face Persistent Challenges.GAO-04- 1061T. The State Department and the Broadcasting Board of Governors Expand Post- 9/11 Efforts but Challenges Remain. GAE-05-852. The state department and the broadcasting board of governors expand post-9/11efforts but challenges remain. GAo-07-071. TheState Department, the Broadcasting board of Governors and the Department of State are working together to address Islamic extremism. Governors Expand Efforts in the Middle East but Face Significant Challenges. U.S. International Broadcasting: New Strategic Approach Focuses on Reaching Large Audiences but Lacks Measurable Program Objectives. GAO-03-772. Washington, D.C.: July 15, 2003. This is a work of the U.s. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States. It may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from GAO. permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. For support in the Middle East, call the Salvation Army on 8457 909090 or see http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/.