In fiscal year 1998, the Congress appropriated $25 billion in discretionary budget authority for the Department of Housing and Urban Development’s programs. HUD provides rental housing assistance-about $21 billion in fiscal year 1996-that enables about 4.7 million low-income households to obtain safe, decent, and affordable housing. HUD assists about two-thirds of these households through its Section 8 housing assistance program. HUD estimates that the cost of Section 8 contract renewals for the tenant-based program alone will increase from $2.5 billion in 1997 to $10.5billion in 2002.  HUD’s financial management systems did not provide summary information to determine the number of expiring Section 8 contracts. HUD could not assure the Congress that its Section 8 budget requests for fiscal years 1992 and 1993 were reasonably accurate. To help correct the deficiencies, HUD implemented a new Section 8 tenant-based information system in fiscal year 1995. The system contains the actual cost incurred by each housing agency for providing rental assistance. It also provides the amount of unspent budget authority credited to each housing agencies at the end of the agency's fiscal year. OIG: $9.9 billion of budget authority excess to program needs has accumulated in housing agencies’ reserve accounts. Congress rescinded $4.2 billion, and after other adjustments, the current balance is about $3.5 billion. HUD recaptured $7.7 billion of this excess balance and retained the difference of $2.2billion to cover contingencies and to account for future transactions. OIG provided a draft of this report to HUD for review and comment and we address HUD’s comments at the end of each applicable chapter. contingencies, far less than the amount that HUD has reserved for this purpose. During fiscal year 1996, an additional $1.4 billion in excess budget authority accrued. HUD plans to adjust its reserve level after it examines in more detail housing agencies’ actual use of available unexpended budget authority in fiscal years 1996 and 1997. HUD is not required to and does not currently report in its annual budget justifications the aggregate amount of excess unexpending budget authority credited to housing agencies' reserve accounts. In September 1997 HUD proposed changes in its contract renewal estimate that lowered the average unit cost by approximately 14 percent, from $6,386 to $5,499. This change represented a decrease of $1.123 billion in the budget authority requested by HUD for its tenant-based program. In fiscal year 1995, HUD began reducing the terms for renewed expiring contracts from 3 to 5 years to 1 year. HUD does not appear to need additional funding for tenant- based amendments beyond fiscal year 1998.  HUD’s budget operations have been fragmented and disjointed, preventing clear accountability and the necessary coordination. HUD plans to no longer extend expiring tenant-based contracts with excess budget authority within the program reserves. All program divisions are hiring a chief financial officer to mirror the operations of the Department's Office of the CFO. HUD also has implemented a risk management program to protect resources from fraud, waste, and abuse and to maintain the agency's financial integrity. efforts to correct the problems identified, HUD has no specific time frames for their completion.