There were 143 petroleum refineries in the United States as of January 2013, with a capacity to process 17.8 million barrels of crude oil per day. Most refining capacity (almost 90 percent) is located in the Gulf Coast, West Coast, and Midwest regions. These refineries employed over 70,000 people in 2013. Refineries process crude oil into products primarily through a distillation process that separates crudeOil into products. The U.S. petroleum refining industry is one of the largest industries in the world. different fractions based on their boiling points, which can then be further processed into final products. One barrel of crude oil can be processed into varying amounts of gasoline, diesel, jet fuel, and other petroleum products. Through the addition of specialized equipment, refineries can be optimized—or “upgraded” to produce greater proportions of specific types of products. For example, a coker unit upgrades the low-value residual oil from the distillation process into higher value products such as jet fuel. diesel, increasing a refinery’s ability to process heavier crude oils. U.S. refineries primarily produce gasoline, diesel, and jet fuel that are used in the transportation sector, along with heating oil and liquefied petroleum gases such as propane used in home heating. The industry consists of firms of varying sizes that, in addition to operating refineries, may also have operations in other related industry segments. The upstream segment consists of the exploration for and production of crude oil; the midstream segment, which consists of. pipelines and other infrastructure used to transport crude oil and refined products; (3) the downstream segment, which consists of the refining and marketing of petroleum products such as gasoline and heating oil; and (4) the renewable fuels segment. To varying degrees, refiners may primarily operate refineries or may be integrated, participating in various other related industry segments. HollyFrontier Corporation is an example of a merchant refiner that purchases crude oil from unaffiliated producers and sells refined products to consumers. Chevron is an example of a fully integrated company, a refiner that also produces crude oil and operates pipelines and retail fueling outlets across the United States. Crude oil, petroleum products, and renewable fuels are transported between market participants through an extensive supply infrastructure including pipelines, tanker vessels, rail, trucks, wholesale terminals, and retail outlets. In 2012, refineries received the majority of their crude oil by pipeline (over 50 percent) and by tanker vessel (37 percent), with trucks and rail generally playing a more limited role according to EIA data. Retail prices for regular gasoline averaged $3.63 per gallon in 2012, the highest annual average price when adjusted for inflation since 1976. Retail prices have declined in 2013, but are still near historic highs. Market dynamics anywhere along the supply chain can influence consumer prices, beginning with upstream crude oil production, the production of renewable fuels, and the refining of crude oil and gasoline. The refining industry was a low-return industry for much of the prior two decades, according to industry officials and experts. According to EIA data, increases in crude oil costs have been the largest component of the recent increases in gasoline prices. The refining component of prices has fluctuated over time but has not increased in a significant way since 2000. The five key environmental regulations affecting the domestic refining industry that we reviewed are concerned with various health, environmental, and other issues. Under the RFS, since 2000, since U.S. refineries have been required to comply with the EPA’s RFS. 2006, transportation fuels sold in the U.S. have been required to contain increasing amounts of renewable fuels such as ethanol and biodiesel. Congress established the RFS in light of concerns such as climate change and the nation’s dependence on imported crude oil. As shown in figure 5, the law generally required that transportation fuels contain 9 billion gallons of renewable fuel in 2008, and that volumes increase in 2009. In 2009, EPA required that gasoline and diesel fuels contain at least 10 billion gallons. The Administrator of EPA is authorized to waive the RFS levels established in the act. The major source of renewable fuels has traditionally been ethanol produced from corn. The increased cultivation of corn for ethanol, its conversion into renewable fuels, and the storage and use of these fuels could affect water supplies, water officials say. The Administrator determines if implementing the requirement would severely harm the economy or environment, that there is an inadequate domestic supply, or in certain other situations, the EPA says. The RFS is set to increase by 2.4-fold through 2022 to 36 billion gallons. quality, air quality, soil quality, and biodiversity. Under the RFS’ statutory provisions, the increasing amounts of renewable fuels are to primarily come from renewable fuels other than corn ethanol. The RFS could reduce GHG emissions by 138 million metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalent emissions, the EPA says. According to EPA, achieving the R FS’s statutory blending levels in 2022 could result in total benefits of between $13 and $26 billion, the agency says. The benefits include those related to fuel costs, energy security, health, and GHG effects. CAFE standards are administered by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration. The Energy Independence and Security Act of 2007 instituted several changes to the CAFE standards. In 2009, the administration announced a new program to increase vehicle fuel economy and reduce vehicle GHG emissions. NHTSA and EPA put the national program into place by issuing coordinated regulations covering vehicle model years 2012 to 2025.equal to taking about 27 million vehicles off the road. As shown in figure 6, fuel economy standards for cars largely remained unchanged from 1990 through 2010, but vehicle manufacturers are now expected to meet increasingly stringent standards. projected combined average fuel economy of about 50 miles per gallon by 2025. The standards are about 80 percent more efficient than required under the 2011 standards. EPA estimated that the 2011-2025 standards may save consumers and businesses $1.7 trillion, reduce oil consumption by 12 billion barrels, and reduce GHG emissions by 6 billion metric tons. On May 21, EPA is authorized to establish certain standards for new motor vehicles and fuels to address air pollution that may reasonably be anticipated to endanger public health or welfare. 2013, EPA proposed the Tier 3 standards, and on March 3, 2014, EPA announced the final Tier 3 Standards. The standards establish more stringent vehicle emission standards and reduce the sulfur content of gasoline. EPA stated that the final rulemaking is very similar to the proposal, and that EPA made some changes—including to the sulfur provisions—based on public input. The views of stakeholders and other information on Tier 3 that we reviewed and summarize in the rest of this report relate primarily to the proposed standards. The Tier 3 standards set more stringent tailpipe emission standards for new vehicles. The standards generally require refiners to lower the sulfur content of gasoline from 30 parts per million (ppm) to 10 ppm on an annual average basis by 2017. More than 149 million Americans experience unhealthy levels of air pollution that has been linked to respiratory and cardiovascular problems and other adverse health effects. According to EPA, reducing the sulfurcontent of gasoline is one way to reduce pollution from cars and light trucks, among other things. of gasoline allows emissions control systems to work more effectively for existing and new vehicles. EPA estimated that the Tier 3 standards would reduce on-highway vehicle emissions of nitrogen oxides by 10 percent in 2018, and 25 percent in 2030. According to EPA estimates, by 2030, annual emission reductions would generate annual benefits of between $6.7 and $19 billion and prevent up to 2,000 premature deaths annually. EPA estimates that the vehicle and fuel standards would cost around $20 billion. approximately $1.5 billion in 2030, including costs for refiners to install and operate equipment to remove sulfur from gasoline. Under the Clean Air Act, EPA is authorized to take certain steps to address emissions from stationary sources, including refineries. EPA recently issued rules concerning how GHGs are to be included in certain existing permitting processes. Specifically, permitting authorities are to include GHG emission control requirements in Prevention of Significant Deterioration (PSD) and Prevention of significant harm to the environment. permits and certain other permits issued to refineries and other stationary sources that trigger GHG emissions thresholds. Since 2011, construction of any new refineries has generally been subject to the use of the “best available control technology’ for GHGs emissions. The best available controlTechnology is determined for each facility based on an analysis of available technologies considering cost and other factors. For example, for refineries, this could involve the installation of heat recovery units, which are energy efficiency improvements. Current regulations do not require existing facilities to take any steps to control GHG emissions unless they undertake a major modification. Examples of major modifications at a refinery include a significant expansion of crude oil processing units, or installing new secondary processing units. California’s LCFS aims to lower GHG. emissions by reducing the level of carbon in transportation fuels. Established by the California Air. Pollution Control Board, the LCFS was established to reduce carbon in transport fuels. It was created to reduce the carbon in. transportation fuels, such as gasoline and diesel. The LCFS would change the mix of fuels and vehicles in California to reduce emissions throughout the fuel ‘life cycle’ The LCFS has been fully in effect since January 2011. To reduce emissions, carbon intensity (CI) scores are used, which are to reflect each fuel’s life cycle GHG emissions. Refiners generally are required to ensure that the overall CI score for their fuels meets the annual carbon intensity target for a given fuel. The CI score can include gasoline, diesel, and their blendstocks and substitutes.  LCFS refiners can meet CI reduction targets using a variety of low carbon fuel technologies. These include renewable fuels from waste and cellulosic materials, natural gas, electricity used in plug-in vehicles, and hydrogen used in fuel cell vehicles. The original LCFS statewide reduction targets for gasoline, diesel, and their substitutes started at 0.25 percent of 2010 values in 2011 and increased to 10 percent by 2020. However, in 2013 a state Court of Appeal found that CARB must correct certain aspects. CARB officials announced a regulatory package would be proposed in 2014. The 2013 standards will remain in effect through 2014. Refiners can produce their own low carbon fuels, buy such fuels from other producers to blend into their products and sell on the market, or purchase credits generated by others. CARB estimated that 1 percent decrease in carbon intensity from 2010 values would be needed to meet LCFS standards. The standards are based on the procedures by which the LCFS was originally adopted, CARB says. The 2020 targets would reduce GHG emissions associated with the transportation sector in California by 10 percent in 2020, or 23 million metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalent. Stakeholders identified three major changes that have likely recently affected the domestic petroleum refining industry. Crude oil production in the United States and Canada has increased, which has lowered the cost of purchasing crude oil for some refiners. After many years of generally increasing domestic consumption of petroleum products, consumption has slowed in the U.S. and Canada. has fallen since 2005, resulting in a smaller domestic market for refiners. U.S. and Canadian crude oil production has increased in recent years, leading to lower crude oil costs for some refiners, according to several stakeholders we contacted. According to EIA data, U.s. production of crude oil reached its highest level in 1970 and generally declined through 2008, reaching a level of almost one-half of its previous peak in 2008. CAFE and GHG vehicle emission standards and the RFS have likely recently contributed to declining consumption. Recent improvements in technologies have allowed companies to extract oil from shale formations that were previously considered inaccessible. In particular, the application of horizontal drilling techniques and hydraulic fracturing have increased U.S. oil production. The process injects a combination of water, sand, and chemical additives under high pressure to create and maintain fractures in underground rock formations that allow oil and natural gas to flow. The United States increasingly relied on imported crude oil to meet growing domestic energy needs during the 1990s and early 2000s.  monthly domestic crude oil production has increased by over 55 percent through September 2013 compared with average production in 2008. According to EIA, increases in production in 2012 and 2013 were the largest annual increases since the beginning of U.S. commercial crudeOil production in 1859. Much of the increase in crude oilProduction has been from shale and other formations, such as the Bakken in North Dakota and the Eagle Ford in Texas. Similarly, crude oil Production in Canada— the largest foreign supplier of crude oil to the United States has also increased significantly in recent years. The rapid growth in U.S. and Canadian crude oil production has lowered the cost of crude oil for some domestic refiners that have the access and ability to process these crude oils. For example, West Texas Intermediate crude oil was $17.60 per barrel less expensive in 2012 than Brent, an international benchmark crude oil from the European North. From 2005 through 2012, total Canadian crudeOil production increased by 32 percent and U.s. imports from Canada increased almost 50 percent. Sea that was historically about the same price as West Texas Intermediate. Those refineries able to take advantage of these lower priced crude oils have benefited because crude oil costs are the largest cost for refiners. Some of the growth in production has been in areas with limited transportation linkages to refining centers. The development of domestic and Canadian crude oil production has created some challenges for U.S. crude oil transportation infrastructure. Most refineries may not have been able totake advantage ofThese crude oils to the same extent for two key reasons. of the system of crude oil pipelines in the United States was constructed in the 1950s, 1960s, and 1970s. The infrastructure was designed primarily to move crude oil from the South to the North. But emerging crude oil production centers in Western Canada, Texas, and North Dakota have strained the existing pipeline infrastructure. Though pipeline capacity has increased, investment increased pipeline capacity to deliver crude oil to a key Cushing, Oklahoma hub by about 815,000 barrels per day from 2010 through 2013. Some refineries may not have been able to take full advantage of crude oil production increases. Infrastructure constraints have contributed to discounted prices for some domestic crude oils. Domestic consumption of petroleum products peaked in 2005 at 20.8 million barrels per day. Consumption of gasoline, diesel, and jet fuel peaked in 2007 and declined by over 8 percent through 2012. More stringent fuel economy standards and the RFS, which are discussed in the next section, have likely affected the refining industry, according to stakeholders. petroleum fuels, but the extent is unclear. These standards aim to reduce oil consumption, and although they do not require changes at the refinery level, they can affect refineries indirectly. National Academy of Sciences: It is difficult to isolate the effect of CAFE and GHG vehicle emissions standards from other factors that also affect consumption. EPA estimated in 2010 that vehicles were expected to save 1.3 billion gallons of gasoline in 2013 compared with model year 2011 standards. This is equivalent to about 1 percent of EIA’s projection of gasoline consumption in 2013. annual RFS standards, and several factors contribute to the delays. RFS Has Had Three Main Effects Stakeholders we contacted and information we reviewed identified three main ways the RFS has affected U.S. petroleum refiners. compliance has recently increased costs for some refiners, (2) required blending of renewable fuels has contributed to declining domestic consumption of petroleum-based transportation fuels, and (3) EPA’s delays in issuing annual RFS Standards may have contributed to investment uncertainty. Refiners are required to ensure U.S. transportation fuels include certain amounts of renewable fuels. They can purchase and blend renewable fuels themselves, or they can pay others to blend or use renewable fuels by purchasing credits. These credits can be freely traded, and prices for credits are established based on the market and generally reflect the stringency of requirements and the costs of incorporating additional renewable fuels into the transportation fuel system to comply with the RFS. If costs increase, credits prices would tend to increase as well. According to EIA, corn-based ethanol credit prices were low between 2006 and much of 2012. In 2013, prices for these credits increased to over $1.40 per gallon in July before declining to about $0.20 per gallon as of mid- November 2013. Several stakeholders told us this increase in credit prices was primarily due to RFS requirements exceeding the capability of the transportation fuel infrastructure to distribute and the fleet of vehicles to use renewable fuels, referred to as "renewable fuels" the “blend wall.” A refiner we spoke with also attributed the decline in credit prices in the second half of 2013 to EPA’s statements expressing its desire to address the blend wall. While the RFS applies to all refiners in the same way, the effect of the rise in credit Prices may depend on each refiner's situation. However, in comments to this report EPA stated that refiners experience the same compliance costs. As a result of higher costs, several stakeholders told us. refiners could reduce production, produce more jet fuel, which is not subject to RFS requirements, or increase exports to nations where the RFS does not apply. The RFS has contributed to the declining domestic consumption of petroleum-based transportation fuels. As a result, refiners and other industry participants have blended increasing amounts of renewable fuels. (See app. III for more information about the blend wall, RFS credits, and views on how they have affected U.S. refiners.) consumption of ethanol has increased almost 8-fold since 2000. According to EIA, increased ethanol use since 2007 displaced over 4 billion gallons of petroleum-based gasoline. As discussed previously, decreases in consumption affect refiners by decreasing the size of the domestic market. Since the RFS was established in light of concerns about the nation’s dependence on imported crude oil, decreased consumption of petroleum products may further some of the objectives of the R FS. The RFS has contributed to investment in ethanol production. EPA has not issued annual RFS standards on time since 2009. Most recently, EPA issued 2013 standards in August 2013, over 8 months late. EPA proposed the 2014 standards on November 2013, and has not yet issued the 2014 Standards. EPA is required to set annual blending percentages for total renewable fuels, advanced biofuels, cellulosic biofuELs, and biomass-based diesel fuels by November 30 of the preceding calendar year. However, as shown in figure 9, EPA has missed the statutory deadline. The RFS compliance period is set by statute to be a full calendar year, and delays do not change this compliance period. When the RFS standards are issued late, the industry has less time to plan and budget effectively. Several representatives of refiners told us that delays in issuing annual RFS Standards increase uncertainty for refiners. EPA officials told us they plan to finalize the standards in Spring 2014, and they expect them to be in compliance by the end of the year. The deadline for the standards is Nov. 29, 2013. EPA officials say there is no indication that delays have caused significant problems for refiners. Delays could actually make annual standards more robust since EPA then has more data upon which to base decisions. One refining company representative told us that the company has reduced capital investments due to uncertainty related to the RFS. The delays in issuing RFS standards have largely been due to Regulatory Development Processes, EPA officials say. The RFS is the nation's primary source of renewable fuel for power plants, vehicles and vehicles. to the length of the regulatory development process, which includes interagency and public reviews. The interagency review process is to ensure that regulations are consistent with the President’s priorities, among other things, and that decisions made by one agency do not conflict with the policies or policies of the other agencies. EPA is to follow certain procedures before publishing proposed or final regulations that establish annual RFS standards, including submitting draft proposed and final regulations to the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Under the public review process, EPA must publish a proposed standard in the Federal Register. According to EPA officials, the interagency and public review processes can be time consuming. The RFS standards involve complex and controversial issues and balance competing agricultural, energy, and environmental policy interests. In 2009, we recommended that EPA and other agencies track their performance for developing significant regulations against targeted milestones to identify opportunities for improvement. We found that the agency's performance against this recommendation was below average. The agency's overall performance against the 2009 recommendation was also below average, we found. EPA tracks 14 milestones as it develops proposed rules and additional milestones in developing final regulations. For example, EPA tracks when its senior management approves of a document describing the scope of the regulation and the analytical work necessary to develop it. In comments to our 2009 report, EPA said monitoring actual versus estimated performance could help agency managers identify steps in the process that account for substantial time and provide information necessary to evaluate whether time was well spent. In this regard, EPA says it uses an agency-wide Action Development Process. to our 2009 report, EPA stated that it used an internal tracking system along with additional information to develop regulatory management reports to EPA managers and executives. EPA officials told us that they develop RFS regulations using the same procedures used for developing all EPA regulations. However, even with these systems, EPA has not met its statutory deadlines under the RFS in the five annual standards since 2009. EPA has also not conducted a systematic review of RFS rules to ensure that they are being implemented on time. review of its experience issuing RFS regulations to identify the underlying causes of repeated delays. EPA has not identified changes in its approach that may help to avoid these delays in the future. The other key regulations that we reviewed have had minimal effects to date because these regulations either have not yet been implemented (Tier 3 standards) or, with respect to the other two, have not affected industry operations or costs in a major way. Without such analyses and a plan to address the underlying cause of the delays, EPA risks repeating them. way, according to stakeholders and information we reviewed. Tier 3 standards were proposed on May 21, 2013, and EPA announced final standards on March 3, 2014. Stationary source GHG requirements have been burdensome to refiners, but several other stakeholders said they have not had a major effect. EPA officials told us they were aware of only three refineries that have received majorSource GHG permits since the GHG permitting program began in 2010. The EPA says it has no immediate plans to change its GHG standards.  stationary source GHG requirements do not apply unless an existing refining facility proposes a major modification or a new refinery is proposed for construction. A refining company representative expressed concerns to us about the lengthy permitting process to authorize GHG emission increases. An EPA official said that, in most cases, best available control technologies selected to comply with GHG requirement for refining facilities involve energy efficiency improvement measures that could help refiners reduce fuel consumption and save money. In some cases, delays can occur when the refinery applicant has not yet been approved. not provided EPA with the proper information to proceed with processing the permit. The Clean Air Act requires that EPA approve or deny such permits within 12 months of receiving a complete application. LCFS is the subject of several ongoing lawsuits, which resulted in a 4-month delay in some regulatory activities and uncertainty about the status of the regulation. According to a study conducted by a consultant on behalf of industry, the ongoing legal challenge has increased fuel prices by about $0.01 per gallon to date. to LCFS is creating uncertainty that discourages new investments by industry. A refining industry trade association representative told us many refiners that previously invested in new components for their California facilities to process heavy crude oils may not be able to make an adequate return on investment. LCFS does not specifically prohibit any crude oil from being processed in California refineries, but rather it ensures that the LCFS’ goal to reduce carbon intensity in transportation fuels is not affected by increased use of higher carbon intensity crude oils. Domestic petroleum product consumption declined by 11 percent from 2005 through 2012. EIA projects that inputs to refineries in 2020 would be about 1 million barrels per day higher in scenarios with higher domestic consumption. CAFE and GHG vehicle emission standards will require more efficient vehicles in the future, which may reduce future consumption of fuels. EPA estimated that the model year 2012-2025 standards are projected to reduce U.S. consumption of crude oil by 2.2 million barrels a day by 2025. of the U.S. refining industry will also depend on the extent to which some key regulations—RFS, Tier 3, stationary source GHG requirements, and LCFS—increase costs for refiners. Increasing costs may be absorbed by refiners themselves (i.e., by reducing their profits), be passed on to consumers through higher product prices, or both. The uncertainty surrounding these regulations can affect the market climate within which refiners and other market participants make investment decisions. Such uncertainty can discourage investments in the industry overall. EPA entered a settlement in which the agency agreed to develop national performance standards. EPA has no current schedule to issue these standards, but it committed in its settlement to issue them. Several stakeholders expressed concern that future standards could impose more strict controls involving higher costs at refineries. A stakeholder told us that until EPA clarifies its approach for NSPS, many refiners will be reluctant to make certain investments in their refineries out of fear of higher costs. The settlement is expected to be finalized by the end of the year. California refiners could face higher costs or compliance challenges unless CARB adjusts future low carbon fuel requirements. Industry study estimated that the LCFS could cost the refining industry an average of $0.70 per gallon by 2020. Study also projected that 5 to 7 of 14 California refineries could cease production by 2020, and theLCFS could raise other compliance challenges because of insufficient supplies or consumer uptake of cellulosic, Brazilian sugar- cane ethanol, and other low carbon intensity fuels or vehicle technologies. CARB could introduce cost containment provisions to increase the availability of credits. Future domestic refinery production levels may depend on exports of petroleum products. U.S. recently exported more petroleum products than other leading exporters, including Russia, India, and Singapore. Exports of petroleum product represented 7 percent of refinery production in 2007 but increased to 17 percent in 2012. To sell products abroad, refiners need to be competitive with foreign refiners. The extent to which domestic refiners are able to export their products will depend on the competitiveness of domesticRefiners compared with foreign Refiners. Stakeholders and information we reviewed suggest that various factors may affect the U.S. refining industry’s future competitiveness. IEA data indicate that competition from foreign refiners may increase as global refining capacity is projected to exceed global consumption. Costs associated with environmental regulations, exports to nations with stringent fuel standards, and increasing domestic and Canadian crude oil production are also factors. To be competitive, refiners must be able to supply fuels that foreign purchasers want to buy at prices that are attractive. assumes more domestic crude oil and natural gas resources projects higher export levels. Several stakeholders told us that various issues could mitigate U.S. refiners’ ability to take advantage of growing crude oil supplies. It is unclear whether planned expansions in pipelines and rail transportation will keep pace with growing production, and these infrastructure expansions could be affected by regulatory actions to address pipeline and rail safety. Potential future increases in crude oil exports, which are currently minimal, could put pressure on refiners, stakeholders said. The domestic petroleum refining industry has been and is expected to continue to be affected by several profound changes. Some of these changes, such as the growth in crude oil production in the United States and Canada, are reshaping the industry and creating new business opportunities. To take advantage of some of these opportunities, refiners and other market participants will need to invest—to upgrade refineries to be able to process different crude oils or to build pipelines or rail connections to move more crude oil from production to refineries. EPA has missed the annual deadline for issuing annual standards under the RFS in most years. EPA may waive the statutory volumes in whole or in part according to statutory criteria. Uncertainty can affect the market climate within which these investment decisions will be made. EPA’s timeliness in issuing annual percentage standards under RFS is important to help inform the investment decisions of the refining industry. The EPA has some systems in place to help the industry prepare for the new regulations. EPA has identified as potentially factoring in the blend wall, market developments, and other issues. to monitor and evaluate progress in developing regulations, which could provide useful information for understanding delays in RFS. But EPA has not identified the underlying causes of delays, and it has not developed a plan to address delays and, therefore, risks repeating delays. Uncertainty among refiners, renewable fuel producers, and other market participants about how EPA will address the blend wall, which can be exacerbated by the prospect of litigation, can affect investment. EPA delays in issuing RFS standards are important because delays do not change refiners’ compliance periods accordingly. investment decisions and ultimately the availability and prices of the fuels they produce. We recommend that the Administrator of the EPA take the following two actions: Assess past experience to identify the underlying causes of delays in issuing annual RFS standards. Develop and implement a plan to address the causes of delay and help ensure RFS annual standards are issued on time. We provided drafts of this report to DOE, DOT, and EPA for review and comment. The three agencies provided technical comments on early drafts of the report. EPA generally agreed with our findings and recommendations and clarified three topics discussed in the report. EPA asserted that refiners experience the same compliance costs regardless of whether they are fully integrated, with blending capabilities, or merchant refiners that purchase credits for compliance. For example, in a 2011 study, DOE identified the degree to which a small refiner can actively blend production with production. Based on our work, we found the views of several stakeholders differed from EPA's. We incorporated these views into our final drafts. renewable fuels is a large component that could contribute to economic hardship from compliance with the RFS. In theory, market-based compliance systems provide incentives for market participants to make decisions that would tend to equalize additional compliance costs over time. There can be physical infrastructure or contractual constraints, among various other factors, that could result in different outcomes in the short run. We added additional language to explain EPA's views in the report and in Appendix III. Second, regarding the time-frame for RFS compliance, EPA stated that the R FS compliance deadline is the date by which refiners must comply. and other obligated parties must demonstrate compliance to EPA—is established through implementing regulations, not statute. EPA stated that it adjusted the 2013 deadline to provide additional time to demonstrate compliance. The compliance period refers to the time during which refiners and other parties incur obligations under RFS and can take steps to incorporate additional renewable fuels to generate credits for compliance. This period is set by statute to be a full calendar year. We clarified language in the report to acknowledge EPA's ability to adjust the compliance deadline. additional time for obligated parties to purchase credits, and its inability to adjust the compliance period. Third, regarding Tier 3 standards, EPA announced the final standards while our draft was with the agency for comment. EPA stated that the final Tier 3 program is very similar to what it proposed, though EPA made some changes based on public input and updated its analyses. EPA provided technical comments to incorporate information from the final rule which we incorporated into the report, as appropriate. However, we were not able to obtain stakeholder and other views on the finalTier 3 rule for the report. GAO will send copies to the appropriate congressional committees and to the Secretaries of Energy and Transportation and the Administrator of the EPA. The report will be available at no charge on the GAO website at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staff members have any questions about this report, please contact me at (202) 512-3841 or ruscof@gao,gov. See appendix IV for EPA’s letter to theGAO. This report provides information on the domestic petroleum refining industry and its market and regulatory environment. It addresses what is known about (1) major changes and (2) major factors that may affect the future of the domestic refining industry. GAO staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix V.our Offices of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of this report. To provide information on major changes that have recently affected the domestic Petroleum refining industry, this report includes information on key environmental regulations. affected the domestic petroleum refining industry and the future of the industry. We reviewed information including: studies by federal agencies and consultants, company financial regulatory filings, and proposed and final regulations and regulatory impact analyses. Based on our research and information from stakeholders, we identified five key regulations that were recently strengthened or proposed: the Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) Renewable Fuels Standard. We also asked agency officials and other stakeholders we contacted to recommend studies that could be used in the study. regulations, (2) the Department of Transportation’s Corporate Average Fuel Economy and EPA's greenhouse gas vehicle emission standards. We reviewed agency regulatory impact assessments and industry and other studies on the effect of these regulations on industry. We also summarized the results of semistructured interviews with a nonprobability sample of 32 stakeholders. (See app. II for a list of these stakeholders.) Stakeholders included representatives from refining companies, oil refineries, and other industry groups. environmental organizations, consultants, and officials from federal and state agencies. We also visited several refineries of selected refining companies. We selected these stakeholders to represent broad and differing perspectives on these issues. For example, to select refiners, we considered, among other factors, the size and location of their refineries, and whether they were vertically integrated or merchant refiners. When possible, we used a standard set of questions in interviewing stakeholders, including questions about the effect of the key regulations we reviewed. on additional questions tailored to these stakeholders’ expertise and sought opinions from stakeholders on key issues. Because we used a nonprobability sample, the views of these stakeholders are not generalizable to all potential stakeholders. Similarly, the conditions at the refineries we visited are notgeneralized to all refineries. The stakeholder views we summarize were not necessarily supported by all types of stakeholders, though we identify differing views where appropriate. Stakeholders and information we reviewed identified a number of issues that need to be addressed. changes that have affected the industry and a number of factors that may affect its future. To illustrate major changes over time and to describe the domestic petroleum refining industry, we summarized historical data from the Energy Information Administration. To assess the reliability of EIA data, we took several steps including reviewing documentation, interviewing EIA staff, and consulting with stakeholders. We determined the EIAData to be sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report. The U.S. refining industry is one of the largest in the world. We reviewed forecasts from EIA, the International Energy Agency (IEA), and IHS. We selected these forecasts because they made projections through 2020. While forecasts are subject to inherent uncertainties, we found these forecasts to be reasonable for describing a range of views about potential conditions of the domestic refining industry. We identified some differences in the metrics reported in the four forecasts and did not make direct comparisons in these instances. We conducted this review and compiled data from relevant scenarios and compared them where appropriate. performance audit from November 2012 to March 2014 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. To demonstrate compliance with the Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) annual blending requirements under the Renewable Fuel Standard (RFS), refiners use renewable identification numbers (RINs), which we refer to in this report as credits. We plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence. RIN is a unique 38-character code that renewable fuel producers and importers assign to each gallon of renewable fuel produced or imported. To demonstrate compliance with the RFS, refiners must provide sufficient RINs for the volume of gasoline and diesel they produce for use in the contiguous United States and Hawaii. For example, to comply with the 2013 total renewable fuels standard, a refiner selling 100 million gallons of gasoline would have to provide 9.74 million total Rins to EPA. RINs are valid for the calendar year in which they were generated. Up to 20 percent of a year’s standard can be met with RINs from the previous year. Refiners and other obligated parties can hold them for use in the following year or sell them to another party that needs additional Rins to comply with the blending standard. Prices for RINS reflect the cost of blending renewable fuels with natural gas, biodiesel, and other renewable fuels. For more information, go to www.renewablefuel.gov. RIN prices for corn-based ethanol increased to over $1.40 per gallon in July 2013. Several stakeholders told us this increase in RIN prices was primarily due to RFS requirements exceeding the capability of the RFS.of renewable fuels compared with the petroleum fuels they displace, the stringency of annual blending percentage standards, and other factors, and have varied over time. According to the Energy Information Administration (EIA), between 2006 and much of 2012, corn- based ethanol Rin prices were low. High corn prices, which made ethanol more expensive relative to gasoline, also contributed to higher RIN prices during this period. EPA officials recently said the blend wall would be reached in 2014 when about 13.2 billion gallons of E10 could be consumed. Blending additional renewable fuels can be difficult and costly once the blending wall is reached. The EPA has said it wants to address the "blend wall" by the end of the year, but no date has been set for when this will happen.  compliance has been most difficult for refiners with less of a retail presence. Some industry participants may be relatively advantaged when the price of RINs rises. EPA officials told us that the RFS program affects all refiners equally because obligations are the same regardless of whether refiners blend their renewable fuels.to deliver those fuels. For example, an ExxonMobil official said that RIN costs did not have a significant impact on the company’s financial performance during the second quarter of 2013. renewable fuels themselves or purchase RINs. In particular, EPA stated that refiners experience the same costs. If a company generates its own Rins, there is a cost associated with doing so, namely the cost for the renewable fuel compared to the petroleum fuel it displaces. GAO-12-732. Oil and Gas: Information on Shale Resources, Development, and Environmental and Public Health Risks. Washington, D.C.: O&G: The Future of Shale Energy in the United States. September 5, 2012. Biofuels: Challenges to the Transportation, Sale, and Use of Intermediate Ethanol Blends. Washington, D.C.: June 3, 2011. Vehicle Fuel Economy: NHTSA and EPA’s Partnership for Setting Fuel Economy and Greenhouse Gas Emissions Standards Improved Analysis and Should Be Maintained. GAO-10-336. Energy-Water Nexus: Many Uncertainties Remain about National and Regional Effects of Increased Biofuel Production on Water Resources. Increases in Production and Use. Federal Rulemaking: Improvements Needed to Monitoring and Evaluation of Rules Development as well as to the Transparency of OMB Regulatory Reviews. Energy Markets: Refinery Outages Can Impact Petroleum Product Prices, but No Federal Requirements to Report Outages Exist. Vehicle Fuel Economy: Reforming Fuel Economy. Energy markets: Increasing Globalization of Petroleum Products Markets, Tightening Refining Demand and Supply Balance, and Other Trends Have Implications for U.S. Energy Supply, Prices, and Price Volatility. Standards Could Help Reduce Oil Consumption by Cars and Light Trucks, and Other Options Could Complement These Standards. GAO-07-921. Washington, D.C.: August 2, 2007. Motor Fuels: Understanding the Factors That Influence the Retail Price of Gasoline. GAE-05-525SP. Washington,. D.c.: May 2, 2005. MotorFuels: understanding the factors that influence the retail price of Gas gasoline. GAo-05/525SP: Understanding The Factors That influence the Retail price of gas.