Title V of the Social Security Act (SSA) authorizes funding for services and projects that are intended to improve the health of mothers and children. This report focuses on the MCH Services Block Grant, which receives the largest single appropriation under Title V. The Maternal and Child Health Bureau (MCHB) of the Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA) administers the grant. The grant is administered by the Maternal, Infant, and Early Childhood Home Visiting Program. Title V was enacted by Congress in 1935 as part of the Social Security Act (SSA, P.L. 74-271) to promote and support the health of mothers and children. Two grant programs were established to enable states to improve maternal and child health services. The Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1985 replaced the term "crippled" with the term 'children with special needs' in the original Title V of the SSA. The term 'special needs' is now used to refer to children with disabilities. Children with special health care needs (CSHCN) are defined by HRSA as "those who have or are at increased risk for a chronic physical, developmental, behavioral, or emotional condition" CSHCN includes children with disabilities who receive Supplemental Security Income (SSI, formerly ยง1615 [c] of the SSA); lead-based paint; and low-income women and children. Over time, additional programs targeting these children were added to the Public Health Service Act (PHSA) and SSA. Title V was converted to the MCH Services Block Grant in 1981 by the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act (OBRA) OBRA 1981 consolidated the existing categorical programs listed above into a single block grant. The consolidated block grant was intended to give the states more flexibility in determining how to use federal funds to address maternal and child health. Title V was also used to fund poisoning prevention programs, genetic disease programs, hemophilia treatment centers, adolescent pregnancy grants, and sudden infant death syndrome programs. The MCH Services Block Grant currently has three components: block grants to states, a set-aside for Special Projects of Regional and National Significance (SPRANS), and another set- aside for the Community-Integrated Block Grant. It required that each state receive, at a minimum, the combined funding of the programs that were consolidated under OBRA 1981. Additional changes were made to the block grant under the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1989. These changes increased the authorization of appropriations, called for greater accountability, and created stricter rules. The MCH Services Block Grant was appropriated $638.2 million in funding for FY2016. The majority of this funding is distributed to the 50 states, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, Guam, the Virgin Islands, the Northern Mariana Islands, American Samoa, the Federated States of Micronesia, the Marshall Islands, and Palau. Some of these funds are reserved for CISS grants, and others are devoted to research via the SPRANS grants. Title V of the Social Security Act established seven broad goals for the program. the MCH Services Block Grant. Maternal and child health services, research, training, demonstrations, and other activities funded by the block grant must be linked to one or more of these goals. The seven goals are as follows: ensure access to quality health care for mothers and children, especially those with low income or limited availability of care. reduce infant mortality; provide and ensure access. to comprehensive prenatal and postnatal care to women (especially low-income and at-risk pregnant women); increase the number of children receiving health assessments and follow-up diagnostic and treatment services. Primary use of MCH Services Block Grant is to fill gaps in core public health services. States are required to use at least 30% of their block grant allocations for preventive and primary care services for children. MCH workforce development, genetic services, and diagnostic and treatment services for hemophilia are funded by SPRANS. CISS grants fund projects that support integrated maternal and child health services at the community level. The law provides that block grant funds are to be used by the states "to provide and to assure mothers and children (in particular those with low income or with limited availability of health services" Maternal and Child Health Services Block Grant provides funding for core public health services provided by maternal and child health agencies. Services funded by the block grant may include prenatal care, well-child care, dental care, immunization, family planning, and vision and hearing screening services. Block grant funding is also used to support school-based health centers. Distribution of funds depends on the needs of the states' populations, and the gaps left by other health and social service programs that are identified by the states. V agency contracts with health providers to provide the services. Agency administering the state's Medicaid program assumes the responsibility for reimbursement of those services. States may also include coordination with other services, such as WIC, under the agreement. HRSA's 2008 analysis recommended specific components for interagency agreements and provided a model interagency agreement. Adoption of a model agreement could build upon the Title V effort to ensure coordination among the block grant, Medicaid, and other programs. The SPRANS program is a HRSA- administered discretionary grant program for research and training for maternal and child health and children.  SPRANS projects must support national needs and priorities or emerging issues. They must also demonstrate ways to improve state systems of care for mothers and children. Approximately 15% of MCH Services Block Grant funds are set aside for SPRANS programs. The FY2016 budget included appropriations language that provided appropriations language for the SPRANS program. The program is funded by the MCH services block grant program. It provides funding for programs that train health care and maternal and child health personnel. It also provides funds for research into maternal and children's health. SPRANS set-aside funds for oral health ($5.00 million); epilepsy ($3.64 million); sickle cell ($2.96 million); and fetal alcohol syndrome ($0.48 million) SPRANS may also be used for genetic disease testing, counseling, and information development and dissemination programs. Preference is given to applicants who demonstrate that activities in these categories will be carried out in areas with a high infant mortality rate. Generally, the priority for funding SPRANS projects is determined by HRSA. has sometimes provided specific directives for certain programs, including set-asides for the programs listed above. In FY2016, these congressional directives comprised about 16% of SPRANS funding. In addition, the Family-to-Family Health Information Centers program funds family-staffed and family-run centers. The F2F HICs provide information, education, technical assistance, and peer support to families of children with special health care needs. They also assist in ensuring that families and health professionals are partners in decisionmaking at all levels of care. CISS grants and contracts support development and expansion of integrated services at the community level. Public or private organizations or institutions are eligible for these grants. Strategies used include maternal and infant health home visiting; projects to increase participation of obstetricians and pediatricians in Title V and Medicaid; integrated maternal and child health service. CISS is a HRSA-administered discretionary grant program that funds projects which seek to increase service delivery capacity at the local level and to promote community-based health systems. MCH Services Block Grant funds are distributed by formula to states and territories. States must contribute $3 for every $4 of federal funds awarded. States are required to maintain at least the state's FY1989 level of funding for maternal and child health programs. The program also receives 15% of funds remaining above $600 million after CISS funds are set aside. The CISS program is initiated whenever the MCH Services block grant appropriation exceeds $600million. The SPRANS program has additional funding of $5 million to develop Family to Family Information Centers. Grant program is currently authorized to receive $850 million annually. The final appropriation for FY2016 was $638.2 million. Full-year appropriations for FY2017 have yet to be enacted. Figure 2 shows historical and current funding in total and for the three components of the MCH Services Block Grant. The President's budget requested $637.6 million for the program for FY 2017. The program is discretionary and subject to the annual appropriations process. It is funded by a combination of block grants to states and SPRANS. MCH Services Block Grant funding was $638.2 million in FY2016. Funding for the program peaked at $731.3 million inFY2002. decreased federal funding for the block grant may be temporarily offset by funding for new Title V programs authorized in the ACA. The Maternal, Infant, and Early Childhood Home Visiting program is funded through FY 2016. While this program is not intended as a flexible source of funds, the home visiting program has maternal and infant programs. Child health objectives that are consistent with those of the MCH Services Block Grant. Funding for MCH services is not determined solely by federal funding. States are required to provide $3 for every $4 of federal block grant funding. Other local, state, or federal funds may be used to support MCH activities. Certain MCH programs generate income through insurance payments and Medicaid reimbursements. Figure 3 shows national Title V block grant partnership funding by source of funding for FY2015. The MCH Service Block Grant has several reporting mechanisms required by the federal government. HRSA must report to Congress on the activities carried out under the SPRANS and CISS programs. HRSA has developed national performance measures in coordination with states and grantees. States have also developed and reported additional state-level measures. The first national audit of the program will be performed every two years. The second audit will be carried out every three years, and the third will be every five years, unless there is a change in the program's funding source or the program is terminated. performance measures (NPMs) for MCH were instituted in 1997. In 1998, HRSA introduced the Title V Information System (TVIS) to collect and publicly report state-level Title V data. This interactive, web-based system provides public access to Title V performance measures by state. Since 2011, all states have reported annually on their progress toward achieving the targets they set for 18 National Performance Measures. That will end with the FY2015 annual report (see Table E -1 ). Changing trends in MCH risk factors, outcomes, health services, data sources, and advances in scientific knowledge, in conjunction with budgetary constraints led the The new performance measurement system has three tiers: NPMs, national outcome measures (NOMs), and evidence-based/informed strategy measures (ESMs) Beginning with the annual report for FY2016, each state Title V program selects 8 out of 15 N PMs for programmatic focus during the five-year reporting cycle. A comprehensive list of national performance measures is provided in Appendix E . In addition to state-reported measures, the Maternal and Child Health Bureau administers two surveys, the National Survey of Children's Health and the National survey of Children with Special Health Care Needs. and submit an annual report to the Secretary on all Title V activities. States must provide a list of activities and recipients of Title V funding, along with a description of progress toward meeting national and state health objectives. The reports must be presented in a standardized format. While the measures are designed to standardize reporting across the states, they are not intended to replace state-by-state reporting. The measures are intended to provide a framework for state-to-state comparisons. They are not meant to replace individual state- to state reporting. There is still variation among states in terms of capacity for collecting and reporting data. Priority needs that were frequently identified in states' FY2013 MCH Services Block Grant applications include family support services, oral health services and childhood obesity treatment and prevention. The statute requires states to provide the number of individuals served, either in the state or in the U.S. as a percentage of the total population. The state may annually adjust the strategic plans as their priorities change. The federal government provides funding for MCH services in the form of grants to states. person or by phone, by the Title V block grant. States are also required to report expenditures by the four broad categories of service (direct health care services, enabling services, population-based services, and infrastructure-building services) Maternal and child health measures provide information on the overall health of mothers and children in each state. The numbers provided by states may be estimates if the actual numbers are not available. These measures include data on maternal mortality rates, infant mortality rates and other health statistics. HRSA differentiates between health "performance" measures and health "outcome" measures. The performance measures include data on breastfeeding, oral health care, the suicide rate, and the teenage birth rate. Outcome measures include the infant mortality rate, the ratio of the black infant mortality rates to the white infant mortality Rate, and child death rate. States are required to report data on these maternal and child health indicators by county, race, and ethnicity. Title V programs serve women and children who are covered by private and public insurance, as well as those who have no insurance coverage. Title V funding is only one component affecting these measures. Other federal and state programs and policies, including Medicaid, and WIC, as well as complex societal issues, also substantially affect the health and well-being of low-income children and their families. Access to quality health care for mothers and children is measured by several questions in the National Survey of Children's Health. Participants were asked whether they have public, private, or no insurance coverage. Participating families were also asked if their children had any health insurance. children had at least one preventive care visit in the prior year, whether they had unmet health care needs, and whether or not they had a medical home. According to the 2011-2012 National Survey of Children's Health, almost 95% of all children have health insurance coverage. The proportion of children with health insurance Coverage varies considerably by race, ethnicity, and poverty status. For example, 81% of children living in households at or below the federal poverty level have health Insurance, compared with 99% of kids living in homes at 400% or more. 90% of Hispanic children had health insurance, compared with 96% of non-Hispanic white children and 95% ofnon-Hispanic black children. The infant mortality rate (IMR) is frequently used as a proxy indicator for the health status of children generally. The most recent data reported to HRSA by the states are shown in Figure D -1 , although current reporting years vary among the states.. CDC's National Center for Health Statistics has published the most recently available data on infant mortality rates. Of the 50 states, Mississippi had the highest IMR (9.97 per 1,000 live births) and New Hampshire had the lowest (3.95) IMR is generally higher in the South and Midwest, and lower in other regions. Risk factors for infant mortality, including higher rates of teenage births, prematurity, and inadequate prenatal care in the first trimester, disproportionately affect low-income people.single-year linked birth and death certificate information on IMR. Comparing data from both HRSA and CDC, the data show similar variability in rates by state and region. In 2012, the infant mortality rate for women enrolled in Medicaid was 10.3 infant deaths per 1,000 live births, compared with 7.7 for those not in the Medicaid program. Prenatal care is recognized as an important factor in the health and well-being offamilies. For more information, visit the Human ResourcesSA website or call 1-800-273-8255 or go to http://www.HRSA.org/. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch or click here. Pregnant women who receive late or no prenatal care are more likely to experience complications of childbirth, including low birth weight. The rate of pregnant women entering prenatal care in the first trimester is generally higher among non-Medicaid populations than among women enrolled in Medicaid. These rates also vary by state. For example, in 2012, 92% of pregnant woman in Maine received prenatal care. However, in the same state, this rate was 90% among those enrolling in Medicaid and 97% among the general population. In Georgia in 2012, 45% of pregnant women received care in the first trimester. This rate was 41% among the Medicaid population and 52% among non-Medicaid populations. Lack of insurance coverage and lack of access to a primary care provider may be barriers. These barriers tend to be higher among racial and ethnic minorities, researchers have found. In Medicaid enrollees, limited availability of maternity care providers, limited. availability of transportation, and late enrollment in Medicaid as barriers to early prenatal care. Overall, 84% of children had one preventive health care visit in the year preceding the 2011-2012 National Survey of Children's Health. Non-Hispanic white children had the highest rate (86%) of preventive health Care visits in the preceding year, followed by non-Hispanic black children. There was slight variation among racial and ethnic groups; non- Hispanic black children had a higher rate of preventive Health Care Visits than Hispanic white children (87% vs. 85% in the previous year). children (84%), and Hispanic children had the lowest rate (81%). Children who were uninsured (54%) were less likely than those covered by public insurance (84%) to have received preventive health care in the past year. These rates also varied by age, with older children and teenagers less likely to have gotten preventive care than infants and preschool-aged children. Children with special health care needs often need health, mental, and social services beyond preventive care. They also are more likely to be uninsured. injuries that require medical care. Accessing these additional services may create additional access and financial burdens on families. Children with special health care needs may qualify for Medicaid or CHIP, and they are more likely to have health insurance. In the 2009-2010 National Survey of Children with Special Health Care Needs, access to preventive and health care services is measured by a series of questions on use of services and unmet needs. Overall, 76% of children did not have an unmet need for specific health care Services in the year prior to the survey. an unmet health care need was much higher among children with no insurance than children with insurance. Shared decisionmaking between families of children with special health care needs is another goal for the MCH Services Block Grant. Multiple components determine whether a family is receiving family-centered care. These components include the amount of time spent with health care providers, their level of attentiveness, sensitivity to families' values and customs, and the relevance of information provided to families, according to the grant's website. and whether the family felt like a partner in their child's health care. The 2009-2010 National Survey of Children with Special Health Care Needs found that families with insurance coverage were more likely to report family-centered coordinated care than families without insurance coverage. Another approach to ensuring family- centered, community-based care is the medical home. Medical homes provide patients access to primary care medical providers and a coordinated care team. They have been associated with improved care outcomes and outcomes for children with special health needs. 47% of children with special health care needs had a medical home in 2011-2012. Access to care is often cited as a barrier to health services. State toll-free hotlines provide callers with state-specific Medicaid enrollment information. In 2012, state toll- free hotlines recorded 1.3 million calls regarding Medicaid enrollment. The Maternal and Child Health Services provides coverage for maternal and child health services in the U.S. It also provides care for the elderly and disabled. Block Grant is not a single program, but rather a combination of block grants to states and two discretionary grant programs. The issues related to the MCH Services Block Grant span the intersection of clinical health services, prevention, and public health. This combination of approaches provides flexibility to states in achieving maternal and child health goals, while allowing both Congress and HRSA to maintain a degree of control in guiding national initiatives, the report says. The report says the Block Grant provides increased access to health care, coverage for preventive services and other health care. HRSA: MCH Services Block Grant provided services to over 34 million children in FY2013. Of those children, nearly 15 million had Medicaid or CHIP coverage. Changes to public and private insurance markets under the ACA may affect the number of pregnant women and children served by the block grant. Some policymakers contend that during this time, pregnant women may not be able to get the care they need to stay healthy. The block grant provides coverage for preventive care without cost-sharing, and provisions for coverage of individuals with preexisting conditions. The MCH formula block grant and its discretionary grants are integral to assuring continuity of care. States may argue that block grant funds can and should be redirected to meet other maternal and child health goals, and not decreased. One general concern with block grants may be that federal funds are being used to address state-specific issues and are not held accountable to national concerns. Congress must decide whether block grants should continue to be used for Medicaid and CHIP coverage expansion to those who currently receive block grant-funded services.  states may be best suited to use block grant funds in situations where there is wide variability in burden and cost. Filling in the gaps left by Medicaid and CHIP is one such area, due to variable enrollment eligibility among the states. As mentioned earlier, the indicators discussed in this report are referred to as outcome measures and performance indicators by HRSA. improvement in these measures is an objective of Title II of the MCH Services Block Grant Act of 2013. The report was compiled by the HRSA, CDC, and the Department of Health and Human Services. V funding is only one component affecting these measures. Other federal and state programs and policies, including Medicaid and WIC, also affect the health and well-being of low-income children and their families. Progress toward national health objectives, such as reduction of the infant mortality rate, has shown past improvement but has stagnated in recent years. Due to the flexibility of funding, varying circumstances in states, and other societal issues, it is impossible to globally track the direct impact of maternal and child health block funding. grant funds on national health indicators such as IMR. Congress and the executive branch cannot direct states to specifically target one data point with block grant funding, but may use other approaches. Programs such as the Maternal, Infant, and Early Childhood Home Visiting Program and Strong Start have been promoted by policymakers as direct approaches to improving this particular health objective. Healthy Start, a national program that targets the infant mortality rate in selected communities, has been promoted as an alternative to block grant funds. has been successful in targeted communities. Some have argued that the decentralized nature of block grants makes it difficult to measure program performance and accountability. The quality of services provided under block grant funding is not currently tracked. However, the existing data required by Title V may be used to determine whether states are efficiently funding their gap areas with block grant funds. In addition to the MCH Services Block Grant, Title V contains a Health and Human Services (HHS) Block Grant. The HHS Block Grant provides funding for health and human services. Most of the provisions created under the ACA included mandatory appropriations for FY2010 through FY2014, with the exception of the Postpartum Depression program, which was authorized but has not been funded. SSA ยง510, Abstinence Education This program provides funding to states for abstinence education. P.L. 114-10 , the Medicare Access and CHIP Reauthorization Act of 2015, increased the Title V Abstinent Education block grant to $75 million per year for FY2016 and FY2017. and ethnic diversity, and other related subjects; (3) financial literacy; (4) parent-child communication; and (5) educational and career success. The ACA appropriated $75 million annually for each of the five fiscal years FY2010 through FY2014. The Protecting Access to Medicare Act of 2014 extended PREP ($75 million per year) through FY2015. P.L. 114-10 (the Medicare Access and CHIP Reauthorization Act of 2015) extended PREp ($75million per year). through FY2017 (i.e., September 30, 2017) Appendix B. Source of Funding for Title V Block Grants to States, the District of Columbia, and Other Jurisdictions, by State, FY2015 Appendix C. MCH Services Block Grant Funding History Appendix D. Selected Maternal and Child Health Measures, by state Appendix E. National Title V Performance and Outcome Measures Table E -1 shows the national performance measures for Title. V for FY2011-FY2015. Table E-2 shows thenational performance measures. for FY2016 and later years. The Maternal and Child Health Bureau (MCHB) funds more than 700 projects each year through discretionary grants. The MCHB Discretionary Grant Information System (DGIS) electronically captures performance measures (see Table E-5 ), program, financial, and abstract data, and products and publications about these discretionary grants from the grantees. The data collected are used by M CHB project officers to monitor and assess grantee performance as well as assist in monitoring and evaluating MCHb's programs. The notice pertaining to changes in the DGIS was published in the Federal Register on March 15, 2016. MCHB's purpose in revising the performance measures is to better measure progress toward program goals. The overall number of performance measures has been reduced from prior DGIS data. The revised measures will more accurately capture the scope of services provided through the Title V Block Grant. It is hoped that the measures will better align with and support the Block Grant, specifically population domains and National Performance Measures, where reasonable. collection, and the average number of performance measures each grantee will be required to report is reduced. Further, the structure of the data collection has been revised to better measure the various models of programs and the services each funded program provides. This revision will allow a more accurate and detailed picture of the full scope of services provided through grant programs administered by MCHB. It is hoped that this revision will give a better picture of what is available to the public in the form of grants and loans.