Disability Insurance (DI) is an insurance program that provides benefits to workers who become unable to work because of a long-term disability. Workers who have paid into the Social Security Trust Fund are insured under this program. At the end of calendar year 2005, the DI program served about 8.3 million workers with disabilities, their spouses, and dependent children. DI paid out about $85 billion in cash benefits throughout the year. The Social Security Administration (SSA) administers two programs that provide benefits to people with disabilities. SSI is an income assistance program that provides cash benefits for disabled, blind, or aged people who have low income and limited resources. Once found entitled, individuals continue to receive benefits until they either die, return to work and earn more than allowed by program rules, are found to have improved medically and are able to work, or reach regular retirement age. SSI serves people with disabilities on the basis of need, regardless of whether they have paid into the Social Security Trust Fund. At the end of the year. calendar year 2005, the SSI program served about 6.8 million people and paid about $36 billion in federal cash benefits throughout the year. Unlike the DI program, SSI benefits can continue even after the person reaches full retirement age. The Social Security Act’s definition of disability for adults is the same under both programs. A person�s physical or mental impairment is considered a disability under SSI and the DI programs. SSI can be discontinued for the same reasons as DI benefits, although it may be discontinued if a person no longer meets SSI income and resource requirements. must (1) have lasted or be expected to last at least 1 year or to result in death and (2) prevent the person from being able to engage in substantial gainful activity (SGA) for that period of time. People are generally considered to be engaged in SGA if they earn above a certain dollar level. For 2006, SSA considers countable earnings above $860 a month to be SGA for an individual who is not blind and $1,450 a month for an individuals who is blind. of the disability programs no longer had a disability and could work. In 1981 and 1982, about 45 percent of those individuals who received a CDR had their benefits discontinued. There was no statutory requirement for SSA to show that a beneficiary had improved medically in order to remove him or her from the program. To ensure that only eligible beneficiaries remained in the programs, Congress passed a law requiring SSAto conduct continuing disability reviews (CDR) beginning in January 1982. State Disability Determination Services (DDS) examiners began conducting medical CDRs under the same criteria used to evaluate initial disability claims. Congress enacted the Social Security Disability Benefits Reform Act of 1984. The act included a provision requiring SSA to find substantial evidence demonstrating medical improvement before ceasing a recipient’s benefits. SSA resumed CDRs in January 1986 using this standard, which is among the first steps of the CDR evaluation process. In order to be removed from the disability programs for one of the specific “exceptions” to medical improvement, the person must also show that the individual has the ability to engage in SGA. years; or medical improvement not expected—CDR once every 5 to 7 years. SSA has also developed a method, called profiling, to determine the most cost-effective method of conducting a CDR. In general, beneficiaries with a high score are referred for full medical CDRs. Beneficiaries with a score of more than 50 are more likely to be eligible for a full CDR and to receive a full disability pension. The CDR process can take up to seven years to complete. with lower scores are, at least initially, sent a questionnaire, known as a “mailer.” Full medical CDRs involve an in-depth examination of a beneficiary’s medical and possibly his or her vocational status. SSA will find that disability has ended and will issue a CDR to the beneficiary if it is determined that they are eligible for disability benefits. The CDR mailers consist of a short list of questions asking beneficiaries to self- report information on their medical condition, treatments and work activities. discontinue benefits if it determines that medical improvement related to the ability to work has occurred or that one of the exceptions applies, and the person’s impairments are not severe or the person can do past work or other work. If SSA determines that no medical improvement has not occurred, then benefits are continued. SSA finds that the individual no longer has a disability and discontinues benefits. The individual has the right to appeal the CDR decision, first to another reviewer for a reconsideration, second to an administrative law judge, then to the Appeals Council, and finally to federal courts. At the hearing before the administrative law judge (ALJ), the ALJ reviews the file, including any additional evidence submitted after the DDS determination and may hear testimony from the individual as well as medical and vocational experts. SSA’s Office of Quality Performance conducts quality reviews of disability determination outcomes. To conduct these quality reviews, SSA selects a random sample of cases each month from all final CDR decisions. examiner reviews the case to ensure it adheres to SSA guidance. The combined accuracy rate for all CDRs was about 95 percent. On average, about 1.4 percent of all individuals who received a CDR received it were eligible for it, the agency says. The agency says it has a 95 percent accuracy rates for cases where CDR benefits were continued and discontinued of 95 percent and 93 percent respectively. It says the accuracy rates are based on a review of the DDS decision, documentation of that decision, and the evidence contained in the case. SSA data show that few beneficiaries who receive medical CDRs are removed from the disability programs. More people leave the programs when they die, convert to full retirement benefits, or leave for other reasons. About 2.8 percent of those who receive these CDR are found to no longer have a disability under the medical improvement standard. Some of the officials we interviewed stated that the medical improved standard may artificially limit the percentage of recipients who have improved medically. However, we were unable to identify any empirical data regarding the impact of the standard. SSA does not clearly define the degree of improvement needed to meet the standard, authors say. SSA also removes beneficiaries for failing to cooperate during a CDR, they say. Authors: Most DDSs are incorrectly conducting CDRs with the presumption that a beneficiary has a disability. They say SSA guidance instructs examiners to disregard “minor’ changes in a beneficiary’s condition, but this guidance does not adequately describe what constitutes a minor change, they write. SSA is developing requirements for training examiners to ensure they understand the information needed to make accurate and adequately documented decisions. SSA is responsible for assuring that individuals who truly have a disability that prevents them from being able to work continue to receive benefits. The amount of judgment involved in the decision-making process increases when the process involves certain types of impairments that are difficult to assess. Other factors, including inadequate documentation of evidence, are more difficult to address in the short term. We recommend that the Commissioner of Social Security clarify guidance for assessing medical improvement when conducting CDRs. to include additional information on (1) examiners’ confusion on the use of the exceptions when conducting CDRs and (2) SSA’s rationale for its current exception guidance. Having made these changes, we continue to believe that additional guidance in this area is warranted if only, as the report notes, because most of the disability examiners whom we spoke with told us that they were uncertain about when to apply the exceptions. Moreover, while answering a survey question on the exceptions to medical improvement, 4 DDS directors commented that more guidance is needed. SSA generally agreed. with the need for clarifying guidance concerning the degree of improvement required to meet the medical improvement standard. However, the agency believed that the report was unclear with regard to whether this part of the recommendation applied only to guidance for determining if there has been any medical improvement, or also to the guidance for determine if any medical improved is related to the ability to work. As stated in the draft report, our discussion of medical improvement encompasses both elements (improvement in a beneficiary’s medical condition and its relation to the able to work) this throughout the entire report to minimize any confusion on this matter. SSA indicated that clarification of this guidance would probably have little noticeable impact on the number of cases in which SSA finds that a disability has ended. As our report notes, we cannot quantify the impact that clearer guidance would have on the discontinuation of benefits. Even so, we continue to believe that it is important for DDSs to consistently apply this aspect of the medical improvement standard and that, towards that end, additional guidance would be useful. ensure that CDRs be conducted on a neutral basis. However, it believed that more adjudicator training in this area would likely have little impact on discontinuing benefits. SSA suggested that we provide additional context for some of the statistical information presented in our discussion of the proportion of DDS directors who are incorrectly applying the neutrality standard. We cannot predict the impact. additional guidance and training would have on continuing or discontinuing. benefits. But, as the report points out, there are large numbers of D DS directors. who are wrongly applying the neutral standard and, in our view, would benefit from additional guidance. of beneficiaries removed from the disability programs each year. For example, SSA commented that the disability discontinuation rates in the early 1980s may not have been representative. SSA also provided additional technical comments, which have been incorporated in the report as appropriate. We revised the report to take into account these suggestions. The Commissioner’s comments have been reproduced in appendix III. Unless you publicly announce its contents earlier, you must publicly announce the report's contents earlier than you would otherwise have done. we plan no further distribution until 30 days after the date of this report. At that time, we will make copies available to other parties upon request. In addition, the report will be available at no charge on GAO’s Web site. This report does not contain all the results from the survey. The survey and a more complete tabulation of the results can be viewed at http://www.gao.gov/cgi-bin/getrpt?rptno=GAO-07-4sp. If you or your staff have questions concerning this report, please contact me at (202) 512-7215. This appendix provides additional details about our analysis of the medical improvement standard (the standard) The standard poses challenges for the Social Security Administration (SSA) when conducting medical continuing disability reviews (CDR) To meet the objectives of this review, we reviewed prior studies by GAO, SSA, and external organizations related to the disability determination process and CDRs. We also reviewed the Social security Disability Benefits Reform Act of 1984, regulations, and SSA policies and processes. See appendix IV for a listing of major contributors to this report. for assessing whether beneficiaries continue to be eligible for benefits. In addition, we analyzed SSA data on CDR outcomes over a 7-year period for fiscal years 1999 to 2005. For the purposes of our study, we only assessed DI and SSI adult beneficiaries who left the programs as a result of receiving a full medical CDR. We did not include children or “age 18 re-determinations” in our analysis since there are differences between the medicalCDR sequential evaluation processes for children and those for adults. adults and children. We did not assess the outcome of CDR mailers or work CDRs. We verified the statistical data on CDR outcomes for internal logic, consistency, and reasonableness. We determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of our review. We also met with knowledgeable SSA officials to further document the reliability of these data. We interviewed 34 officials from SSA’s central offices (including officials from the Office of the Chief Actuary, the Office. of Quality Performance, the. Office of General Counsel, and others) We conducted a national Web-based survey of all 55 Disability Determination Services (DDS) directors in the 50 states, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, the Western Pacific Islands, and the federal DDS. DDSs are the agencies responsible for conducting periodic CDRs to determine if beneficiaries’ medical conditions have improved and if they are able to work. We received 54 completed surveys for a response rate of 98 percent. The purpose of this survey was to discuss the disability programs and the CDR process. assess the extent to which the standard impacts outcomes of CDRs and determine if the standard poses any special challenges for SSA. We asked the directors about particular elements of the standard and how these elements, alone or in combination with other factors, impact CDR outcomes. We determined that the survey data are sufficiently reliable. Because this was not a sample survey, there are no sampling errors. However, the practical difficulties of conducting any survey may lead to some sampling errors in the data. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. introduce errors, commonly referred to as nonsampling errors. For example, difficulties in how a particular question is interpreted, in the sources of information that are available to respondents, or in how the data are entered into a database or were analyzed. We took steps in the development of the questionnaire, the data collection, and the data analysis to minimize these nonsampled errors. The draft questionnaire was pretested with a number of state officials before it was released to the public. It was designed in collaboration with GAO staff with subject matter expertise. to ensure that the questions were relevant, clearly stated, and easy to comprehend. The questionnaire was also reviewed by an additional GAO survey specialist. Since this was a Web-based survey, respondents entered their answers directly into the electronic questionnaire. This eliminated the need to have the data keyed into a database thus removing an additional source of error. We conducted three pretests of this survey with DDS directors in three different states. We modified the survey to take their comments into account. We also provided SSA with a copy of the survey and incorporated its technical comments into the final version. This report does not contain all the results from the survey. The survey and a more complete tabulation of the results can be viewed at http://www.gao.gov/cgi- bin/getrpt?rptno=GAO-07-4sp. To augment information from our state survey, we conducted independent audit work in three states (California, Massachusetts, and Texas) to examine how SSA policies and procedures are carried out in the field. rates above, below, and at the national average; (4) states with varying DDS structures (i.e., centralized and decentralized); and (5) states that have large numbers of Disability Insurance (DI) beneficiaries and large DI expenditures. In each state, we visited a DDS office, the SSA regional office, and the regional Office of Quality Performance. In total, we conducted in-depth interviews with 80 SSA and DDS managers and line staff responsible for conducting medical CDRs. law judges. documented management and staff views on the challenges associated with applying the medical improvement standard. We documented the impact of the standard on CDR outcomes, the effectiveness of SSA policies and procedures for applying the standard, and the degree to which factors external to the standard create challenges when determining if a beneficiary has improved medically and is able to work. To further assess how the standard is applied in practice, we took a nonprobability sample of 12 CDR and documented their views. case files from the DDSs in California and Texas. We asked CDR supervisors to provide several cases that were (1) discontinued for medical improvement, (2) continued because the beneficiary was clearly disabled, and (3) ambiguous cases. These case files serve to illustrate the difficulties examiners face when determining if a beneficiary has improved medically and is able to work. In addition, we interviewed seven disability policy experts from national disability research and advocacy organizations to obtain their input on the impact of the law. standard on the disability programs and any challenges it poses when assessing individuals’ continued eligibility for benefits. We spoke with individuals affiliated with the following organizations: American Association of People with Disabilities, Center for Health Services Research and Policy at George Washington Center for the Study and Advancement of Disability Policy. Finally, we spoke with representatives from the National Association of Disability Examiners, the National Council of Disability Determination Directors, and the Social Security Advisory Board. We also spoke with the National Organization of Social Security Claimants’ Representatives. We conducted our work from October 2005 through June 2006 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. In the first step of the CDR evaluation process for adult beneficiaries, an SSA field office representative determines if the beneficiary is working at the level of substantial gainful activity (SGA) A beneficiary who is found to be not working or working but earning less than the SGA level (minus allowable exclusions) has his or her case forwarded to the state. We conducted the work in compliance with generallyaccepted government audited standards. The second step is to determine if the individual’s current impairment(s) is included on the current list of disabilities that SSA maintains. The list describes impairments that, by definition, are so severe that they are disabling. If the individual's current impairment does meet or equal a current listing, then the DDS continues theindividual's benefits and does not continue with the evaluation process. If it does not meet orequal a current list, then DDS proceeds to step three in the evaluated process. the individual’s medical condition has occurred. This improvement is any decrease in the medical severity of the impairment(s) that was present at the time of the most recent favorable medical decision. If improvement has not occurred, the disability examiner skips to the fifth step in the evaluation. The DDS examiner compares the current signs, symptoms, and laboratory findings associated with the beneficiary's impairment to those recorded from the last review. This step is usually referred to as the comparison point decision, or CPD. the disability examiner proceeds to next step, the fourth step. The fourth step is to determine if the improvement found in step three is related to the ability to work. The law provides for certain limited situations when the DDS may discontinue a recipient’s benefits even though medical improvement has not occurred. If functional capacity for basic work activities has improved, then the examiner finds that the improvement isrelated to the able to work and proceeds to step six of the evaluation process. If an exception applies, the examiner continues through to step seven. is to determine whether the beneficiary has the capacity to do the work that he or she did before having a disability. If the beneficiary does not have the ability to do past work, then benefits are discontinued. The eighth step is to determine if the beneficiary is able to do other work. At this step, the disability examiner considers the complete vocational profile (the beneficiary’s age, education, and past relevant work experience) together with pastrelevant work experience. The evaluation continues to the eighth step. the beneficiary’s RFC to determine if he or she has the ability to do other work. If the beneficiary does not have the ability, disability benefits are discontinued. The following team members made key contributions to this report: Kelly Agnese, Jeremy D. Cox, Susan E.M. Etzel, Stuart M. Kaufman, Luann M. Moy, George H. Quinn, Jr., Daniel A. Schwimer, Salvatore F. Sorbello, Wayne T. Turowski, Vanessa R. Taylor. Is Positioning Itself to Implement Its New Disability Determination Process, but Key Facets Are Still in Development. Social Security Disability Insurance: SSA Actions Could Enhance Assistance to Claimants with Inflammatory Bowel Disease and Other Impairments. SSA’s Disability Programs: Improvements Could Increase the Usefulness of Electronic Data for Program Oversight. The Social Security Administration should Strengthen Its Efforts to Detect and Prevent Overpayments, the Government Accountability Office said in 2004. Needed to Assess Consistency of Disability Decisions. Social Security Disability: Commissioner Proposes Strategy to Improve the Claims Process, but Faces Implementation Challenges. SSA Disability Decision Making: Additional Steps Needed to Ensure Accuracy and Fairness of Decisions at the Hearings Level. Social security Disability: Reviews of Beneficiaries’ Disability Status Require Continued Attention to Achieve Timeliness and Cost- Effectiveness. Socialsecurity.gov: For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here. SSA and VA Disability Programs: Re-Examination of Disability Criteria Needed to Help Ensure Program Integrity. Social Security Disability: SSA Making Progress in Conducting Continuing Disability Reviews. SSA: Disability Rolls Keep Growing, While Explanations Remain Elusive. The Social Security Administration is taking steps to review Recipients’ Disability Status. The Department of Health and Human Services is taking Steps to Review Recipient’s Disability status. The U.S. Department of Social Security is reviewing the Supplemental Security Income Program.