In the 1800s, the private sector played a central role in financing early transportation infrastructure development in the United States. More recently, there has been a move back towards policies that encourage more private and public blending of funding, responsibility, and control in transportation projects. Much of the federal government’s share of new capital investment in mass transportation has come through the New Starts program. We have previously identified New Starts as a model for other federal transportation programs because of its use of a rigorous and systematic evaluation process. process. If the agreed-upon cost, schedule, and risk transference are not met, the government withdraws its funding. United Kingdom Department for Transport officials told us that they have experience withdrawing funding when such conditions have not been met. We also found that other U.S. Department of Transportation modal administrations have also withdrawn funding for transit projects when they have not met the agreed conditions. We have asked Transport Canada for comment and will update this article if we receive a response from Transport Canada. The Federal Aviation Administration has granted 90 of these multiyear awards since 1988. The Federal Highway Administration grants early conditional approvals to highway project sponsors seeking Transportation Infrastructure Finance and Innovation Act funds. The FAA uses Letters of Intent in its Airport Improvement Program to establish multiyear funding schedules for projects that officials said allow project sponsors to proceed with greater certainty regarding future federal funding compared to the broader program. It also helps prevent project stops and starts, officials said. It is intended to encourage greater private sector involvement in projects. private sector bidders to incorporate these funds into their financial plans without having to individually apply as otherwise required. The Federal Highway Administration has also carried out three pilot programs that have allowed projects to move more efficiently through its grant process by modifying some of its requirements. These pilot projects waived certain aspects of the federal-aid highway procurement provisions, such as moving forward with final decision prior to a National Environmental Policy Act decision, and allowed federally funded highway projects to use alternative approaches including design-build. Pilot program allowed project sponsors in two states to contract with the private sector at a much earlier point in the project development cycle than was previously allowed. FTA does not yet have an evaluation plan to accurately and reliably assess the pilot program’s results, including the effect of its efforts to streamline the New Starts process. Having helped pave the way for design-build to become the standard project delivery approach in highway projects, pilot program has been a big success for the federal government. The Federal Highway Administration has not yet granted project sponsors any major streamlining modifications. A sound evaluation plan is needed to evaluate the effectiveness of a pilot program, says FTA. Without such an evaluation plan, FTA is limited in its decision making regarding its pilot program. The plan should incorporate key features including: well-defined, clear, and measurable objectives, measures that are directly linked to the program objectives, criteria for determining pilot program performance, a way to isolate the effects of the pilot program; a data analysis plan for the evaluation design; and a detailed plan to ensure that data collection, entry and storage are reliable and error-free. Congress will be limited in its decision making about the pilot program’s potential broader application. FTA officials told us that they have not yet developed an evaluation plan for its pilot program. The alternative approaches we reviewed have protected the public interest in various ways to ensure the public receives the best price for a project and to create incentives for the private sector partner so that the project progresses and operates based on agreed-upon objectives. Project sponsors we found that the alternative approaches protect the public's interest. Interviewed have attempted in part to protect the public interest by ensuring the use of competitive procurement practices. These practices are not unique to alternative approaches and are sometimes used in conventional procurements. Federal law and regulations generally require federal contracts to be competed unless they fall under specific exceptions to full and open competition. Nevertheless, project sponsors told us that maximizing the use. of these competitive procurement Practices helps to maximize the public's interest in transit projects, the authors say. The authors say the public should be able to have a voice in how transit projects are funded. European Union countries are required to have multiple bidders for procurements. Procurements with only one bidder are less competitive and can result in less attractive bids. For example, although Bay Area Rapid Transit prequalified three contractors for the first version of its Oakland Airport Connector, two contractors withdrew during the negotiation period due to concerns about the project affordability. Bay AreaRapid Transit negotiated with the sole remaining bidder on costs for nearly a year but then let the Request for Proposals expire with no bids. Minnesota Metro Transit Hiawatha Corridor and Denver’s Transportation Expansion light rail offered proposal stipends to private sector entities that submitted formal bids. Stipends add costs that must be weighed against the benefits they provide. Project sponsors have encouraged early and sustained interaction with the private sector to test the project's marketability and whether and in what form private sector participation is advantageous. Such feedback can be helpful in the development of a project's plans and plans for the future, the authors say. be obtained through bidder information sessions and from consultants. Project sponsors then conduct a request for qualified bidders to gain more detailed input from the private sector on a project. The request can establish a higher threshold of responsibility for private partners compared to traditional procurements in which a private partner is selected based primarily on bid price. Thus, sustained and iterative interaction between the project sponsor and theprivate sector can refine the project’s scope and terms and determine how best to use the funds. include the private sector. The Canada Line project sponsor used a list of essential elements agreed upon by the public agencies funding the project. The Hiawatha Corridor project used a request for qualifications to select bidders and solicit private sector’s review of project details. Minnesota Metro Transit told us that input from the privatesector produced several good ideas that were incorporated into the project, such as a shared risk fund to provide an incentive for theprivate sector to reduce construction delays. The pilot projects are part of the Federal Transit Administration's "Transit for All" program. Project sponsors seek to protect the public interest through an emphasis on performance. Performance specifications focus on desired project performance and not design details. When specifications are focused on performance, bidders can offer a range of design and technology options as well as follow best practices that meet best practices for project delivery. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. The East Corridor and Gold Line pilot projects initially had a 700-page design specification document for their commuter rail vehicles. After industry review and feedback that the specifications would lead to customized vehicles that would be expensive and difficult to operate and maintain, the project sponsor responded by creating a 15-page performance specifications document for the vehicles. An advisor noted that the use of design specifications is more challenging with transit projects than in highways and other sectors given the technology issues and environmental concerns. The advisor also noted that design specifications are difficult to use on transit projects due to technology issues. Project sponsors have sought to use performance standards to protect the public interest. These standards are what the private sector partner must meet to be compensated during the project. In contrast, one project sponsor noted that performance specifications should not be used when conditions of the facility or surrounding environment, for example, are unknown as unforeseen circumstances could occur that would require more specific design specifications. Also said that projects with a range of technology options must undergo the environmental review process at the highest possible level of design given the effect of different technologies on the environment. project’s construction, operations, and maintenance phases, helping to ensure adequate performance. If the private sector partner does not meet the standards, then it is penalized with no, reduced, or delayed payments. Standards for construction include delivering a completed project or project element within a set schedule. For example, the Canada Line had 400 milestones that it needed to complete and have certified in order to continue to receive timely payments during the project's construction period. Performance standards for operations and maintenance cover all aspects, also called key performance indicators. of service including the availability, frequency, and reliability of service and conditions of facilities. Some projects have also incorporated standards that link to increased ridership to provide incentives for the private sector partner to provide good customer service. For example, Nottingham Express Transit has 20 percent of its payments to the privatesector based on ridership. Additionally, the draft concession agreement for Denver’s metro area has a 20 percent ridership link to private sector payments. The London Underground chose to emphasize key performance indicators in four areas—availability, capability, ambience and service points. Regional Transportation District East Corridor and Gold Line pilot projects incorporate payment deductions. Low performance, such as delayed trains and littered or unclean railcars, persists. If low performance continues over a period, the project sponsor can terminate the concession agreement and rebid the project to another private partner. Project sponsors also protect the public interest in transit public-private partnership and other alternative approaches through the incorporation of private equity capital. When a private sector partner finances a project using equity capital, the private sector uses payments received from the project sponsors to repay. its costs plus provide a return on investment. Since the private sector partner borrows to finance its costs, it has equity at risk if it does not meet standards. Bank lenders protect their investments by ensuring that the privatesector properly develops a concession agreement and then delivers on it. This situation can create incentives for theprivate sector partner to deliver according to the terms of the agreement, the authors say. They say it can also provide incentives for project sponsors to deliver on their promises to project sponsors. The public interest is further protected by this integration of responsibilities. The bank lender and concessionaire provide additional project oversight through the monitoring of cost overruns and schedule delays, among other issues. To better protect the public interest, project sponsors have also incorporated clauses into project agreements that protect public interest. For the Croydon Tramlink, the private sector partner contributed 30 percent of project costs. In the case of the Canada Line, theprivate sector partner did not miss any of its 400 payment milestones. allow for flexibility under certain circumstances. For example, Houston Metro’s North and Southeast Corridor projects’ concession agreement incorporated this flexibility by including an operations and maintenance agreement for the first 5 years after service begins with the option for renewal. According to a consultant that works on the project, this approach was chosen in part because the project sponsor wanted to protect the public interest in the project. The project sponsor also said it was in the interest of the city to have a long-term concession agreement. Both of the London Underground’s maintenance 30-year concession agreements are reviewed for scope of work and costs by a public-private partnerships arbiter every 7.5 years. The concessionaire has the ability to request an extraordinary review by the arbiter if costs rise above a specified threshold. Periodically revisiting terms, or shorter concession periods, can also allow for changes such as system extension. One of the Docklands Light Railway extensions has breakpoints at the years 2013 and 2020 in its concession agreement. project sponsor an option to break and buy back the agreement for a set price. In contrast, in the previously mentioned example of Manchester Metrolink, concessions for phase 2 were terminated by the project sponsor to allow for system expansion in a third phase. According to consultants we interviewed, the terminations could have been avoided if the initial concessions had been shorter. Shorter concession periods are thus being used as a means to revisit terms and rebid if desired. In addition to clauses that allow project sponsors to revisit concession agreement terms, other clauses that allow for flexibility can also protect the public interest. Denver Regional Transportation District’s draft concession agreement includes clauses specifying both triggers that could lead to default and terms of compensation in case of default. Other advisors to project sponsors told us that a clause specifying the sharing of “refinancing gains” between the project sponsor and concessionaire could also help to protect public interests. These provisions help to minimize disputes, according to the advisors to the project sponsors, who spoke on condition of anonymity. Refinancing gains refer to savings that occur when the private sector revises its repayment schedule for its equity investment by taking advantage of better financial terms. The governments of the United Kingdom as well as Victoria and New South Wales, Australia, require that any refinancing gains achieved by private concessionaires generally be shared with the government. Some foreign governments have recognized the importance of protecting the public. The public interest is at the heart of the highway public-private partnerships, says the government's report. interest in public-private partnerships through the use of quantitative and qualitative public interest assessments. We have previously reported that more rigorous, up-front analysis could better secure potential benefits and protect the public interest. For example, a Value for Money analysis is a tool used to evaluate if entering into a project as a public/private partnership is in the public's best interests. The use of such tools can help lay out the expected benefits, costs, and risks of the project. Conversely, not using such tools could potentially allow aspects of thepublic interest to be overlooked. The United Kingdom, and British Columbia in Canada, among others, require a Value for Money analysis for all transportation projects over a certain cost threshold. Domestically, Florida requires avalue for money analysis for public- private partnerships, one of which was recently conducted on the Florida Turnpike. Public-private partnership is the best project delivery option available, according to the U.S. Department of Transportation. The U.K. requires a Value For Money analysis if a project costs more than about $24 million, while British Columbia requires one if the cost is over $46 million. Value for Money evaluations examine total project costs and benefits. They are used to determine if a public-private partnership approach is in the public interest for a given project. Value for Money tests are often done by comparing the costs of doing a proposed project. against an estimate of the costs. of procuring that project using a public delivery model. The I-595 Corridor Roadway Improvements Project in Broward County was one of the projects assessed. The Bay Area Rapid Transit’s Oakland Airport Connector was also assessed. Value for Money analysis includes both quantitative and qualitative factors. Project sponsors can also use financial assessments such as Value for Money for other reasons. For example, they can assess if one public-private partnership option is more advantageous than another if it is decided that private participation in a project is beneficial. They can also give a range of possible project costs when coupled with a sensitivity analysis, such as for the Canada Line. The value of unquantifiable risks transferred to the private sector can also be considered. Money analysis, cautioned that the assessments are not without limitations. For example, officials and consultants told us that these analyses are inherently subjective and rely on assumptions that can introduce bias. Assessments can include the assumption that the public sector will likely have higher construction costs due to a history of cost overruns. In the United Kingdom, an “optimism bias” of 15 percent is added to a public sector comparator in part to account for this. Consultants noted that there is subjectivity in valuing risks as detailed data on the probability of particular project risks occurring are unavailable. use data from past projects and their own professional views to conduct the analysis. Some countries have further protected the public interest in transit projects that use alternative approaches by establishing quasi- governmental entities to assist project sponsors. Entities such as Partnerships UK, Partnerships Victoria, and Partnerships BC are often fee-for-service and associated with Treasury Departments on the provincial and national levels. In sum, government officials and consultants noted that Value for Money should be considered as a tool rather than the sole factor in assessing whether to do a public-private partnership. entities all develop guidance such as standardized contracts and provide technical assistance to support transit projects that use alternative approaches. According to an advisor for project sponsors, contracts for these partnerships and approaches generally follow a standard model. The United Kingdom’s standard contract outlines requirements as well as factors to consider from a project’S service commencement through termination, which is periodically updated to reflect lessons learned. For example, after the government of the United.Korea decided to build a new rail line, it decided to use an alternative approach. Kingdom required the private sector to share any refinancing gains with the project sponsor, the standard contract was subsequently updated. quasi-governmental entities provide technical assistance to support transit projects that use alternative approaches. For example, Partnerships BC provides project sponsors assistance on conducting a Value for Money assessment to determine whether private sector participation in a project is beneficial. In addition to this assistance, these entities provide other varied services to facilitate public-private partnerships across different sectors. for more information on Partnerships UK and Partnerships Victoria click here. project sponsors to help develop and close public-private partnership contracts in British Columbia. Quasi-governmental entities can further protect the public interest through the benefits they provide. According to government officials in the United Kingdom and Canada, these entities create a consistent approach to considering public- private partnerships. Further, by using standardized contracts developed by these entities, project sponsors can reduce transaction costs of implementing transit projects that use alternative approaches, they say. The project sponsors and consultants told us that they are looking forward to working with the government on the project. GAO: Without the services provided by quasi-governmental entities, project sponsors that plan to or use alternative approaches for a transit project will develop them on a case-by- case basis. While DOT has established an office to support project sponsors of highway-related public-private partnerships, DOT does not provide similar support for transit projects. FTA distributes billions of dollars of federal funding to transit agencies for the construction of new, large-scale projects; as such, it is critical that the public interest is protected and federal funding is spent responsibly. We reviewed transit project information from DOT, GAO, the Congressional Research Service, and other reports as well as interviews with DOT officials, project sponsors, industry representatives, and academic experts. We selected projects that were either completed or had already carried out substantial planning. We determined that we would focus solely on projects that have or are expected to go through the Federal Transit Administration’s (FTA) New Starts process. We conducted a review of public-private literature of alternative financing and project delivery practices. reviewed pertinent federal legislation and regulations, including: Federal Register Notices and guidance for FTA’s Public-Private Partnership Pilot Program and the New Starts Program. To determine how project sponsors and DOT can protect the public interest in transit projects that use alternative approaches, we conducted site visits of selected transit public-private partnerships and visited the United Kingdom and Canada. We conducted, summarized, and analyzed in-depth interviews with project sponsors, private sector participants, international stakeholders, and experts regarding the competitive procurement process. In addition to the individual named above, Steve Cohen, Assistant Director; Jay Cherlow; Patrick Dudley; Carol Henn; Bert Japikse; Joanie Lofgren; Maureen Luna-Long; Amanda K. Miller; Tina Paek; Amy Rosewarne; Tina Won Sherman; and Jim Wozny made key contributions to this report. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.based on our Audit objectives. Public Transportation: Better Data Needed to Assess Length of New Starts Process.