ROTC is the largest of the three major officer commissioning programs for DOD. ROTC programs prepare college and university students to serve as officers in the military services. Most states have a unit from each service located within the state and all states have at least one unit. The Army met at least 95 percent of its overall production goals for newly commissioned officers in fiscal years 2008 through 2012. In fiscal year 2012, the Army produced nearly half of all the newly commissioned active duty officers from three major commissioning sources. The Army and the Air Force each exceeded their production goals for 3 of the 5 years we studied. Neither OSD nor the services have established performance measures that provide a comprehensive understanding of the overall effectiveness and efficiency of ROTC programs. The absence of clearly defined measures also affects the objectivity of DOD’s unit closure factors because it requires the services to determine how they should be applied. We reviewed the methodologies used by each service to identify potential units for closure and found that in addition to the five factors considered, two of the services incorporated additional factors into the process. The military services’ ROTC programs have conducted a total of 11 evaluations. The evaluations have largely occurred on an ad hoc basis, the authors say. They say the evaluations are not routine and systematic and have not yielded closures that service officials believe are needed. The authors say the services need to establish a systematic process to routinely evaluate the performance of their ROTc programs using comprehensive performance measures. The results of recent evaluations may be incomplete to draw conclusions about unit performance, they say. internally generated oversight reports. The military services have had difficulty gaining buy-in for recommendations to close dozens of underproductive ROTC units across the services. DOD and service-level guidance provide performance measures that do not provide a comprehensive understanding of the overall cost-effectiveness and efficiency of RotC programs. The services have been unsuccessful in completing any of these politically sensitive consolidations or closures in part because and prior the services do not proactively and periodically engage congressional stakeholders on RotsC program performance. GAO obtained and analyzed ROTC unit production data from each of the military services for fiscal years 2008 through 2012. For our other five recommendations, DOD concurred with each of them and estimated actions would be completed by July 2015. We encourage DOD to begin taking actions now to facilitate implementation of these recommendations as soon as possible. If you or your staff have any questions regarding this report, please contact me at (202) 512-3604 or farrellb@gao.gov.