Since 1872, hardrock mining on federal lands has been governed by the General Mining Law. The law allows virtually free access to open public domain lands for mineral prospecting, staking claims, exploration and development. Proposals to reform the Mining Law have been made almost from the time it was signed by President Grant. The major reform bill in the House is H.R. 2262, which would impose an 8% ad-valorem royalty based on the value of the minerals. A factor payment in a competitive market for a royalty to be based on other than market value minus the costs of obtaining it. For example, if instead of payments in kind (deer or crops or precious metals) the landowner were to be paid in money, one would expect him to receive the monetary equivalent of the value of the output. Rational landowners would not settle for less than what the deer, crop, or metal is worth because they could always have the deer and crops taken to market and sold for at least that amount. The ad-valorem royalty appears to be economically the most efficient type of royalty. But the question becomes to what base specifically should the royalty rate apply? The aggregate value of a commodity being the product of a price (value/unit) and a total output, the questions are what is the appropriate royalty rate for this commodity? The answer is that it should be based on the aggregate value, rather than the price/unit, of the commodity as a whole. If the renter wanted less rent, then presumably that would have been negotiated as a smaller share. are: At what point can the value of a mine's output first be determined? Further, since throughout the production stage value is added or increased, at what stage does mining value end, and non-mining value begin? Production of valuable mineral products from raw hardrock minerals (e.g., metals such as iron, copper, aluminum, gold, lead) generally involves various stages: extraction or quarrying of the raw minerals, delivery to a plant or mill in order to produce valuable products.  production stages are shown for the typical case or mineral in Figure 1. Within these production stages, from extraction to the first sale to manufacturers, there may be various points at which there is created a valuable output. Depending on the type of mineral, and the structure of the mineral, there are different production stages for different types of mineral. These stages include the initial processing, beneficiating or concentrating to derive an ore concentrate (generally the first valuable product), smelting or refining (i.e., additional processing) of the ore concentrate in order to derive the marketable metal or mineral. industry—there may be several different types of mineral products with value. Does the mine produce the raw mineral ore, the ore concentrate, or the final metal or mineral sold to wholesalers? Further, even if the output of the mine can be determined, there is the problem of what is the value or price of that output. For example, copper is traded in many forms that relate to different stages of processing: at the mine, copper may be sold as ore, concentrate, and precipitate. There may not actually be a sale throughout the mining-production-processing-marketing (sale) stage. Any price or value would have to be constructed, i.e., estimated or derived, from values further upstream when they are first determined or identified. One measure of the value of mining output is gross income from mining as defined under the income tax laws for purposes of determining the percentage depletion allowance, one of several tax preferences or subsidies available to a mining firm. This royalty base has been suggested many times in the past. the current and past royalty debates and is the base proposed in H.R. 2262. The main reason for suggesting this royalty base is that not only is gross income under the tax depletion rules consistent with the economic concept of an ad-valorem royalty, but the legal and regulatory apparatus has been in place since 1932, the year that percentage depletion first became available to the hardrock mining industry. This would tend to reduce the costs of industry compliance and government administration of the royalty system. The term "gross income" as used for purposes of percentage depletion is somewhat confusing. While the term is intended to measure only sales revenue from mining operations, income in the context of a business generally refers to profits and not sales. The term may be misleading because it may suggest a larger percentage depletion deduction, and therefore a larger royalty payment than a "net" royalty. But, in fact, whether a gross royalty base is smaller or bigger than a net royalty base depends on the point in the production stage the price is. Under Internal Revenue Code, mining companies are allowed a depletion deduction, at varying percentages, based on the gross income from mining. Because value is added as mining production moves from the extraction or quarrying state to the smeltering stage, a net price (such as net smelter return) further downstream would generally be greater than a gross price further upstream. The term "mining" includes not merely the extraction of the ores or minerals from the ground but also the treatment processes considered as mining. price used to determine gross income. Under IRS regulations, gross income for depletion purposes is defined as "the actual price for which the ore or mineral is sold" Price of ore concentrate would depend on the (wholesale) price of the final metal (including related metals) on commodities markets, and the percentage of the metal in the ore. If the mining process is not used, the ore concentrate is sold at a lower price than if it is used to transport the ore from the mine. firm is an integrated producer, i.e., it has smelting/refining operations, and also applies non-mining processes to the ore concentrate before the mineral is sold. There may be no sale of either the raw ore, or ore concentrate, and hence no price for the mineral firm's output until the final metal (gold, for example) is sold in the commodities markets. In these cases, percentage depletion is based not on actual gross income but what is called "constructive" gross income. This is income derived from or approximated by using representative market prices elsewhere in that particular market. in cases where there is no representative price from sales of the same ore concentrate (the mining output) in other markets, then gross income from mining is estimated by multiplying gross sales by the ratio of mining to total costs. As a hypothetical example, assume that the market price of the final cast copper on the commodities exchanges is $3.60/lb, which is $7,937/metric tonne of pure copper. Also assume that one metric ton of copper ore concentrate contains 30% pure copper and no other valuable minerals. The remaining 70% is sulfur, iron, and other impurities that have no value. "Net smelter return" is a common term used in the mining industry to refer to the net average revenue per unit of the smelted mineral product sold by the miner. It is essentially an estimate of the price the miner receives, or equivalently, the price paid by the smalter, for the ore concentrate produced, based on the price for the pure metal. At 8%, the royalty on this would be $14.24 million. From mining in this one year, the royalty from this could be $178.6 million. The Net Smelter Return is the amount of money which the smelter or refinery pays the mining operator for the mineral product. It is usually based on a spot, and is based on the price on the London Exchange or the Chicago Commodities Exchange. According to Cartright (2007), The Net Smalter Return is the amount of money which the smalter pays the mineral operator for the product and is usually based on a spot, or the price on the London Exchange. or current price of the mineral, with deductions for the costs associated with further processing. In non-metal mines the selling price is usually 'fob mine site' because of the transportation costs involved in delivering the mineral product to the buyer. In Canadian law, net smelter return is defined in the same way. According to Barten (1993), a net Smelter Return is ... the amount received by the mine or mill owner from the sale of the Mineral product. From the gross proceeds received there may be. deductions for costs incurred by the owner after the property leaves the mine property and before sale. Costs of transportation, insurance, or security, penalties, sampling and assaying, refining and smelting, and marketing. No deductions are made for the operating costs of the mine-mill complex. A net smelter return will be ... the net value of minerals from the property, where Net Value is Gross Value less certain permitted expenses. Gross value will usually be defined with reference to the spot price of an average weekly or monthly spot price on specified markets. The permitted deductions will include all charges by the smelter, such as smelting and refining charge as well as penalties for impurities in the ore. In some cases deductions may also be made for taxes except income taxes and, depending on the nature of the commodity, for marketing costs. The similarity of these definitions of net smalter return (gross price less non-mining costs) times output to the gross income base under the percentage depletion rules is readily apparent. The following two examples, from contracts or royalty deeds between a landowner (the vendor) and the mining company (the purchaser), illustrate the legal language used in defining a net smelters return. of transportation and handling of such concentrates, metals (including bullion) or products from the Claims to any mint, smelter, refinery or other purchaser. c) related insurance on such concentrate, metals, bullion or products. Thus, continuing with the above hypothetical copper example, the net smalter return would be the price at which cast copper could be sold after the costs of smelting and refining the copper ore are subtracted. Using the same figures as before, the market price of the final cast copper is $3.60/lb. tonne (2,205 lbs) of pure copper would be valued at $7,938. One ton of copper ore concentrate contains only 30% pure copper, so that the value of one tonne of that ore concentrate is 30% of that, or $2,381. To calculate smeltering and refining costs assume that these are 10% of the price of the cast copper. Then costs would be $238/tonne of copper concentrate (equal to $0.36 x 0.30 x 2,205) smelter/refiner, it would equal the actual (or constructive) sales revenue to the mining company of the ore concentrate. If annual sales were 100,000 metric tonnes of copper concentrate, total net smelter return revenues would be $214 million. At 8%, the royalty on thiswould be $17 million. This is because final metal prices are high relative to smelting/refining costs. In general, the higher are metals prices relative to costs (in which case mineral producers earn extra or more) windfall profits) the more net smelter returns diverge from gross income. Another royalty base that has been mentioned in the General Mining law debate is net profit. Here the royalty would be a certain percentage of the miner's net after-tax profit or income. For any mining company (indeed for any business) net profit is, of course, less than sales revenue by the costs of doing business, thus resulting in a smaller royalty base from which to calculate royalty payments. Reducing royalty payments to the federal government might Net profits are notoriously variable, difficult to measure, and susceptible to accounting manipulations. This method could create incentives for mining companies to claim significant deductions from their income such that there would rarely be a profit against which to levy the royalty. Depending upon the royalty rate this could lead not only to smaller royalty payments than either a gross income or net smelter return royalty, but perhaps to no royalty at all. Some advocates of the net system believe that it is the best way to make money from mining. after-tax profit type of royalty, for example the 1993 bill S. 775, would have measured net profits at the mine mouth. Royalties on coal extracted from federal lands, at the 8% or 12% royalty rate, are also assessed on the "gross proceeds" from the sale of the coal. For oil, gas, and coal, federal royalties are calculated on the gross proceeds (or gross sales revenues) from the contract sale. For geothermal resources, the Geothermal Steam Act of 1970 (as amended) instituted a 10%-15% royalty on federal leases. There is another side to the externality concept: external costs. It appears that some external effects associated with hardrock mineral production are net "external costs" rather than net external benefits. Without land reclamation, there would presumably be damage to the environment, which is an external cost to society. This is a cost that the typical profit-maximizing hard rock mineral producer does not usually account for in its decision-making. The external costs from hardrock Mineral production are the degradation of the environment. the normal business decisionmaking process. Consequently, since the accountable business costs are lower than the real costs (including external costs) prices are lower. Under this reasoning, if the presence of external benefits is dismissed and the Presence of external costs is considered significant, the appropriate federal policy would be a tax. This is the economic rationale for the abandoned mineland reclamation fee under SMCRA, the Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act. Two other conditions might be required for the fee to be reinstated. mitigate against the use of the market-determined royalty rate. If private landowners exercise monopoly power or some other type of market power, then it would be possible to extract from the mining companies higher than competitive royalty rates. In the second case, if the mining industry is concentrated and exercises market power—control over prices, for example—it might lead to underpayment of royalties. The market- determined royalty rates might actually be higher than they appear to be, the authors say. be too low. These are complex issues which are difficult to analyze. Much of the land from which hardrock minerals are produced is owned by the federal government. It might be in a position to take advantage of its power to obtain royalty payments above the competitively determined rates. Such payments, combined with the bonus bids, would appropriate for society the economic rents—the abnormal or excess profits (i.e., windfalls)—from the production of scarce natural resources. In reality, of course, the government policy is just the reverse: It charges a royalty rate of zero, which is definitely below the market-determined rates. rate. Much land is also privately owned or owned by state or local governments or Indian tribes, which suggests that the market-determined royalty rates might be a reliable indicator of competitive rates. As to the hardrock mineral industry structure, available data suggest that the industry, both in the United States and throughout the world, is somewhat concentrated. Hardrock mining is a highly capital intensive business and large enterprises can operate more efficiently. In the U.S., many of the mining firms are large multinational mining conglomerates. Five of the top ten claim holders (who hold more than $1 billion) are multinationals. 16% of all claims on western public lands are foreign corporations. The hardrock mining industry is dominated by about 40 companies. The top four account for 35% of total market capitalization. This would suggest that the market-determined royalty rate might actually be too low. On balance, it might be the case that the above two opposing forces tend to offset each other and the government would want to use the more appropriate competitive rate. This is more consistent with economic efficiency, and social welfare, than a zero rate. royalty rate should apply to all hardrock minerals or whether the rate should vary by type of mineral in some logical way. On the one hand, a variable rate is unnecessary because the base is ad-valorem, so the royalty amounts automatically vary in proportion to mineral value. More valuable minerals pay greater absolute royalties per unit. Table 2 gives an illustration for metals. Note that the royalty in column (4) is based on the gross value of the metal in the commodities markets and does not allow deductions for smeltering costs and A constant royalty rate tends to minimize both economic distortions and administrative costs. Private royalty agreements, which are negotiated on a case-by-case basis, have widely varying royalty rates. These can range from 1-10%, and differ by mineral types. Under one possible structure that has been suggested, the royalty rate itself would be a function of—it would vary positively with—the amount of such costs. The figures do not represent either net smelter returns or gross income from mining, both of which would be less by the amount ofSuch costs. Mineral prices would probably not increase very much because for most minerals, prices are determined in the international market. Less land would be mined and fewer U.S. hardrock minerals would be produced and more imported than under a no-royalty system. This would likely contribute to a more economically efficient use of the nation's resources, which would tend to promote the welfare of society. The payment of a royalty to the federal government for the services from the mineral land would increase federal revenues, although revenue generation is not the primary rationale for the imposition. holding fee, from $30 to $50 per claim, and from $125 to $150 per claim respectively. Under federal budget rules fees collected by federal agencies, such as the Department of the Interior, are considered as offsetting budget receipts, or negative spending. Such receipts reduce the agencies' outlays. The U.S. hardrock minerals industry is a major source of revenue for the federal government. The revenue estimates are net of federal income tax revenues due to the deductibility of royalty payments and fees against business taxes. subject to the same income tax laws which apply to all other for-profit businesses, paying federal income, payroll, and other federal taxes. The federal corporate income tax applies a 35% rate to most corporate taxable income. Reduced tax rates, either 15%, 25%, or 34%, apply to "smaller" corporations, those earning less than $10 million of income. In addition, corporate stockholders pay individual income taxes on their corporate-source capital gains and dividends. As business entities, hardrock mining companies benefit from many different different tax rates. types of untargeted tax incentives, provisions that are generally available to non-mining businesses, as well as some tax provisions specifically targeted toward mining. Under IRC §199, "manufacturing" businesses are allowed a deduction, as a business expense, for a specified percentage of the qualified production activity's income. The deduction was 3% of income for 2006, is currently 6%, and is scheduled to increase to 9% when it goes into effect in 2009. The tax benefits are the §199 manufacturing deduction and accelerated depreciation. The deductions are subject to a limit of 50% of the wages paid that are allocable to the domestic production. fully phased in by 2010. For the domestic mining industry (which includes the oil and gas industry), the deduction applies to any primary product "manufactured, produced, or extracted in whole or in significant part in the United States" Note that extraction is considered to be manufacturing for purposes of this deduction. Effectively, the deduction is equivalent to a reduced marginal tax rate. For example, at the top marginal corporate tax rate of 35%, which typically applies to large corporations, this would be a 35% deduction. such as hardrock mining companies, the current deduction of 6% is equivalent to a marginal corporate income tax rate of 32.9% (35% x 0.94) rather than 35%. Another untargeted or general tax provision that is important to the hardrock mineral companies is accelerated depreciation. This deduction is intended to provide a business reasonable allowance for the exhaustion and wear and tear (i.e., depreciation) of business property. It is analogous to the cost depletion allowance for investment in a mineral deposit (as discussed below) companies incur geological and geophysical (or surveying, and reconnaissance investigation) costs. These include the costs of staking the claim, removal of property line obstructions, limited removal of overburden, and limited sluicing. The removal of large amounts of overBurden would indicate that a deposit may have already been found and the mine may be in a different stage. Exploration expenditures include the Costs of Surveying, test pitting, trenching, drilling, driving of exploration tunnels and adits, and similar types of work. The costs of exploratory drilling to ascertain the extent of commercially marketable ores are treated by the tax law as a mineral exploration cost. These types of costs are all deductible rather than capitalized. Expenditures made after the existence of ores or minerals has been disclosed are considered mine development expenditures, and these are deductible as well as exploration costs. The tax law does not apply to exploration expenditures made in connection with the development of a new mine or a new ore deposit. It only applies to the exploration costs associated with the discovery of new ore deposits. also qualify for expensing treatment. These are costs associated with bringing the mine to production. Activities associated with development are building roads, clearing the land, and other activities to prepare a site for the production stage. Expensing applies only to domestic mines; exploration and development cost of foreign properties must be either depleted or amortized over a 10-year period using straight-line method. The costs of constructing or sinking a mine shaft, or the costs of driving tunnels and galleries, are development costs, which may be expensed. amortization. Mining companies may only expense 70% of the exploration and development; the remaining 30% must be amortized over five years. Recapture is accomplished by either including the amount expensed as ordinary income or by subtracting it from the percentage depletion allowance. This makes it especially important for mining companies to determine when exploration ends and development begins, as well as when production commences and when the mine is sold. It is also important to know when exploration begins and development ends, so that the company can determine when to recapture costs. The percentage depletion allowance is available to virtually all mineral producers except integrated oil and gas producers. Percentage depletion rates range from 5% for stone and clay to 22% for uranium and beryllium. Most of the hardrock minerals have a depletion rate of 22%, and several have either a 15% or 14% rate. For iron ore (and coal) mined by corporations, the allowance must be reduced by 20% of the excess of percentage depletion over cost depletion (IRC §291) the Tax Equity and Fiscal Responsibility Act of 1982 ( P.L. 97-248 ). In effect this limitation reduces the 22% depletion rate to an effective depletion rate of between 17.6% and 22%, depending upon the amount of cost depletion. The Joint Tax Committee estimates the revenue losses from the above three special tax preferences or subsidies (formally called "tax expenditures"). The latest five-year estimates (from FY2007-2011) are as follows: $0.5 billion for expensing of mine exploration and development costs. which are a list of ten tax breaks or subsidies that have been identified as potentially able to reduce a business's or individual's tax liability to little or nothing. The intent is to assure that all taxpayers—individuals and businesses—pay some tax, which is not assured if taxpayers are able to claim a lot of special tax breaks. In effect, the alternative minimum tax imposes an additional tax above and beyond the normal or regular income tax on the total amount of these ten items of tax preference. items are tax breaks that are important to the mining industry. Excess of percentage depletion over cost depletion, and the excess of the exploration and development cost deduction over a hypothetical deduction. A third item of tax preference that the mining firm would have to include in its list of tax preferences is accelerated depreciation over straight line depreciation. To the extent to which mining companies use these and other items of tax preference, this could have a significant impact on their tax bills in the future. It could also have a negative impact on the mining sector as a whole. trigger the minimum tax, and thereby reduce the value of the special tax provisions. These special tax preferences or subsidies, combined with accelerated depreciation (a significant tax benefit for highly capital intensive business such as hardrock mining) have historically resulted in relatively low effective average and marginal tax rates. Thus, firms that mine hardrock minerals on public domain lands pay no royalty, and benefit from fairly significant tax subsidies. For example, CBO recently published a study of effective tax rates on different types of assets, and those used in mining. mine shafts) generally ranked fairly low, relative to assets used in other industries. mining companies pay a variety of claims fees (location fees, Bureau of Land Management processing fees, annual maintenance fees) These are charges for specific types of administrative services provided by the BLM. The claims location fee is presently $30 per claim, which is about 20 acres. The annual maintenance (or holding) fee, necessary to hold a claim on public land, is currently $125 per claim. This fee applies to claim holders with 11 acres or more. The location fee and the annual maintenance fee are adjusted for inflation. The BLM also assesses a processing fee of $15. These fees help the BLM cover its costs of administering the mining law and regulations. They cover costs for such actions as processing and recording applications, certain exploration permits, name changes, and corporate mergers. On November 1, 2007, the United States House of Representatives approved a substitute version of H.R. 2262 (with amendments), the Hardrock Mining and Reclamation Act. of 2007. This bill would: establish a new regulatory framework for administering permits to develop hardrock minerals. permanently end the sale or "patenting" of public lands for mining, which has been under moratorium since the early 1990s. Use 75% of the proceeds for the cleanup of abandoned sites; impose an 8% gross income royalty future hardrock mining operations, and an 4% royalty rate on current mining operations; require miners to seek additional permits to explore for and develop mineral resources and meet certain standards related to reclamation of mined. lands; create an abandoned mine reclamation program similar to the one currently in place for coal sites; make the income from hardrock mining fees and royalties available, subject to appropriation, to support reclamation programs and to provide assistance to certain state, local, and tribal governments. 50% of the cleanup funding would be directed to the state in which the royalties were generated; direct the Secretary of the Interior to prioritize reclamation projects that protect public health and safety, particularly from water pollution, and for projects that restore wildlife habitat. the Committee bill, watershed areas would be designated as eligible reclamation projects and among the top priorities for receiving cleanup funds. establish environmental standards specific to the hardrock mining industry. establish a new definition of "undue degradation" of public lands and resources and give the Secretary of the Interior broader authority to block mining operations that would cause such harm. allow Native American tribes to petition the federal government to withdraw federal lands with cultural and religious values. The substitute version of H.R. 2262 would be less prescriptive and more performance-oriented than the original bill. from mining activities (similar language has been in place for states and localities) Set guidelines for administrative and judicial review of actions authorizing mining on public lands. Allow citizen lawsuits challenging federal decisions. Set guidelines to allow citizen lawsuits against federal decisions on mining activities. Allow for citizen lawsuits to challenge federal decisions about mining activities on public land. Allow state and local governments to sue the federal government to stop mining on their land. For more information on the bill, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/29/politics/mineral-mining/index.html.