At the end of July 2010, over 10,000 military medical personnel were deployed to Iraq and Afghanistan. The United States’ military presence in Iraq is scheduled to end no later than December 31, 2011. The military has established five levels of medical care to treat injured or sick military personnel. Each level provides progressively more intensive treatment, with each level providing more advanced care. The U.S. command structure in Iraq and Afghan has evolved over time, with the commanding generals advised by a lead surgeon. A DOD directive governing medical care for DOD deployed civilians is inconsistent with in-theater guidance. DOD could reduce uncertainty about the level of routine care these deployed civilians can expect in theater. In response to a draft of this report, DOD mentioned to us that its operating units have sufficient organic medical support and the medical needs of deployed civilians are being met. DOD also agreed that the Commander of U.S. Central Command should revise its guidance to clarify thelevel of care that deployed civilians should receive. About 2,600 DOD civilian employees were deployed to Iraq, and about 2,000 to Afghanistan. DOD relies on its own deployed civilians to carry out or support a range of essential missions. It is unclear to what extent DOD civilians can expect routine medical care in theater, authors say. The issue has received continuing congressional interest, they say, but no one has been turned away from routine care in Theater of Operations. The authors say shortages of and high demand for medical personnel in certain specialties plays a role in decisions about whether to request medical forces. Commanders in Iraq and Afghanistan have been splitting or reconfiguring medical units. Army doctrine, which is the starting point for defining and planning a unit’s capabilities, has not been updated fully to reflect these changes in theater. Splitting medical units, such as level 3 combat support hospitals and level 2 forward surgical teams, in order to locate them in more areas increases the opportunities to provide advanced emergency care quicker and could save more lives, authors say. They say Army doctrine and the organizational design of medical units were top issues that needed to be updated to better reflect current practice. Gaps in medical capabilities can occur when medical providers do not deploy as expected. Backfilling involves the identification and deployment of medical personnel into theater. Cross-leveling involves the temporary relocation of personnel from one unit in theater to another. The Army could benefit from incorporating its lessons learned, where appropriate, and be better assured the current practice of splitting medical units does not lead to unnecessary staffing challenges, the authors say. They say the Army has not fully incorporated these current practices into Army doctrine and organizational documents.