Following the September 11, 2001, attack on the WTC, FEMA provided funding to HHS to establish certain WTC health programs. The four programs are the FDNY WTC Medical Monitoring and Treatment Program; the NY/NJ WTC Consortium; HHS’s WTC Federal Responder Screening Program; and the WTC Health Registry. FEMA entered into interagency agreements with HHS agencies, such as NIOSH, ASPR, and ATSDR to distribute funding to implement health screening and monitoring programs for responders and other affected groups. Many workers and volunteers worked for extended periods of time without sufficient respite. Some of them did not have training in disaster response and were therefore more vulnerable to the stress of the event. Despite the early recognition of the need for mental health services, the mental health status of responders did not receive as much attention as it should have.and monitoring could improve the ability to accurately diagnose physical and mental health conditions and prevent more serious mental health problems from developing. The World Trade Center disaster was an unprecedented, highly traumatizing event. initially as their physical health status. Mount Sinai School of Medicine is one of the clinical centers in the NY/NJ WTC Consortium. The mental health status of responders was initially assessed with a short written questionnaire, and depending on a person’s score, individuals were referred for an in-person clinical mental health evaluation. Recognizing the seriousness of mental health problems among responders, the Mount Sinai school of Medicine Department of Psychiatry sought private funding from the Robin Hood Foundation. The program is federally funded. to develop a broader mental health component to the screening program. With the additional funds, the program was able to develop and use a more extensive mental health questionnaire and have a trained mental health professional conduct in-person interviews. Such programs can improve the ability to accurately diagnose and differentiate physical and mental health conditions. For example, gastrointestinal problems can sometimes be a sign of psychological stress. Timely mental health screening can help identify and treat mental and physical health conditions, experts say. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. and monitoring can also prevent some mental health conditions from progressing to more serious disorders. For example, obtaining treatment for mild depression might prevent a major depressive disorder from developing. Before federal funding became available in fiscal year 2006 to pay for treatment of responders’ health effects, WTC health program officials told us that it was a challenge to find providers who would treat responders whose screening or monitoring examination was done. Including a treatment referral process in screening and monitoring programs could improve the ability of responders to gain access to needed treatment. Some responders required additional diagnosis or treatment for physical or mental health conditions. The FDNY WTC program was able to refer firefighters to its Bureau of Health Services, which provided treatment. The NY/NJ WTC Consortium did not have a similar option. Officials from this program said that identifying providers available and willing to treat participants was a major part of their operations. It was especially difficult when participants lacked health insurance, which was often the cause of some of the problems. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. HHS officials, clinicians involved with the WTC health programs, and other experts said that an integral part of screening and monitoring is the establishment of a linkage to treatment services. Some indicated that as professionals they also felt an ethical obligation to be able to refer people in. Case study: WTC responders who carried out cleanup services after the WTC attack often did not have health insurance, according to a labor official. Case case: WTC workers who were construction workers often lost their health insurance when they became too ill to work the number of days required for coverage. need of care to treatment services. Screening and monitoring programs for responders to the WTC disaster were set up as separate programs. Making comparable services available to all responders, regardless of their employer or geographic location, could ensure more equitable access to services for responders. Data collected about responders’ health are consistent and comprehensive, the NIMH says. The agency says providers who identified a need for treatment during screening examinations acquired a responsibility to provide access to care. The NIMh says it has no plans to change its screening and monitoring program. on the basis of the responder’s employer and geographic location. The types of services available and information collected about responders varied by program. From 2002 until summer 2007, NIOSH did not consistently ensure the availability of screening and monitoring services for nonfederal responders residing outside the NYC area. For example, from August 2004 to August 2007, the FDNY WTC program and the NY/NJ WTC Consortium provided an initial screening examination followed by monitoring examinations every 18 months for firefighters and other workers and volunteers. until June 2005, NIOSH did not fund any organization to provide screening or monitoring services outside the NYC metropolitan area for nonfederal responders. Responders who traveled to NYC from around the country following the attack have testified before the Congress about having difficulty receiving services. Because the WTC Federal Responder Screening Program collected only limited data, less is known about the health effects experienced by federal responders. Officials involved with the WTC health programs have recognized the value of designing responder health programs that provide comparable services to all responders. NIOSH took steps to increase the availability of services to nonfederal responders outside the NYC metropolitan area. In June 2007 it arranged for QTC Management, Inc., to provide screening and monitoring examinations nationwide for 1 year. In March 2008, CDC issued a request for organizations to indicate their interest in coordinating a national program for WTC responders that would ensure that all WTC responders who reside outside of NYC have access to federally funded screening, monitoring, and other services. For more information, visit www.nihos.org. In the event of a future disaster, providing comparable services to all responders would ensure more equitable access to services. This could help ensure that responders receive timely care for conditions and illnesses related to the disaster. HHS has taken steps to ensure thatresponders are registered, but it has not developed a program to ensure consistency in program design. In addition, ensuring that programs collect data that are consistent and comprehensive would help ensure data collection is comprehensive and consistent. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. ATSDR has developed a survey instrument that state and local entities can voluntarily adopt to register responders. ASPR is also taking steps to establish a system to register HHS employees and certain other volunteers, but it has not completed its effort. HHS has not developed a department-level plan for designing and implementing responder health programs that incorporates the lessons from the WTC health programs. In the absence of a plan, NIOSH developed a plan for responding to emergency situations in the emergency room and community. a proposal for a project to develop strategies to ensure responder safety and health. NIOSH’s project would address some aspects of the lessons from the WTC health programs. A Rapid Response Registry (RRR) survey instrument that state and local entities can voluntarily adopt to register responders and other individuals exposed to a disaster. The RRR survey instrument, a two-page form that can be distributed in paper or electronic format, is designed to collect information that would enable officials to inform individuals about follow-up health services. ATSDR established a contract with Research Triangle Institute International (RTI) to support state and local efforts to implement the RRR survey instrument during responses to disasters. RTI’s responsibilities include providing information to the entire at-risk population on how to enroll in the R RR. The RRR is intended to collect basic demographic and health information, including contact information; exposure information; and information on exposure-related health effects, immediate health and safety needs, and health insurance. According to research studies. As of February 2008, 21 states had included the RRR survey in their disaster planning. NIOSH has also taken some steps that relate to the registering of responders. In 2005, NIOSH posted interim guidance on its Web site to help occupational health and other clinicians conduct postexposure medical screening of workers leaving hurricane disaster recovery areas. The data would be collected and maintained by state or local entities with ATSDR’s and RTI’S assistance. The instrument has been shared with other federal agencies, all state health departments, and local response organizations. guidance states that all responders should receive some basic screening services. identity and contact information should be obtained on their completion of or return from response activities. ASPR is required under the Pandemic and All-Hazards Preparedness Act to register federal public health and medical personnel who are deployed under the Secretary of HHS’s authority. It has not completed efforts to ensure that these responders would be registered in the event of an outbreak. The guidance outlines minimum screening information needs, including contact information, health status information and exposure information. HHS has not developed a department-level plan for designing and implementing responder health programs that incorporates the five lessons from the WTC health programs. Thousands of responders to the WTC disaster have experienced serious physical and mental health problems as a result of their response and recovery efforts. HHS has not indicated whether its policies and actions following a disaster or emergency would apply these lessons, such as by building epidemiologic research into the design of screening and monitoring services. Until HHS completes this work, responders to a future disaster could be vulnerable to health problems.