Mining of hardrock minerals, such as gold, lead, copper, silver, and uranium, was an economic incentive for exploring and settling the American West. When the ore was depleted, miners often left behind a legacy of abandoned mines, structures, safety hazards, and contaminated land and water. BLM, the Forest Service, EPA, and OSM play a role in cleaning up these abandoned mining sites and ensuring that currently operating sites are reclaimed after operations have ceased. Some contaminated hardrock mine sites have been listed on Superfund’s National Priorities list. readily available records or data sources, such as published or unpublished geological reports, mining claim maps, and the Mineral Availability System/Mineral Industry Locator System (MAS/MILS), which states indicated were typically incomplete. Several of those states that relied primarily on literature used the literature only as a starting point, and then estimated the number of features on the basis of experience. For example, while one state estimated that there were about three times the number. of public safety hazards as identified by the literature, another state estimated. there were four times as many. were up to six times as many. As of November 2007, hardrock mining operators had provided financial assurances valued at approximately $982 million. Some states were less readily able to provide the data directly from their systems without manipulation or estimation. For example, New Mexico estimated the number of abandoned mine sites from the data it maintains on hazardous features. Nevada estimated theNumber of abandoned hardrock mine sites from the data it maintains on the number of mining districts in the state. 52 of the 1,463 hardrock mining operations had inadequate financial assurances. The financial assurances for these 52 operations should be more accurately reported as about $61 million less than needed to fully cover estimated reclamation costs. The report also indicates that about $28 million less was needed to cover estimatedReclamation costs for the operations. The operations are located on BLM lands in 11 western states, including California, Nevada, New Mexico, Oregon, Utah, Washington and Wyoming. The total number of mining operations on the BLM lands is 1,462. BLM’s approach to determining the adequacy of financial assurances is not useful because it does not clearly lay out the extent to which financial assurances are inadequate. For example, in California, BLM reports that, statewide, the financial assurances in place are $1.5 million greater than required, suggesting reclamation costs are being more than required. In contrast, we totaled the difference between the financial assurance in place for an operation and thefinancial assurances needed for that operation to determine the actual shortfall for each of the 52 operations for which BLM had determined that financial assurances were inadequate. fully covered. However, according to our analysis of only those California operations with inadequate financial assurances, the financial assurances in place are nearly $440,000 less than needed to fully cover reclamations costs. BLM officials said that financial assurances may appear inadequate in the Bond Review Report when expansions or other changes in the operation have occurred. BLM agreed that it would be valuable to report the dollar value of the difference between financial assurances. in place and required for those operations where financial assurances are inadequate and have taken steps to modify LR2000. requiring an increase in the amount of the financial assurance. BLM’s estimate of reclamation costs has increased and there is a delay between when BLM enters the new estimate into LR2000 and when the operator provides the additional bond amount. Conversely, hardrock mining operators may have financial assurances greater than required for a number of reasons. For example, they may increase their financial assurances because they anticipate expanding their hardrock operations. In addition, according to the Bond Review Report, there are about 2.4 times as many notice-level operations. surface disturbance on 5 acres or less. About 99 percent of the value of financial assurances is for plan-level operations. A greater percentage of plan- level operations had inadequate financial assurances. Over one-third of the number of all hardrock operations and about 84 percent of  value of all all BLM operations were inadequate for financial assurances, according to the report. The report was published by the U.S. Bureau of Land Management on Wednesday, November 14. For confidential support call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. financial assurances are for hardrock mining operations located in Nevada. See appendix IV for further details on the number of plan- and notice-level operations in each state. I would be happy to respond to any questions that you or Members of the Committee may have. Contact points for our Offices of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of this testimony. For further information about this testimony, please contact Robin M. Nazzaro, Director, Natural Resources and Environment (202) 512-3841. We interviewed officials at the BLM, the Forest Service, EPA, and OSM. We obtained data on total expenditures for cleaning up and reclaiming abandoned hardrock mine sites. We reviewed agency documents, budget justification reports and reports detailing agencies’ cleanup efforts and programs. We interviewed officials involved with the abandoned mine cleanup programs to understand how they tracked and monitored expenditures to clean up abandonedhardrock mines, and to request and ensure that we would receive the data we needed. We also examined relevant legislation and regulations to determine the value and coverage of financial assurances operators use to guarantee reclamation costs. The data were compiled from BLM’s Financial Accounting and Reporting System, EPA's Superfund eFacts Database, OSM's Abandoned Mine Land Inventory System, and Forest Service officials. Because the four agencies’ abandoned hardrock mine programs started in different years, start years for expenditure data vary. BLM officials told us that in addition to the expenditure data they provided, the agency receives funding allocations from other sources, such as the Department of the Interior's Central Hazardous Materials fund. through 2007. Forest Service’s data, for fiscal years 1996 through 2007. EPA’S data, from fiscal years 1988 through 2007; and OSM’ s data from 1993 to 2007. We presented these data for the past 10 years (1998 through 2007) because of variability in the program start year across the agencies. Some data recording errors in early years at some agencies also contributed to the lack of year-by-year presentation. We performed a limited reliability assessment of the expenditure data. in 2008 constant dollars. Because of limited time in preparing this testimony, we were unable to fully assess the reliability of the agencies’ expenditure data. We concluded that the data are appropriate as used and presented to meet our objectives because we (1) attribute the data to what agencies report as their expenditures, (2) present rounded data to minimize the perception of precision, and (3) do not base any conclusions or recommendations on the data. To answer our second objective, we summarized selected prior survey efforts by federal agencies and organizations. to document differences in estimates, definitions, and methodologies. We consulted experts in mining and abandoned mine land programs. We then provided states with an edit-controlled data collection instrument that requested data specifically tailored to our definitions and methods. Features that pose a significant hazard to public health and safety include features, such as mine openings, structures, and highwalls; and impoundments that poses a threat to public safety. The definition we ultimately chose was clear and incorporated enough flexibility for all major hardrock mining states to reasonably comply. to public health and safety and require actions to secure, remedy or reclaim. Sites with environmental degradation include features that lead to environmental degradation, and, consequently, require remediation of air, water, or ground pollution. Most states do not maintain environmental degradation data by feature, states could only speculate about this figure, or compute it by estimating an average number of features per site and multiplying that. Rather than reporting, as requested, theNumber of features leading to environmental degradation, most states reported only the number of sites with environmental  degradation. by the overall number of sites with environmental degradation. Because of these limitations with feature-level data, we report only the number of site with data on environmental degradation in order to ensure more reliable and consistent reporting across the states. As a secondary confirmation that states provided data consistent with the definition, our data collection instrument included a section for states to provide a brief description of how the various data points were calculated, and whether the data provided were actual or estimated values. Based on comments in these fields, and basic logic checks, we followed up on the data. as needed through telephone interviews to clarify and confirm problematic responses. To answer our third objective—to determine the value and coverage of financial assurances in place to guarantee coverage of reclamation costs— we requested the BLM Bond. Using these final edited data, we calculated the estimated number of abandoned mine sites, the number of features that pose physical safety and environmental hazards in the 12 western states and Alaska. Our definitional and editing processes provided us with reasonable assurance that the data were as clean and consistent as possible. Review Report from BLM’s Legacy Rehost System 2000 (LR2000) database. Because we had previously reported reliability problems with data on financial assurances in LR2000, we conducted a limited reliability assessment of the bond report data. This limited assessment included (1) basic logic checks on the data we received, (2) interviews with BLM minerals management officials knowledgeable of the changes made to LR2000. Although the data are of undetermined reliability, our limited assessment indicates that they are reliable. that management controls were improved for the generation of bond review reports from LR2000. We concluded that the data are appropriate as used and presented, and we did not base any conclusions or recommendations on these data. This appendix provides information on federal expenditures used to clean up abandoned hardrock mines by fiscal year (table 5) and by state (table 6). Range of estimated abandoned mines previously (2001) (2007) Mineral Policy Center (2003) Earthworks (formerly Mineral policy Center) ( 2007) (2004) “openings” No data provided Western Governors’ Association and National Mining Association, Cleaning Up Abandoned Mines: A Western Partnership, 1998. appendix provides information from BLM’s November 2007 Bond Review Report. It includes information on the number of financial assurances in place for hardrock operations on BLM lands in 11 western states. It also includes the value of these financial assurances by state. The report also includes information of the differences between financial assurance requirements and actual value of financial assurance in place in each state. It concludes with an analysis of the difference between the requirements and the actual value for notice- and plan-level operations in that state.