As of December 31, 2010, there were 6,364 community banks (commercial banks with total assets of $1 billion or less) This represents about 92 percent of all commercial banks, although only about 10 percent of commercial bank assets nationwide. Banks in the U.S. are supervised by one of the following three federal regulators: FDIC, Federal Reserve or OCC. The Federal Reserve supervises commercial banks that are state-chartered and members of the Federal Reserve System. OCC supervises federally chartered national banks. The purpose of federal banking supervision is to help ensure that banks throughout the financial system are operating in a safe and sound manner. Financial regulation more broadly has sought to achieve four goals: to ensure adequate consumer protections, ensure the integrity and fairness of markets, monitor the safety and soundness of institutions, and act to ensure the stability of the overall financial system. Federal banking regulators use a number of tools to achieve these goals, the authors say. For more information, visit www.banks.gov. Capital provides an important cushion against losses for banks. Capital can be measured as total capital or tier 1 capital. Regulators oversee the capital adequacy of their regulated institutions through ongoing monitoring, including on-site examinations and off-site tools. When banks fail to meet these goals, they may face fines or other penalties from the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. and other authorities. When a bank fails to meet the minimum capital requirements, it may be fined or other sanctions may be imposed by the federal government. regulators require banks to hold capital above regulatory minimums. These requirements may result from an enforcement action through an agreement between the regulator and the bank. Examinations and ratings: Federal banking laws and regulatory guidance require on-site examinations. At each full-scope examination, examiners review the bank’s risk exposure on a number of components. It may reduce the availability of bank credit and reduce returns on equity to shareholders. It can also affect a bank”s financial health. using what is known as the CAMELS rating system (Capital adequacy, Asset quality, Management, Earnings, Liquidity, and Sensitivity to market risk) Evaluations of CAMELS components consider the institution’s size and sophistication, the nature and complexity of its activities, and its risk profile. In examinations, a bank is rated for each of the CAMEL components and given a composite rating. However, the composite is not an average of the component ratings. The component rating and the composite ratings are scored on a scale of 1 (best) to 5 (worst) typically correspond to the composite CAMELS ratings, with the actions generally increasing in severity as the ratings become worse. Table 2 describes the definitions of the composite scores under the Uniform Financial Institutions Rating System. In examinations, examiners review a sample of banks’ internal ratings of loans to determine the adequacy of credit risk administration and identify loans that show undue risk and may be uncollectible. As part of this review, Examiners determine which loans are considered “pass,” with no concerns noted, as well as those that are special mentioned or “classified” There are three classification categories used by the federal banking regulators: substandard, doubtful, and loss. These loan classifications, and the internal ratings that banks produce for all of their loans, are incorporated into how each bank calculates its allowance for loan and lease loss (ALLL) If additional loans are classified substandard or doubtful, this information is included in a bank’s updated ALLL estimates. If Loans are classified loss, they are not performing or may not perform in the future. charged off the bank’s balance sheet. The end result of an on-site examination is an ROE that includes the CAMELS ratings. CRE encompasses many different property types that present different risks. Table 4 describes the key CRE property types. Regulators define CRE loans to include construction loans, loans to finance CRE that are not secured by CRE, loans secured by multifamily property, and nonfarm, nonresidential property in which the primary source of repayment derives from the rental income associated.  CRE loans in which the primary source of repayment is not the property itself are called owner-occupied loans. For example, a line of credit for a business’s operating expenses might be secured in part by commercial property, such as an office. Owner-occupied properties generally are considered to carry less risk than non-owner- occupied properties because regulators consider them to be less sensitive to the condition of the CRE market. For more information on CRE loans, go to www.securitizer.gov. Construction and land development (CLD) loans are considered to be the riskiest class of CRE. They can include properties that are built before having firm commitments from buyers or lessees. By the time the construction phase is completed, market demand may have fallen, putting downward pressure on sales prices or rents. In recent years, this type of loan also has tended to have a much higher loss rate than other types of CRE, according to a report by the Bank of America Merrill Lynch. Banks report on four broad categories of CRE in their quarterly call reports. CLD: loans secured by real estate to finance land development and construction. Multifamily: loans for residential properties with five or more dwelling units, such as apartment buildings. Nonfarm nonresidential: Loans secured byreal estate for business and industrial properties, as well as properties such as hotels, churches, hospitals, schools, and charitable organizations. This category includes offices, retail, and other nonfarm commercial properties. warehouse space. Loans to finance CRE, construction, and land development (not secured by CRE). Interagency guidance issued in 2006 on concentrations in CRE and sound risk-management practices define CRE loans within these categories to include those in which repayment is dependent on the cash flow generated from the real estate itself. CRE as an asset class—and especially properties in the ADC category—is prone to volatility and cyclical behavior, as illustrated in this chart. When evaluating concentrations inCRE, examiners are instructed not to include owner-occupied properties in which the income or value of the property is not the primary source of repayment. the current CRE market downturn. This volatility and cyclical behavior is attributed to characteristics such as information-gathering difficulties, infrequent transactions, high transaction costs, rigid and constrained supply, long construction times, and a two-fold reliance on external finance. CRE is by nature diverse and localized. For example, shopping centers are one type of CRE, but even within this category properties can have significant differences depending on design, types of tenants, and other factors that can affect their value. Because of these factors, the supply of CRE in the marketplace has been constrained. is slow to respond to an increase in demand, which drives prices up when investor optimism rises. Conversely, the marketplace isslow to respond when the market supply of CRE catches up and new construction projects are delivered, resulting in oversupply and declining property values. According to regulatory officials, the weakness in the ADC sector during this crisis was primarily due to residential housing construction. That weakness affected the performance of other areas of CRE, such as strip malls. The recent downturn in the CRE sector has been particularly bad. downturn in the CRE markets can be seen in the market values for commercial property and the condition of the commercial mortgage- backed securities (CMBS) market. Market values for all major commercial property types have declined significantly. As of December 2010, overall CRE market values were down more than 42 percent from their peak in 2007. This decline followed a rapid appreciation in CRE asset values during which CRE values increased by more than 85 percent from 2002 to the market’s peak in October 2007.  CMBS issuance slowed severely since the CRE downturn started. By January 2011, the delinquency rate on loans included in CMBS was at a record high, above 9 percent. High-value properties in markets such as New York, Washington, San Francisco, and Boston are showing signs of recovery. The CRE market price deterioration appears to have leveled off recently, but vacancies at many properties remain high. The signs of a market recovery have been uneven in different areas of the U.S. and across the country. Low rental rates and high vacancies indicate that demand for office, retail, multifamily housing, and warehouse space remains relatively weak. Although CRE markets nationally have experienced a downturn, some regions have experienced more distress than others. The South, Midwest, and West have experienced greater stress and deterioration than the East. Community banks increasingly have moved toward providing CRE loans more than other kinds of loan products, in part in part because of the CRE market's strength. The CRE market has performed well more recently. Community banks have increased their focus on CRE lending. CRE collateral backed about 30 percent of total loans and leases at community banks in 2000. A decade later that rate increased to more than 43 percent. Nearly a third of community banks are exposing three times their total capital to risks related to their CRE loans. The decline in CRE values has contributed to more noncurrent CRE loans, charge-offs, and bank failures. The fall in CRE market value declines could reduce overall small business lending by community banks. problem of CRE loan refinancing may exacerbate the negative CRE trends and limit lending to small businesses. CRE loans usually are written for 3–10 years, with a 20–30 year amortization schedule and a balloon payment at the end. Small businesses that are looking to refinance a loan against a property that has lost a significant amount of market value may have to put up more equity. Alternatively, such borrowers might default on the loan, or the lender might be forced to sell the property. About $1.7 trillion in CRE mortgages will mature between 2011 and 2015, with about half of that held at banks. About 60 percent of CRE debt maturing in 2011 is “underwater” Due to price declines and stricter bank underwriting standards, those mortgages will be difficult to refinance.bank could work with the borrower to restructure the loan and avoid default. Results from the Federal Reserve’s Senior Loan Officer were published in the June issue of The Federal Reserve Journal. Opinion Survey have suggested that new CRE borrowers have faced tighter credit conditions. Banks tightening their underwriting standards in response to the downturn. Trend of tighter credit standards suggests that borrowers who previously were considered creditworthy might not meet banks’ higher standards. The regulators have been aware for some time of the risk-management challenges related to growing CRE banks. The January 2011 survey found that 10.6 percent of respondents reported easing credit standards over the previous 3 months, compared to 10.5 percent who reported tightening them. Bank officials say regulators have applied guidance rigidly since financial crisis. Regulators have been incorporating lessons from the financial crisis in their supervisory practices, which in part are based on lessons learned from the crisis. The regulators have issued guidance to banks on managing CRE concentration risks, conducted training on CRE treatment, and conducted internal reviews to better ensure examiner compliance with CRE guidance, the report says. The report also says that regulators have been too harsh in classifying loans and improperly applying the 2006 CRE guidance. Regulators began to address CRE concerns before financial crisis, authors say. OCC review found potential for improvement in banks’ risk-management processes for CRE concentrations, they say. In October 2009, after the start of the financial crisis and the widespread deterioration in CRE loan performance, regulators issued interagency guidance on CRE loan workouts, they write. They say the guidance was not intended as forbearance, but to encourage prudent loan workouts. The authors: Bank officials’ experience of increased stringency in supervision may explain it. Federal banking regulators help ensure consistency among examinations, and appropriate application of guidance. Regulators’ internal reviews include comprehensive audits that recur periodically, and real-time and post-ROE quality processes. Some of the internal review processes have identified inconsistencies in the application of CRE guidance. Examiners told us that the examples have helped to resolve differences of opinion with bankers on how to treat certain CRE- related loans. The process and the staff involved vary slightly for each regulator and based on a bank’s CAMELS rating. Bank officials say examiners have been more critical of recent appraisals. If the borrower lacks the ability to repay, the loan then could be considered “collateral dependent.” Such loans are classified based on the value of the property, and tend to rely on values established in appra isals. Classifications are a major concern for banks primarily because they can result in reduced earnings. For example, an examiner may determine that an applicant may not be able to repay the loan. Bank examiners have been asking bankers to place more loans on nonaccrual. Classifications also can reduce earnings because they factor into ALLL. As more loans are classified, more is generally reserved in ALLL to anticipate future losses from nonperforming loans. In our interviews with bank officials, some stated that some stated.that a bank should place a classified loan on non Accrual—which means the bank cannot accrue the interest income as earnings. It is not clear if the bank has made such a move. that examiners have been requiring additional ALLL and criticizing the ALLL methodology. In addition, a few bankers noted that some examiners want ALLL increased based on their peers’ ALLL rather than the bank’s individual situation. Many bank officials with whom we spoke were concerned that examiners had been misapplying the 2006 guidance. The 2006 guidance states that the CRE and ADC concentration levels are not limits, but some bank officials told us that examiner have been interpreting them that way. the 2006 guidance: some examiners were including owner-occupied CRE and some were using the wrong type of capital for the calculation, which inflated the concentration levels. A few bankers stated that examiners told them they exceeded the 300 percent concentration threshold for CRE, based on these faulty calculations, but according to the calculations in the guidance they actually were under the threshold. Some bank officials also stated that it was unclear to them what examiners expect in complying with requirements related to CRE and risk management. example, on what is considered to be satisfactory stress testing. While more bank officials than not noted that examiners’ actions have been consistent with the letter of the 2009 CRE loan workout guidance, a few said examiners were not always complying with its spirit. Two bankers with whom we spoke stated that it was their experience that examiner were particularly stringent in 2008 when the financial crisis was escalating, but moderated their approach in late 2009, which is around the time that the 2009 guidance was issued. CRE loan workout guidance was issued. An internal review by OCC’s Midsize and Community Banks Division came to a similar conclusion. Examiners have become more consistent in their CRE loan treatment through internal discussions, training, and policy communication efforts. A few bank officials with whom we spoke provided specific suggestions on how to improve policy guidance. But a few others felt that some form of general regulatory reprieve was needed for CRE lenders in the U.S. and around the world. For confidential support call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255. for community banks to work through the downturn. Bank officials we interviewed also stated that their experience with increased supervisory scrutiny was being reflected in CAMELS ratings and additional capital requirements. For example, many bank officials thought the management component rating was more critically assessed now, and heavily driven by asset quality and other component ratings. Some bank officials added that they were being rated on deterioration in their portfolios that was due to the broader economic downturn and problems in their geographic market that were out of their control. examiners have been more aggressive about requiring additional capital. Two bank officials in particular stated they thought this was especially the case for banks with high CRE concentrations. However, a few bankers thought the additional scrutiny was appropriate, but should not necessarily be focused on all banks. One banker stated that if examiners had been applying the guidance stringently before the crisis that perhaps the banks could have avoided some of the current problems. A few others also noted that stricter scrutiny is appropriate given the current CRE market situation and the severity of the economic downturn. Regulators have been incorporating into their regulatory processes a number of lessons learned from the financial crisis. A few bank officials stated that the regulators should focus on the community banks that caused the problems, rather than subjecting all community banks to such strict scrutiny. As noted in a December 2010 report by the FDIC IG that summarizes certain MLR findings, FDIC determined based on the MLRs that earlier supervisory action could have been taken against the failing banks. The report was based on findings from the IGs of the banking regulators in 2009 and 2010. was needed to address banks with high risk profiles or weak risk-management practices. We also found in past work that regulators identified a number of weaknesses in institutions’ risk- management systems before the financial crisis began but did not always take forceful actions to address them. A number of nonmanagement regulatory staff in the field offices we visited acknowledged they could have better followed up on outstanding issues. In response to the Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission report notes areas in which regulators could have been more proactive in using regulatory tools to address certain risks. lessons learned, regulatory officials stated that they have been following up more often on matters requiring attention (MRA) and refocusing their supervisory efforts. OCC’s Midsize and Community Banks Division issued an MRA Reference Guide that provides examiners with OCC policy guidance on how to report, follow up on, and keep records related to MRAs. FDIC in June 2009 implemented its “Forward Looking Supervision” program that re-emphasizes reviewing all aspects of a bank’S risks during the examination process. a bank’s financial condition; (2) examiners review risks associated with concentrations and wholesale funding sources; and (3) appropriate capital is maintained. Based on our analysis of a nonprobability sample of 55 ROEs, examiners’ findings were generally consistent with policy guidance, with some exceptions. Examiners made statements in ROEs related to the quality of banks’ loan workouts that were consistent with the 2009 guidance on CRE loan workouts. ROEs in our sample that comment broadly on Banks’ CRE Loan workouts tend to cite areas for improvement (20 of 27). Examiner concerns include that the bank management or its board could have better identified, monitored, or tracked problem loan workouts. Improvements to managing loan workouts that examiners cited include reporting on current loan status and related developments. Almost half of the ROEs in our sample that raise concerns related to CRE were ROEs that raised concerns relatedto TDRs. The study was based on a survey of more than 1,000 bank examiners in the U.S. and Europe. The report was published by the American Bankers Association. loan workouts (8 of 20) specifically note concerns about the nature of banks’ loan workouts. In our sample, most ROEs (44 of 55 sampled) raise concerns about CRE concentrations and how they are managed. In more than half of those (24 of 44), the concerns are supported by risk-management deficiencies and explicitly cite the 2006 CRE loan workout guidance. For example, in these cases, examiners most often stated that loans were restructured and extended on unsustainable terms that resulted in further asset quality deterioration. CRE concentration guidance. The findings include concerns on the bank’s need to update or enhance internal policies on CRE concentration limits and CRE underwriting acceptable to the bank. In 7 instances (of 44), the ROE includes statements that the bank must reduce its CRE concentrations. However, the basis for this requirement was unclear or appeared. The bank has a history of underwriting CRE loans that are not considered to be ‘high risk’ by the Federal Reserve. It has also underwritten some CRE loans in the past that are considered “high risk.” inconsistent with the 2006 CRE concentration guidance. In two other instances the ROEs state that the bank must reduce its CRE concentrations but do not focus on the bank’s risk-management systems. Differences in message between an ROE and an enforcement action could be confusing to bank boards and management as they seek to comply with regulatory requirements for risk management related to CRE concentrations. Such confusion could lead bank officials to misunderstand whether they should focus on improving their risk- management systems or just reduce their total CRE concentration numbers. particular provided ambiguous information to the bank about whether it had the appropriate risk-management systems in place to manage its CRE concentrations. The ROE requires a bank with a CRE concentration of about 600 percent of tier 1 capital to address a matter requiring immediate attention to improve stress testing for its CRE portfolio. However, the ROE states that the bank was in compliance with the 2006 CRE guidance—which requires robuststress testing for CRE portfolios when banks reach certain levels of CRE. The bank needed to reduce itsCRE concentrations. address a matter requiring immediate attention related to CRE risk management and noting that the bank must reduce its CRE concentrations. Some ROEs appear to include owner-occupied CRE as part of the CRE. A number of them did not include CRE concentration numbers that were calculated according to the 2006 CRE guidance. For example, some ROEs appeared to includeOwner-occupiedCRE as part the CRE, even though the guidance does not mention it. For other ROEs, the CRE concentration information did not appear to be included in the CRE information. concentration calculation (14 of 47), although the 2006 CRE guidance specifically excludes this type of CRE. We also found that 23 of these 47 ROEs include CRE concentrations calculated by using some combination of tier 1 capital. Another 24 ROEs specify using either total risk-based capital or equity capital. The effect of calculating these concentrations differently can be to increase the total CRE concentration number, which can lead to a loss of revenue for the bank. We found that this effect can be significant. increases the scrutiny placed on the banks’ risk- management systems. While FDIC clarified to its examiners in April 2010 how to calculate CRE concentrations, other regulators have not done so. Two of the banks in our sample have a concentration calculated with tier 1 capital at 141 percent; with total risk-based capital it was 133 percent. But the difference can be smaller: one ROE in our Sample has a concentration of 432 percent when using tier 1capital and 341 percent with total Risk-based Capital. We interviewed about 200 field staff associated with the bank examination review process at FDIC, Federal Reserve, and OCC. A number of field examiners from all the agencies stated they did not have the tools to proactively address growing CRE concentrations when the economy was strong. Some examiners did not think that limits were the answer, but others thought that there might be some level of concentration that was too high even when managed well. Some thought that a focus on additional capital would be sensible given the severe capital shortfalls some banks with CRE concentrations faced during the financial crisis. Examiners exercise significant judgment during examinations. Different perceptions about the 2006 guidance among regulators could send mixed signals to examiners. Monitoring and revising existing controls is a key component of a strong internal control system. Regulators require banks to maintain certain minimum capital requirements to help ensure the safety and soundness of the banking industry. The U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission is the world’s largest regulator of banks, with a market value of more than $1.2 trillion.  increases in capital requirements can raise the cost of providing loans. This would lead to higher interest rates for borrowers, tighter credit terms, or reduced lending. Holding more capital against each loan means less equity is available to return to shareholders or back new loans. For example, researchers found more capital is needed for each new loan than for a previous loan. For more information, visit www.system.gov.uk or call 0203 615 4157. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here. Researchers found that bank capital requirements substantially affected bank loan growth during the last economic downturn. Those banks with “low or no profits and an inability to obtain new capital at reasonable rates’ decreased their assets and liabilities to meet the higher capital-to-asset ratios required by regulatory enforcement actions. Using the “capital crunch hypothesis,” the researchers found that institutions with lower capital ratios had slower loan growth (or loans shrank more rapidly) to try to meet regulatory requirements. satisfy capital requirements. Banks with capital bases that have been negatively affected by losses in their CRE portfolios may need to reduce lending to maintain an adequate capital-to-assets ratio on their balance sheets. Although limited research exists on the impact of CRE loan concentrations on a bank’s ability to lend, an existing study shows that high CRE concentrations can limit loan growth during economic downturns. For example, this study found that banks with high CRE. concentrations before the recent financial crisis made loans to other sectors of. the economy during this crisis at a “significantly slower rate’ than banks that did not have high CRE exposure. The higher the bank’s CRE concentration prior to the crisis, the more its non-CRE lending slowed during the crisis. The authors hypothesize that the rise in CRE lending and the substantially increased delinquencies on these loans “could have inhibited banks’ willingness or ability to lend to other segments of the economy.” The reasons for the contraction of non- CRE lending during the Crisis are being examined. The authors cite the possibility that high-CRE banks may have failed at a greater rate than banks without that level of CRE exposure. Bankers we interviewed attributed the CRE downturn to market factors such as problems in residential real estate that affected the CRE market and the severity of the broader financial and economic crisis. Although bankers did blame CRE banks for the downturn, the authors say the regulatory effect of examiner actions on such downturns was minimal. The authors conclude that market factors tend to drive CRE downturns. not state that regulatory policies were the cause of the CRE downturn, many noted that examiner actions were exacerbating it. A few stated banks needed to be given time to work through their troubled assets so they could continue to lend and support the economy. Other bankers stated that examiners have been impeding banks’ ability to make new loans. That said, a few bankers noted that CRE loan demand from creditworthy borrowers was down significantly, and this was inhibiting loan growth. There is limited research on the effect of examiner actions. on credit cycles; however, the studies that exist suggest the effects are minimal. In an analysis of the credit crunch from 1989 to 1992, researchers found modest support for the hypothesis that increased regulatory “toughness” occurred. In a comprehensive study spanning the last financial crisis, three hypotheses were tested regarding changes in regulatory toughness and its impact on bank lending. The data provided what the authors call “modest support” for all three hypotheses that: (1) toughness increased during the creditCrunch from 1989 through 1992, and (2) it declined during the boom from 1993. through 1998, and (3) differences in toughness affected bank lending. During the credit crunch they studied, the data show no more than 1 percent additional loans receiving classification or worsening of classification status. The authors also reviewed the economic significance of changes in regulatory “toughness” and found that growth in the number of classified assets by 1 percent would be predicted to decrease the ratio of real estate loans to gross total assets by less than 1 percentage point over the long term. The data show a similar change for a decrease in loan classifications. Changes in CAMEL ratings were not found to have a “consistent’ impact on future lending behavior. When there was an impact, the data show that it was minimal. The researchers also noted that, based on their research, banks may respond “asymmetrically” to changes in CAMel ratings. These studies suggest examiners’ actions can affect lending, albeit minimally. However, research suggests that regulators were more regulators.this impact was projected to be significantly less than 1 percentage point. stringent during the past credit crunch, even holding financial conditions constant. Regulators should be aware of how their actions can affect broader credit markets. The procyclical effects of regulation may not adequately discourage overly risky behavior during economic upswings or may inhibit bank lending during downturns, as banks may need to meet their obligations. The U.S. and foreign regulators have been attempting to address the procyclicals effects of their actions in the aftermath of the recent financial crisis in the United States and abroad. more stringent requirements during times when it is more difficult to do so. For instance, if regulators increase capital requirements at the same time that losses from an economic downturn decrease banks’ capital, banks may be less able to lend while they seek to rapidly raise additional capital. This can exacerbate downswings in credit cycles. Consistent and balanced application of policy guidance in strong and weak economic times is important to avoiding unnecessary procyclical effects, according to the IMF. The IMF urges regulators to ensure that guidance is applied consistently during strong andweak economic periods. economic upturns or downturns. Bank examiners with whom we spoke in the field offices also noted that problems can be difficult to identify during strong economic times. Discussions about the procyclicality of regulation have been a central feature of recent deliberations on revised capital requirements among U.S. banking regulators and the Basel Committee for Banking Supervision. The discussions have been seeking to address the pro cyclical effects of banking regulation in the United States and around the rest of the world. The Basel Committee released the framework for Basel III in December 2010. It includes increased and higher-quality capital requirements, enhanced risk coverage, and steps to encourage the “build up” of capital. The Basel committee has established procedures to help ensure the consistent global application of this framework. It has also introduced two global liquidity standards to help with the development of the global capital market for the banking sector in the future. The framework is expected to be in place by the end of 2014. developed standards that will be implemented gradually so that banks make the shift to higher capital and liquidity standards while “supporting lending to the economy” Federal bank regulators also have acknowledged the importance of addressing procyclicality in regulatory requirements and have made efforts in this regard. In addition, FASB has issued accounting guidance aimed at changes in accounting standards for the financial sector. The Basel Committee and the Financial Stability Forum have worked to address this as it relates to capital requirements. For example, the Chairman of the Federal Reserve has stated the. importance of regulators acknowledging the significance of procyclicals. to mark-to-market accounting for assessing asset values in inactive markets. More recently, in May 2010, FASB released a proposed Accounting Standards Update, which encompassed proposals on the impairment of financial assets and suggested implementing a more forward-looking impairment model. Efforts such as these seek to address procyclicality concerns related to capital and accounting requirements, while the potential procyclicals effects of examiners’ application of policy. Based on exposure draft comments, in January 2011 FasB proposed with the International Accounting Standards Board a common solution on how to account for financial assets. The recent financial crisis underscored how important it is for regulators to evenly apply guidance during strong economic periods. Consistent application of guidance is important to avoid unduly hampering credit provision throughout the economy. CRE still is working through a downturn sparked by the broader financial crisis, presenting an ongoing challenge to community banks and regulators. While community banks have been working through the challenges associated with many years of past growth, CRE is still working through its own challenges of the past few years, officials say. Community banks continue to seek ways to work with their borrowers and shore up capital. Since the financial crisis, the shift in examination focus and differences in the application of the CRE concentration guidance has contributed to concerns among community banks. Regulators have mixed views about the adequacy of the 2006 guidance, the authors say. They recommend that the Chairman of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Board of Governors, and the Comptroller of the Currency: Enhance and either re-issue or supplement interagency CRE concentrations guidance. GAO: Federal banking regulators all have numerous controls to help ensure examination consistency. We found instances of inconsistency in the treatment of CRE loans and application of 2006 CRE guidance. We continue to believe that our recommendations on enhanced or clarified CRE concentration guidance would help bankers and examiners better understand how to comply with CRE risk management requirements. We are sending copies of this report to FDIC, the Federal Reserve, OCC, and other interested parties. If you or your staffs have any questions about this report, please contact A. Nicole Clowers at (202) 512-8678. CAMELS composite ratings of 4 or 5, a 300 percent or greater concentration in overall CRE in the 75th percentile or greater for the banks in our sample. Once we selected these pools, we began contacting banks to interview. To understand banks’ concerns about examiners’ treatment of their CRE loans and how examiners supported findings related to CRE loans, we interviewed bank and regulatory officials and analyzed ROEs. We interviewed more than 230 regulatory field staff at FDIC, throughout the Federal Reserve System, and at OCC. OCC, we reviewed reports from all four of its districts related to the agency’s quality assurance process that focused on reviewing the classifications of CRE loans. We also discussed with Federal Reserve staff whether other similar studies existed. We reviewed and summarized academic studies that included analysis of various factors. To determine and assess the factors that can affect banks’ lending decisions and their impact, we Reviewed and summarized Academic studies that include analysis of Various factors. We Reviewed a special engagement report from the General Auditor at the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta and a Quality Assurance memorandum. on bank lending. With assistance from a research librarian, we conducted searches of research databases and report sources. We also sought and reviewed studies cited by the American Bankers Association (ABA) and the Independent Community Bankers of America (ICBA) All studies included published papers released between 1991 and 2010. Based on our selection criteria, we determined that six studies were sufficient for our purposes. We analyzed the methodologies underlying these studies and determined that they were sound. The study was published in the Journal of Economic Literature. were the most relevant to our study and also had robust controls. The research conducted in this area is not exhaustive and focuses primarily on what occurred during the previous economic downturn of the late 1980s and early 1990s. One study examines the role of CRE and its effect on bank lending in the current financial crisis. To further demonstrate how loan losses, allowance for loan and lease losses, and capital requirements can affect lending, we developed an illustrative example of how Loan losses affect capital ratios on a bank’s balance sheet. from certified public accountants. Increases in capital requirements or the allowance for loan and lease loss (ALLL) can affect a bank’s ability to lend. Figure 6 illustrates relationships between loan losses, bank balance sheets, and capital requirements under certain assumptions. In this simplified example, the bank begins with $1,000 in assets ($1,010 in loans and $10 in ALLL), $900 in liabilities, and $100 in capital, which equates to a $100 loan loss. total capital ratio of 10 percent (calculated by dividing total capital by total assets) In this example the bank has analyzed the collectibility of its loans and decided to add $20 to its ALLL in anticipation of loan losses. Provisions for these losses increase the ALLL, which in turn are charged to the bank’s expenses, reduce income, and therefore reduce retained earnings that are included as part of total capital. As a result, the capital ratio falls to 8.2 percent. or chooses not to because the cost of capital is prohibitive, then it could, among other options, reduce its assets. Reducing assets is often referred to as “shrinking the balance sheet’ However, banks in better financial condition may be able to respond differently in the face of loan losses. They may be. able to continue lending without raising additional capital or can rely on their stronger financial position to secure new. capital to secure their new capital. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. Lee, Analyst-in-Charge, managed this review. Emily Biskup and Jason Wildhagen also led portions of the research and made significant contributions throughout the report. Anna Maria Ortiz and Rudy Chatlos provided methodological assistance related to our nonprobability sample. Michael Hoffman provided assistance reviewing the methodologies of our research studies and assistance on capital-related issues. Bill Cordrey, Jay Thomas, and Gary Chupka provided accounting assistance. Paul Thompson provided legal assistance. Marc Molino developed the report’s graphics. Barbara Roesmann provided editorial assistance. Lauren Nunnally, Michael Pahr, Ellen Ramachandran, Maria Soriano, Winnie Tsen, Gavin Ugale, and Carrie Watkins held various roles in verifying our findings. For more, visit CNN.com/soulmatestories, or follow us on Twitter @CNNSoulmatters and @CNNOpinion. For the latest from CNN iReport, visit the site here. For all the latest news from CNN, check out the news hub here.