Education administers and oversees federal student aid programs authorized by HEA. Among these financial aid programs is FFELP. The five principal entities involved are students, schools, lenders, guaranty agencies, and Education. Most lenders contract with a third-party entity to service the loan and collect payments from borrowers. If the student defaults on the loan, the lender files a claim with the guaranty agency for reimbursement of most of its loss. In general, HEA designates which entities are eligible to makeFFELP loans to students. an eligible lender is defined as under certain circumstances, a national or state chartered bank, a mutual savings bank, or a savings and loan association. A pension fund as defined in the Employee Retirement Income Security is an insurance company that is subject to examination and supervision by an agency of the United States or a state. An eligible institution is also defined as the Student Loan Marketing Association or the Holding Company. A single state agency or a single nonprofit private agency designated by the state is an eligible institution. of the Student Loan Marketing Association, including any subsidiary of the Holding Company, or an agency of any state functioning as a secondary market. The majority of organizations making loans to students fall into one of these eligible lender categories. However, organizations that do not meet HEA criteria may still participate in FFELP by contracting with an eligible lender to serve as its trustee. These ineligible lenders include: a Rural Rehabilitation Corporation; under certain circumstances, any nonprofit private agency functioning in any state as asecondary market; and a consumer finance company subsidiary of a national bank. lenders fall into two categories: (1) secondary marketsthat have not been designated as an eligible lender for a state and (2) private companies that wish to make and hold student loans. Ineligible lenders generally contract with trustees for three purposes. First, ineligible lenders use trustees to allow the ineligible to originate student loans or to purchase them from another originating lender. Second, ineligibles using trustees to securitize portfolios of student loans and third, trustees are used to raise capital necessary to make or purchase student loans without securiting other loans. by selling tax-exempt bonds to investors. Report is concerned primarily with trustee arrangements used to enable ineligible lenders to make and hold student loans. At FFELP’s outset, the government expected to share the program's financial risks with state-designated guaranty agencies. When states failed to establish such agencies, the Congress enacted legislation with several incentives to increase lender and guaranty agency participation. In providing these incentives,. the Congress kept the financial risk almost entirely with the federal government. Congress has since shifted some risk back to the guaranty agencies and lenders by reducing the maximum reimbursement and insurance rates on defaulted loans. These actions were intended to encourage both lenders and guaranty agency to work with borrowers to prevent them from defaulting on their loans. Apart from the defaults that occur when borrowers fail to repay their loans, some loans lose their federal guarantee because lenders, servicers, or Guaranty agencies fail to follow the Department’s requirements for making, servicing, and collecting loans. penalties, refuse to make future payments, or recover payments already made to lenders and agencies for such things as interest subsidies and insurance claims. Loss of the federal guarantee due to servicer problems has occurred under the auspices of trustee arrangements in the past. In 1998, HEA was amended to include a provision stating that eligible lenders that act as trustees are responsible for meeting statutory and regulatory requirements for the loans they hold as trustees. For example, in the late 1980s, Bank of America served as trustee for the California Student Loan Finance Corporation. The Department of Education reports that approximately 125 trustee arrangements exist between eligible and ineligible lenders. These arrangements account for approximately $400 million in student loans. servicer problems that may result in loan guarantee loss can also occur on loans held by eligible lenders and are not unique to trustee arrangements. The Department of education reports that about 125 trustee arrangement exist between ineligible and eligible lenders. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. The 125 arrangements represent liaisons between 16 eligible lender trustees and 31 ineligible lenders. Ineligible lenders can be further grouped as 17 secondary markets and 14 other ineligibles. Costs of trustee arrangements fall into two categories—payments to initiate the agreement and annual fees to maintain it. The ineligible lenders we interviewed reported that initiation costs were generally a flat fee ranging from $1,000 to $2,000.for $25.3 billion in outstanding loans— approximately 19 percent of the outstanding balance of all FFELP loans as of December 1999. between $2,500 and $20,000. Some secondary markets reported that their trustee charged this initiation fee each time they issued bonds to raise capital. Annual trustee fees reported by ineligible lenders ranged between $4,500 to $75,000, depending on a number of factors. These lenders reported that the fees could be a flat fee or calculated as a percentage of outstanding loan balances or on the outstanding balance of bond issues. Ineligible lenders reported the annual costs are used to pay for trustee fees. maintain the arrangement and cover the necessary services provided by the trustee. Some eligible and ineligible lenders reported that a variety of other factors could influence the size of both initiation and annual fees. Some of these factors included the structure of the trustee arrangement and the complexity of the the geographic region in which the trustee and ineligible lender operate. The trustee handles paperwork associated with the guarantors and servicers involved in the loan transactions, and carries out administrative activities associated with obtaining financing to originate or purchase loans. Some ineligible lenders feared that the provision of HEA that makes trustees fully responsible for trustee-held loans might have an impact on costs. They reported that costs did not significantly increase or decrease after the 1998 amendments were enacted and that they did not see a change in the role of the trustee. According to ineligible lenders, the trustee’s decision to charge administrative fees on a per-loan basis rather than as a flat fee, and the additional services the trustee will perform for the ineligible lender, such as payroll services, are key factors. lenders we interviewed, current initiation and annual trustee fees do not prohibit them from conducting business in the student loan market. Trustees and ineligible lenders reported similar criteria used by trustees to evaluate ineligibles before they entered into arrangements. For example, trustees reported that most important in deciding whether to enter an arrangement is the business reputation of the ineligible lender. The reputation of an ineligible lender is more important than the reputation of a trustee, according to the trustees. The trustee arrangements we reviewed shared several characteristics. the loan servicing organization it has chosen. In addition, some trustees review the structure of the financing method used by the ineligible lender to raise the capital necessary to originate or purchase loans. This review might include examining a rating agency’s report on the transaction. Trustees and ineligible lenders also reported that their contracts included similar clauses covering trustee and ineligible lender resignations. For example, they reported that trustee resignation clauses allow the trustee to resign from the arrangement by giving a specific number of days’ notice. 60 or 90 days. If ineligible lender is unable to locate another trustee within that time period, the resignation clause sometimes provides for additional time to obtain a new trustee. Most trustees and ineligible lenders reported that the trustee would probably remain in place until a new one can be engaged, even if the designated time periods have elapsed. The trustee arrangements we reviewed were also similar in the requirements placed on the ineligible lender and the amount of monitoring the trustee performed. For example, trustees generally require ineligible lenders to abide by HEA requirements. Eligible lender trustees and ineligible lenders reported limited day-to-day interaction. One trustee reported no daily interaction. Some trustees reported that they interact with the ineligible lender only when it is necessary to sign forms, such as quarterly reports that must be submitted to the Department of Education. Trustee arrangements come with some protections, but not all trustees feel they have enough protection to oversee the loan servicer, the report says. The report says the trustees perform limited monitoring activities and mostly review annual reports and audits. The most direct protection comes from an HEA provision that holds eligible lenders fully responsible for any loans they hold as trustees. For example, a loan may lose its guarantee because of servicing errors or because of negligence on the part of the servicer or the lender. When these problems occur, the federal government will not reimburse the guarantor. To ensure the government’s investment in FFELP is secure while allowing ineligible lenders to participate in the program, the HEA must be changed. or the lender for the associated dollar loss. However, because some problems may not be found until after the federal government has already provided reimbursement, the government may have to recover these monies from the parties involved. According to Education officials, the HEA provision that holds trustees responsible for an ineligible lender’s loans allows theFederal government to recoup the losses from the eligible lender trustee rather than the ineligible lender. Education officials further stated the ability to Recoup losses from a trustee is important since they believe they do not have direct oversight authority of ineligible lenders. believe the federal government is likely to recover its losses from trustees for two reasons. Most financial institutions that serve as eligible lender trustees are subject to federal oversight. Because ineligible lenders are generally not subject to financial safety and soundness reviews by government agencies, Education lacks assurance that these lenders would be able to meet their financial obligations in the program. Most ineligible lenders have merged with each other in recent years. Recent mergers include First National Bank of Chicago and Bank One, Norwest and Wellswest. with HEA. Obtaining a trustee arrangement does not appear to be a widespread problem among ineligible lenders to date. Education agreed with our recommendation that it clarify its interpretation of how the HEA provision applies to loans held by the trustee for an ineligible lender. Education did not say when it expected to implement our recommendation. We are sending copies of this report to the Honorable Richard Riley; eligible lender trustees; ineligible lenders; and other interested parties. Copies will also be made available to others on request. If you or your staff have any questions about this report, please call me at (202) 512-7215.