suppression aircraft focus on trying to neutralize, degrade, or destroy the enemy’s air defense radar equipment. Aircraft launch antiradiation missiles that can search for and destroy enemy radars if they are turned on. Since the end of Desert Storm in 1991, U.S. suppression aircraft have been continuously deployed to protect fighter aircraft maintaining the no-fly zones over Iraq. In 1999, during Operation Allied Force in Yugoslavia and Kosovo, these aircraft were extremely important for protecting strike aircraft. In February 2002, the Navy had only 91 EA-6Bs available for operations instead of the 104 required. As a result, while the Navy has been able to meet operational commitments, it has been unable to meet some of its training and exercise requirements. The Navy plans to replace a total of 67 wing center sections.that has been delayed until March 2004. But wing fatigue has continued to grow, and the Navy may have to ground additional aircraft. It is currently taking action to remedy wing fatigue and engine failures. The Navy will spend $4.4 million each for such replacements for 17 aircraft in the fiscal year 2002 budget. In 2001, the Navy also began experiencing problems with the EA-6B’s engines. Premature failure of certain engine bearings caused some engines to fail, and it may have caused the crash of two aircraft in 2001. The Navy grounded over 50 engines until they could be overhauled, and the Navy is programming funds for 10 more wing replacements for each year in the Future Years Defense Plan. The constant deployment of this “low density” EA-6B fleet for contingency operations has contributed to its deterioration and to other maintenance- related problems. The constant deployments also added to personnel problems in terms of quality of life. The Navy expects to have them back in service by late this year. But it expects to be back to full service by the end of the year. The U.S. Navy has not commented on the report. The report was compiled by CNN's John Defterios and published by the Center for Military Analysis. The Navy says it needs a replacement aircraft to begin entering the force by 2009 if requirements are to be met. The Navy has been upgrading its EA-6B electronic warfare equipment over the years, and it is currently in need of a new fleet of the aircraft. All of the current aircraft will be out of the Navy's fleet by 2015, and the Navy needs to have a replacement ready by 2009 to meet force structure requirements in 2009. The new aircraft will have a range of up to 2,000 miles. modifying its radar signal receiver and related equipment. The modification program, known as the Improved Capability Program (ICAP) III, provides improved radar locating and jamming capabilities. The Navy expects ICAP III to reach initial operational capability in 2005 and to be installed on all EA-6Bs by 2010, about the time when the aircraft begins to reach the end of its service life. As of January 2002, ICap III engineering and manufacturing development was about 94 percent complete, and the modification began testing on the first aircraft in November 2001. Navy is considering using a modified version of the ICAP III equipment on whatever follow-on suppression aircraft are developed and fielded. The Air Force is procuring 30 additional F-16CJ suppression aircraft to meet force structure requirements for the Air Force’s Aerospace Expeditionary Forces. To fully implement its concept of operations for the Expeditionary forces, the Air Air Force also plans to increase the capability of the latest model F- 16C/Ds (block 40) and the F-15CJs (block 25) The F-16C/Ds will be modified to carry the HARM Targeting System. The Advanced Target Pod will enable the F- 16CJs to deliver precision-guided munitions. The upgrade (known as R-6) provides better and faster targeting information to HARM missiles. The Air Force is procuring additional systems to upgrade the system to R-5.50 (R-6.50) to be used for both attack and suppression missions. The upgrades are expected to be completed by 2015. The F-16CJ still lacks some of the capabilities of the retired F-4G. The Air Force completed the R-6 upgrade on fielded systems in December 2001. Once 31 additional systems are delivered in 2002, the F- 16CJs will have a total inventory of 202 systems. Also, the Air Force has partially funded additional upgrades (called R-7) for the HARM Targeting System in 2003, and plans to fully fund the upgrade in 2004. The U.S. Air Force’s original goal of having 1.1 systems per aircraft, or about 240 systems, was met. The Air Force is also upgrading the capabilities of the EC-130 Compass Call Aircraft, which perform primarily communications jamming missions. The upgrades are intended to improve the aircraft’s jamming capabilities, reliability, and maintainability. Officials also stated that they are considering funding for additional R-7 HARM Targeting Systems for F-16CJs and F- 16C/Ds in the 2004 budget submission. The Air Force has a total of only 13 operational aircraft, of which 11 are being funded for upgrade. aircraft make it essential that other aircraft have the ability to protect themselves from enemy defenses. The services have already identified serious reliability problems with current self-protection systems on U.S. combat aircraft. Most of the current systems use older technology and have logistics support problems due to obsolescence. In reviewing test results using the new Joint Service Electronic Combat System Tester, we found that aircraft the services believed to be mission worthy had problems with self- protection systems. Also, as we reported last year, the self- Protection systems on strike aircraft may have more problems than the services estimate. capable were not because of faults in their electronic combat systems that were undetected by older test equipment. For example, 41 of 44 F-15C aircraft and 10 of 10 F-18C aircraft previously believed to be fully mission capable were subsequently found to have one or more faults. The faults ranged from the identification of parts needing to be replaced inside the electronic combat system, to the wiring, antennas, and control units that connect the systems to the aircraft. Coupled with the problems in the suppression aircraft, these shortcomings could be fatal. create survivability problems for the aircraft should they encounter significant enemy air defense capabilities in some future conflict. The services have some programs underway to improve self-protection capabilities, but they face technology challenges and/or a lack of funding priority. The Miniature Air Launched Decoy (MALD), which an Air Force analysis has shown could make a significant contribution to aircraft survivability, illustrates this problem. DOD has acknowledged the gap in U.S. air defense suppression capabilities for some time and has conducted several studies to identify solutions. Institute for Defense Analyses studied problems in acquiring electronic warfare systems. Institute found several causes for the problems, including uncertainties in characterizing rapidly changing threats and systems requirements. Lack of adequate and stable funding, complexity of electronic warfare hardware and software also cited. Institute recommended that DOD establish central offices for electronic warfare matters in the Joint Chiefs of Staff and in each service, create a senior oversight panel, and prepare an annual electronic warfare roadmap to help correct some of the problems DOD faces in electronic warfare acquisition programs.