To protect the U.S., DOD relies on a complex array of computer-dependent and mutually supportive organizational components. Software code that is poorly developed or purposely injected with malicious code could be used to disrupt these and other DOD information systems. DOD has reported that countries hostile to the United States are focusing resources on developing information warfare strategies. Information systems technology was the most sought after militarily critical technology by these entities, the DSS says. The National Industrial Security Program Operation Manual establishes mandatory procedures for the safeguarding of classified information that is released to contractors. limits access to U.S. citizens with appropriate security clearances and establishes eligibility policies for contractors determined to have foreign ownership, control, or influence. Further, an additional DOD directive requires programs containing classified military information to have controls to prevent the unauthorized release of this information to foreign recipients. In addition, the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) controls foreign access to defense articles and services through the establishment of the export license and authorization process. U.s. entities, including defense contractors, may apply to the Department of State for authorization to export controlled information and technology to qualified foreign recipients, DOD estimates that it spends about 40 percent of its Research, Development, Test, and Evaluation budget on software. About $8 billion of that amount may be spent on reworking software because of quality-related issues. Carnegie Mellon University’s Software Engineering Institute (SEI) has developed models and methods that define and determine organizations’ software process maturity. Better software development practices are seen as a way to reduce the cost of software development in the U.S. and around the world. number of software defects and therefore improve overall software quality, but alone the practices cannot be expected to address malicious software development activities intended to breach security. DOD’s approach to software development and acquisition generally is more cautious than other agencies’. The Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense (Networks and Information Integration) and the Federal Aviation Administration Chief Information Office are co- sponsoring a project aimed at developing ways to provide safety and security assurance extensions to integrated software maturity models. The project will be led by SEI and will include the Department of Energy, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, and SEI. Despite risks associated with foreign access to defense systems, DOD acquisition policy does not require program managers to identify and manage the amount of foreign involvement for software development in weapon systems. DOD information system security requirements focus on operational software threats, rather than potential threats posed by software developers. While recent DOD initiatives could increase DOD’s focus on software security, efforts to date have not translated into greater knowledge for program managers about foreign software development activities, the authors say. The authors say DOD should focus on improving overall quality, leaving decision making on software suppliers and security with individual program managers. program managers discretion in managing foreign suppliers used for software development. This policy consists of general guidance for meeting overall acquisition management principles. For software acquisition, program managers are encouraged to develop open software systems architectures, use COTS computer system products, and allow incremental improvements based on reusable software. All of these practices, while having the potential to benefit cost and schedule for weapon programs, could result in greater software vulnerabilities by introducing potentially malicious code from unknown software. The policy instructs program managers to use systems engineering practices, when applicable, that focus on cost, schedule, and performance. DOD acquisition policy requires major weapon programs to maintain information about the software project’s size, effort, schedule, and quality. It does not require program managers to identify and manage suppliers or the potential security risks from foreign suppliers. On October 30, 2002, DOD issued the Interim Defense Acquisition Guidebook, which contained the following security considerations to be used when foreign nationals participate in software development. The change control process shall indicate whether foreign nationals, in any way, participated inSoftware development, modification, or remediation. Foreign nationals employed by contractors. or subcontractors to develop, modify, or remediate software code specifically for DOD shall each have a security clearance commensurate with the level of the program in which the software is being used. Primary vendors on DOD contracts may have subcontractors who employ cleared foreign nationals that work only in a certified or accredited environment. DOD software with coding done in foreign environments or by foreign nationals shall be reviewed by software quality assurance personnel for malicious code. Vendors of COTS software that demonstrate efforts to minimize the security risks associated with foreign nationals will be given preference in product selection or evaluation. Laws, requirements, and policies that are intended to provide information assurance for operational security do not fully address risks during software development. Under the Federal Information Security Management Act of 2002, all executive agencies, including DOD, are required to ensure that information security policies, procedures, and practices are adequate. Air Force, Army, and Navy regulations implement DOD-wide acquisition policies. As such, they defer to DOD guidance and do not specifically address software security issues and related risks that may be inherent with foreign software. The process includes a requirement for a threat assessment, but does not articulate how this information should be developed or reported. While the process is mandatory, the implementation details may be tailored and, in some cases, integrated with other acquisition activities and documentation. While DOD initiatives have begun to recognize potential risks from foreign software suppliers, this is not always the case within the weapon programs where software is developed or acquired, the authors say. They say DOD has taken steps to strengthen software acquisition practices, but has yet to implement practices to better manage software development security risks in weapon programs. Onboard software is that which actually runs the weapon system, even if that software is not located on the main component (aircraft, missile, satellite, etc). Onboard software for a missile system could include software located on a remote platform used to guide the missile toward its target. In 9 of the systems we reviewed, either prime contractors or major subcontractors conducted software development for the onboard systems. Officials for 13 of the programs reviewed had almost no insight into the use of foreign developers for any COTS software. Programs had opportunities to gain such knowledge through practices designed to collect other information. Many of the program offices in our review were able to obtain some information on software suppliers. For 11 of the 16 systems, program managers have not identified foreign supplier involvement in software development as a significant risk to the security of their weapon systems. The relative importance of software security in risk mitigation efforts also varied greatly across the systems we reviewed, the report says.. In at least two cases, program software managers became aware of foreign software suppliers while collecting information requested for this review.