Both the House and the Senate are considering legislation to support medical innovation. Reforms to the National Institutes of Health (NIH) and changes to the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) Both NIH and FDA are agencies within the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) Senators Lamar Alexander and Patty Murray, chairman and ranking Member of the Committee on Health, Education, Labor and Pensions, announced the start of a bipartisan initiative to "examine the process for getting safe treatments, devices and cures to patients and the public" roles of the [FDA] and the [NIH] in that process." This initiative culminated in a package of 19 bipartisan bills that were reported out of the Senate Health, Labor, Education, and Pensions (HELP) Committee. One of these 19 bills, The Adding Zika Virus to the FDA Priority Review Voucher Program Act (S. 2512), subsequently was passed by both chambers and signed into law on April 19, 2016 (P.L. 114-146) include the following: S. 1878, The Advancing Hope Act of 2015; S. 1622, The FDA Device Accountability Act of2015;. S. 2503, Preventing Superbugs and Protecting Patients Act; and S. 2030, The. Advancing Targeted Therapies for Rare Diseases Act of 2016. Also S. 800, The Enhancing the Stature and. Visibility of Medical Rehabilitation Research at NIH Act; S., 849, Advancing Research for Neurological Diseases Act. The Senate's medical innovation package is that chamber's companion effort to the House's 21 st Century Cures initiative. The package includes the Medical Countermeasures Innovation Act of 2015; S. 1767, The Combination Products Innovation Act, and S. 2700, FDA and NIH Workforce Authorities Modernization Act. It also includes the Advancing Precision Medicine Act of 2016 and the Promoting Biomedical Research and Public Health for Patients Act. The bill also includes S. 185, Promise for Antibiotics and Therapeutics for Health Act; and S 2745, Advancing NIH Strategic Planning and Representation in Medical Research Act. H.R. 6 is the result of a series of hearings and roundtable meetings hosted by the House Energy and Commerce Committee dating back to spring 2014. The hearings androundtables focused on a broad range of topics, including modernizing clinical trials, incorporating patient perspectives into medical research and regulatory processes, precision/personalized medicine, digital health care, and more. The bill was passed on July 10, 2015, on a vote of 344 to 77. While consisting of many different provisions, the bill is primarily focused on efforts to increase strategic investments in medical research. medical research at NIH and change some aspects of how the FDA executes its regulatory oversight mission. This report provides for each of the 18 bills in the Senate medical innovation package: (1) background on the issue, or issues, addressed by the bill; (2) a summary of the bill's provisions; and (3) where applicable, identification of comparable provisions in H.R. 6. In some cases, the House and Senate legislation address the same topic in the same bill. The report also provides a comparison of the Senate bill with the House bill. an entirely different way. In other cases, the House and Senate legislation address the topic in a similar way but with key substantive differences. For a summary of all the provisions in H.R. 6 , as passed by the House, see CRS Report R44071, H.r. 6: The 21st Century Cures Act. The HHS Human Subject Regulations are a core set of federal standards for protecting human subjects in HHS-sponsored research. These regulations are the basis for the bill. commonly referred to as the Common Rule because the same requirements have been adopted by many other federal departments and agencies. Research protocols must be approved by an Institutional Review Board (IRB) to ensure that the rights and welfare of research subjects are protected. FDA has issued its own set of Human Subject Regulations, which are similar, but not identical, to the Common rule. FDA applies these regulations to all the research it regulates, including clinical trials of new drugs and medical devices, regardless of the source. All clinical evaluations of investigational devices (unless exempt) must have an investigational device exemption (IDE) before the clinical study is initiated. An IDE allows an unapproved device (most commonly an invasive or life-sustaining device) to be used in a clinical study to collect the data required to support a premarket approval (PMA) submission. A device can be shipped lawfully for investigation of the device without requiring that the manufacturer comply with other requirements of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (FFDCA) such as registration and listing. An HDE application is similar to a PMA, but it is exempt from the effectiveness requirements. Such devices may be used in a facility only after a local IRB has approved their use in that facility. The provision would amend Section 520(g) of the FFDCA, regarding IDEs, by removing the word "local" in all references to local IRBs, including in the stipulation that the device be used only in emergency situations. It would also remove the word 'local' from all reference to the facility. that an approved humanitarian use device may be used in a facility only after a local IRB has approved such use, except in certain emergency situations. The use of non-local IRBs for review of IDEs and HDEs provision in H.R. 6 (i.e., Title II, Subtitle O, Section 2262) is comparable to S. 1622. The provision would also require the Secretary, within 12 months of enactment, to revise or issue regulations or guidance, as necessary, to carry out these amendments. CLIA requires laboratories to receive certification before they are allowed to carry out clinical laboratory testing on a human sample. CLIA certification is based on the level of complexity of testing that a laboratory is performing, graded as low, moderate, or high. Laboratories that perform only low-complexity tests (called waived tests ) receive a certificate of waiver (COW) from CMS. Conversely, only laboratories certified to do so may may test on human samples. FDA is responsible for categorizing clinical laboratory tests according to theirlevel of complexity. FDA determines whether a test is waived (i.e., low-complexity) or not based on information submitted by the manufacturer. Under current law, waived tests are those "that have been approved by FDA for home use or that have an insignificant risk of an erroneous result" The guidance recommends ways to demonstrate that atest is both "simple" and has "an insignificant risk" of an "erroneous" result. Demonstrating the test is simple is one way to prove that it is not too complex. latter includes showing that a test's accuracy is comparable to a method whose accuracy has already been established and documented. S. 1622 Section 3 would require the Secretary to publish draft guidance that revises Section V of the current guidance. Not later than one year after the comment period for the draft guidance closes, the Secretary would be required to publish the guidance. The draft guidance would provide clarification on the appropriate use of comparable performance between a waived and moderately complex laboratory user to demonstrate accuracy. It would also address approaches to demonstrating accuracy. Section 2228 of H.R. 6 (Title I, Subtitle M) is substantively identical to the Senate legislation. Section 205 of the Food and Drug Administration Modernization Act of 1997 (FDAMA, P.L. 105-115 ) amended Section 513 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (FFDCA) The two provisions stipulate that FDA consider the "least burdensome" data or information "necessary" to demonstrate a reasonable assurance of device effectiveness. The two provisions are as follows: Section 513(a)(3)(D)(ii) Any clinical data, including one or more well-controlled investigations, specified in writing by the Secretary for demonstrating a reasonable assurance of device effectiveness shall be specified. The Secretary shall consider, in consultation with the applicant, the least burdensome appropriate means of evaluating device effectiveness that would have a reasonable likelihood of resulting in approval. Whenever the Secretary requests information to demonstrate that devices with differing technological characteristics are substantially equivalent, the Secretary may use this information. FDA published final guidance on the least burdensome provisions on October 4, 2002. Under the guidance, FDA may allow the use of non-clinical data in place of clinical data for the approval of PMA devices. In certain circumstances, such as "devices or modifications of approved devices for which scientifically valid information is available in the public domain," FDA may use such data in the PMA approval process. When clinical data are needed, FDA allows for non- clinical data to be used. manufacturers to consider study designs to shorten the length of the study. Such study designs include the use of "surrogate endpoints and statistical methods, such as Bayesian analyses" The absence of problems in laboratory testing may not always predict what happens to a device over time in the human body. For example, "the malfunction of [Medtronic and St. Jude Medical] implantable cardioverter-defibrillator leads, which resulted in the death of one patient" in a widespread recall, and the hazards posed by particles shed from [DePuy] metal-on-metal hip replacements were not predictable based on engineering insights or in vitro studies. The 2002 FDA guidance states, "[r]eliance on postmarket controls ... should be considered as a mechanism to reduce the premarket burden for 510(k)s and PMAs" However, the FDA's authority to require postmarket studies of medical devices is limited. A September 2015 GAO study found that of the 392 postmarket surveillance studies ordered by FDA, only 38 were ordered by the FDA. between May 1, 2008, and February 24, 2015, 88% were inactive, 10% were ongoing, and 2% were complete. Activities related to implementing the least burdensome provision, including training for staff and advisory panels, are posted on FDA's website. S. 1622 , Section 4, would amend FFDCA Section 513 by adding a new subsection (j), "Training and Oversight of Least Burdensome Requirements" The Secretary would be required to ensure that each FDA employee involved in the review of premarket submissions, including supervisors, receives training. such requirements, including employee training. Under the Senate bill, 18 months after enactment, the FDA ombudsman responsible for device premarket review would be required to conduct an audit of the least burdensome training, including the effectiveness of the training. The audit would be needed to include "interviews of persons who are representatives of the industry regarding their experience" and a list of the measurement tools used to assess the implementation. A summary of the audit findings would berequired to be submitted to the Senate HELP Committee and the Senate. S. 1622 would amend FFDCA Section 515(c), adding a new paragraph that would require the Secretary to "consider the least burdensome appropriate means necessary to demonstrate device safety and effectiveness" It would define the term necessary to mean "the minimum required information that would support a determination by the Secretary that an application provides a reasonable assurance of the safety" and would state that the role of postmarket information must be considered in determining the least burdening means of demonstrating a device. reasonable assurance of device safety and effectiveness. In addition, the provision would amend FFDCA Section 517A(a), adding that each substantive summary of the scientific and regulatory rationale for any decision made by FDA's Center for Devices and Radiological Health (CDRH) regarding the submission or review of a PMA, a 510(k), or an IDE must also include a brief statement. The provision regarding training and oversight in least burdensome appropriate means in H.R. 6 (Title II, Subtitle M, Section 2223) is comparable to S. 1622. Secretary would be required to issue draft guidance, no later than 12 months after enactment. Draft guidance would update the October 4, 2002, final guidance on the least burdensome provisions. The House provision amending FFDCA Section 515(c) would not require that postmarket information be considered in determining a reasonable assurance of device safety and effectiveness. The provision does not amend FFD CA Section 517A(a) regarding the substantive provisions of the bill. The bill is expected to be signed into law by the end of the year. summary of any decision made by CDRH on the least burdensome requirements. FFDCA Section 510(k) requires medical device manufacturers to register with the Secretary and, at least 90 days prior to introducing a device intended for human use into interstate commerce, to report to the Secretary. This notification requirement is part of the 510(K) premarket approval pathway, a process that is unique to medical devices and if successful results in FDA clearance. Under FFD CA Sections 514 and 515, manufacturers are required to report on their compliance with applicable device regulatory requirements. In March of 2015, FDA released final guidance on the reprocessing of reusable medical devices. Reusable medical devices are those devices that may be reprocessed and used on multiple patients. Under the 510(k) pathway, the manufacturer must demonstrate that a new device is substantially equivalent to a device already on the market (a predicate device) The guidance focuses on balancing risks versus benefits for patients, drafting a Data Development Plan by the medical device sponsor and collecting postmarket data on a medical device that has received a priority review designation. S. 1077 would add Section 515B, "Priority Review for Breakthrough Devices," to FFDCA. Section would allow requests for priority review from device sponsors of PMA medical devices. Such requests would be evaluated by a team of experienced FDA staff and senior managers. Each priority review device would be assigned a team, "including a team leader with appropriate subject matter expertise and experience," the bill says. The House provision would allow denied priority review requests to be reconsidered. S. 1878 would amend the definition of "rare pediatric disease" in FFDCA Section 529(a) It would also extend eligibility for a rare pediatric disease priority review voucher. The bill would extend the authority to award such priority review vouchers until September 30, 2022. H.R. 6 contains a comparable provision (Section 2152, Reauthorization of Rare Pediatric Disease Priority Review Voucher Incentive Program) The House provision does not specify that the agreement on clinical protocols and any subsequent changes must be agreed to in writing. individuals based on specific patient characteristics. This approach relies on companion diagnostics to target drugs and biological products to specific subsets of patients. Rare diseases often have genetic origins, and advances in medicine have resulted in the development of new treatments that work by targeting genetic mutations that cause the disease. It is inherently difficult to develop drugs for rare diseases because of the small patient population available to conduct clinical trials, so targeted therapies are generally first developed for patients with the most frequent disease-causing mutations. additional targeted therapies would need to be developed. Targeted therapies, because they may be treating small subsets of patients, sometimes qualify as "orphan drugs" Such drugs are called orphan drugs because firms may lack the financial incentives to sponsor products to treat small patient populations. Orphan drugs receive their designation pursuant to FFDCA Section 526(a), a designation that was created by the Orphan Drug Act ( P.L. 97-414 ) to encourage firms to develop pharmaceuticals to treat rare diseases and conditions. S. 2030 would add a new Section 529A "Targeted Drugs for Rare Diseases" to the FFDCA. It would facilitate the "development, review, and approval of genetically targeted drugs and variant protein targeted drugs" It would apply to a condition that affects fewer than 200,000 persons in the U.S. or affects more than200,000 people in the United States and for which there is no reasonable expectation that the cost of developing and making the drug available will be recovered from sales. drugs to address an unmet medical need in one or more patient subgroups, including subgroups of patients with different mutations of a gene. This legislation would authorize the Secretary to allow the sponsor of a new drug application for a genetically targeted drug or a variant protein-targeted drug to rely on data and information that has been previously developed and submitted, either by the same or a different sponsor (with permission) for a drug that incorporates or utilizes the same genetically targeted technology or for a similar drug. S. 2030 would define genetically targeted drugs, genetically targeted technology, and variant protein-targeted drugs. New Section 529A should not be construed to limit the Secretary's product approval authorities, or to entitle sponsors to obtain information in another sponsor's application without permission of the other sponsor. H.R. 6 would add a new Subchapter J, Precision Medicine, to Chapter V of the FFDCA; this subchapter would include a new Section 592, "Precision medicine" The new FFDCA Section 592 would allow the Secretary to do two things.regarding orphan-drug and expedited-approval programs. The Secretary would be allowed to rely on information about a drug or biological product that has been previously submitted, either by the same or a different sponsor (with permission) in approval. The bill would also allow the secretary to approve a drug that has already been approved by the FDA for an orphan drug. The Senate version of the bill passed the Senate with a vote of 98-0. of an application. This may be for either a new product, or for a different indication for an existing product. Second, in contrast to the Senate bill, it would allow the Secretary to consider the application for expedited review programs, including accelerated approval. Similar to S. 2030 , new Section 592 should not be construed to limit the Secretary's product approval authorities, or to entitle sponsors to obtain information in another sponsor's application without permission. FDASIA ( P.L. 112-144 ) expanded FDA's authorities and strengthened the agency's ability to safeguard and advance public health. a new FFDCA Section 569C "Patient Participation in Medical Product Discussion," facilitating increased involvement of patients earlier in the regulatory process for medical product review. The Secretary is directed to develop and implement strategies to solicit the views of patients during the medical product development process and consider the perspectives of patients. The patient representative may serve as a special government employee in appropriate agency meetings with medical product sponsors and investigators. The secretary is also directed to explore means to provide for identification of patient representatives who do not have any, or have none. minimal, financial interests in the medical products industry. S. 1597 would amend FFDCA Section 569C by adding a new subsection (b) "Statement of Patient Experience" would require the Secretary, upon approval of a new drug application, to make public any patient experience data and related information submitted and reviewed as part of the application. "Data and information" refers to patient experiencedata, information on patient-focused drug development tools, and other relevant information, as determined by the Secretary. guidance, over a period of five years, regarding the collection of patient experience data and the use of such data in drug development. This section describes the content of those required guidance documents. "patient experience data" is data that are collected by any persons (including patients, family members and caregivers of patients, patient advocacy organizations, disease research foundations, researchers, and drug manufacturers) and are intended to provide information about patients' experiences with a disease or condition, including the impact of such disease or Condition on Patients' lives. patient preferences with respect to treatment of such disease or condition. S. 1597 would require the Secretary, acting through the FDA Commissioner, to publish, no later than June 1, 2021, 2026, and 2031, on the FDA website. H.R. 6 also contains a provision related to patient experience data (Title II, Subtitle A, Section 2001, "Development and Use of Patient Experience Data to Enhance Structured Risk-Benefit Assessment Framework" The bill is expected to become law in the next few weeks. H.R. 6 would amend FFDCA Section 505 by deleting a clause from Section 505(d) and adding new subsections (x) and (y) The new 505(x) would restate the deleted 505(D) requirement for the Secretary to "implement a structured risk-benefit assessment framework in the new drug approval process" The new505(y) would require the secretary to "establish and implement processes under which" entities "seeking to develop patient experience data" could submit ideas and data. "patient experience data" would be defined as data collected by patients, parents, caregivers, patient advocacy organizations, disease research foundations, medical researchers, research sponsors, or other parties determined appropriate by the Secretary. The new subsection would also require the Secretary to issue implementation guidance after holding several methodological workshops and a public meeting. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), each year in the United States, at least 2,000 people die of cancer. and nonmanufacturer groups. million people become infected with bacteria that are resistant to antibiotics, and at least 23,000 of them die from these infections. Addressing barriers to antibiotic drug approval may help counter this problem. One such proposal is the so-called Limited Population Antibacterial Drug (LPAD) approval pathway for new antibacterial drugs. Such a pathway would involve smaller clinical trials in a limited population of patients that have serious or life-threatening infections and unmet medical needs due to the lack of an effective approved antibiotic. This streamlined approach would result in more uncertainty about potential risks posed by the product, and therefore a greater need for post-market scrutiny. Section 2 would amend PHSA Section 319E to require the HHS Secretary to encourage and assist in reporting of antibacterial drug use, drug resistance, and antibiotic stewardship programs in health care facilities of the Indian Health Service, Department of Veterans Affairs (VA), and Department of Defense (DOD) It would also provide guidance and other informational materials about antibiotic stewardships for residential and ambulatory health care. facilities; (4) assist states with their antibacterial resistance prevention activities; and (5) establish a mechanism for facilities to report antibiotic stewardship activities and drug resistance. Section 2121, subsection (g) would add a new subsection 317U to the PHSA requiring the HHS Secretary to establish a monitoring system for the use of antibacterial and antifungal drugs, including products approved under the LPAD pathway. The Secretary would be required to make summaries of data from this system publicly available. Section 3 would create new FFDCA Section 506(g), "Limited population pathway for antibacterial drugs" This review pathway would allow the Secretary to approve an antibacterial drug as an LPAD drug if certain conditions are met. It would require that the Secretary's standards for new drug application approval are met, and that the sponsor receives a written request from the sponsor to approve the drug as a LPAD. The drug would have to treat a serious or life-threatening infection in a limited population of patients with unmet needs. determination of the safety and efficacy of a limited population antibacterial drug "reflect[s] the benefit-risk profile of the drug in the intended limited population" Products approved using this pathway must carry prominent labeling noting the intended use for a limited and specific population of patients. Sponsors must submit promotional materials to the FDA for review 30 days prior to dissemination. Section 3 would require the Secretary to issue within 18 months of enactment guidance "describing criteria, processes, and other general considerations" for demonstrating the drug's safety and effectiveness. of limited population antibacterial drugs." It would also require the Secretary to provide advice to the sponsor regarding the approval of an LPAD drug. Section 3 would require the secretary to report to Congress at least every two years on the number of requests for approval. It also would require GAO to report on the coordination of monitoring activities required by S. 185. The legislation would allow the Secretary of Health and Human Services to remove any post-marketing conditions (e.g., labeling requirements) Section 4 states that S. 185 should not be construed to alter current prescribing or other medical practices. The House provision would add a new FFDCA subsection 505(z), "Approval of certain antimicrobial and antifungal drugs for use in a limited population of patients" This would be an expedited review pathway for certain antibacterial and antIfungal Drugs. This would include drugs such as Zyrtec, which has been shown to be effective in reducing infections. biologics) intended for use in limited, defined populations of patients that have severe, life-threatening infections. Some elements of the review pathway proposed in the House bill are comparable to those in the Senate bill, for example. The Secretary could consider limited data sets and non-clinical data as substantial evidence of safety and effectiveness, recognizing the smaller populations available for study of an LPAD drug, and the different balance of benefit and harm. The bill would require the Secretary to report back to Congress by the end of the year. versus harm in these populations. Products approved using this pathway must carry prominent labeling noting the intended use for a limited and specific population of patients. Sponsors must submit promotional materials to FDA for review 30 days prior to dissemination. FDA would be required to issue draft implementation guidance within 18 months of enactment. This provision should not be construed to alter current prescribing or other medical practices (such as off-label prescribing). Other elements of the review pathway were found only in the House provision, for example. FDA may enter into written agreement with the sponsor to define the process and data needed to review the limited population use application. The process must adhere to existing goals and procedures agreed upon by sponsors and FDA in the Prescription Drug User Fee Amendments of 2012 ( P.L. 112-144 , Title I). The House provision would require the Secretary to conduct and publish an assessment of the program within 48 months of enactment, and to seek public input. It also would allow the secretary to allow the public to participate in the process. Precision medicine is the idea of providing health care to individuals based on specific patient characteristics. Currently, medical care is generally provided in a "trial and error" manner, with treatment adjusted based on real-time patient response. Precision medicine would tailor medical treatment to individual patients, thus aiming to improve health outcomes and save health care costs. On February 25, 2016, the White House hosted a Precision Medicine Initiative (PMI) Summit to mark the launch of PMI in the U.S. the one year anniversary of the initiative's launch, first announced in the 2015 State of the Union address. The PMI's three key agencies—National Institutes of Health (NIH), Food and Drug Administration (FDA), and the Office of the National Coordinator for Health Information Technology (ONC)—began work in this area. The FY2017 President's budget requests a total of $309 million for the PMI: $4 million to ONC and $3 million to NIH. FDA, $5 million to ONC, and the remaining $300 million to NIH. Precision medicine research efforts rely on the collection of large amounts of health data. The sharing of genetic and genomic data among private individuals, researchers and the federal government has, at times, prompted concerns that the information, if collected or retained by a federal executive branch agency, could be subject to public release pursuant to the Freedom of Information Act. FOIA, however, specifies nine categories of information that may be released. Exemption 3 allows agencies to withhold applicable records if the data are specifically exempted from disclosure by a statute other than FOIA. These types of Exemption 3 statutes are often referred to as b(3) exemptions. As a mechanism for addressing compelled disclosure of research data, NIH currently issues Certificates of Confidentiality pursuant to §301(d) of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. §241(d)) at the request of an investigator. A Certificate is an official document issued by the National Institutes of Health. of Confidentiality protects investigators from being compelled to disclose information that would identify research subjects in any civil, criminal, administrative, legislative, or other proceeding. This requirement can help promote participation in research by adding an additional layer of privacy protection. In contrast to compelled disclosure of research data by FOIA request, sharing of genomic data generated by NIH-funded research is a priority of NIH. The agency has established a comprehensive policy for the sharing of genetic data that "applies to all NIH- funded research that generates large-scale human or non-human genomic data" The NIH Common Fund, within the Office of the NIH Director, supports the High-Risk, High-Reward Research Program. This program has "four unique funding opportunities for exceptionally creative scientists who propose highly innovative approaches to major challenges in biomedical research" If investigators fail to submit the required data, NIH may withhold funding. These awards are intended "to encourage creative, potentially high-reward, research.subsequent research," according to the program's website. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org. Other transaction (OT) authority is a special vehicle used by certain federal agencies for obtaining or advancing research and development (R&D) An OT is not a contract, grant, or cooperative agreement, and there is no statutory or regulatory definition of "other transaction" Only those agencies that have been provided OT authority may engage in other transactions. Generally, OT authority is created because the government needs to obtain leading-edge R&D from commercial sources, but some companies are unwilling or unable to comply with the government's procurement regulations. The Advancing Precision Medicine Act of 2016 would codify the President's Precision Medicine Initiative. It would also protect identifiable, sensitive information from release under FOIA. The act would also require the sharing of NIH-supported research data in certain circumstances. The bill would also support high-risk, high-reward research in the U.S. and around the world. It was introduced in the Senate on September 14, 2015. It has been referred to as the Advancing precision medicine act of 2016. the carrying out of the PMI as well as identifying requirements of the initiative (§2) Amend PHSA Section 301(d) to require the Secretary to issue a Certificate of Confidentiality to research investigators of federally funded research in which sensitive, identifiable information is collected to protect the privacy of research participants. The provision would prohibit the individual with the certificate from disclosing sensitive information about the research participants, with certain exceptions, as specified, and would make this type of information immune from the legal process. (b)(3) specified biomedical information that identifies an individual or that has an associated risk that the information may be reidentified. The Secretary would be required to make each such exemption available in writing and to the public, upon request (§4). Amend PHSA Section 402(b) to allow the Secretary to require recipients of NIH grants or agreements to share data generated from such NIH grants in a manner consistent with all applicable federal law (§5) Add a new PHSA section to allow NIH Director to approve requests by institute and center directors to engage in transactions other than other transactions. than a contract, grant, or agreement with respect to projects for high-impact, cutting-edge research, as specified. This provision would require the Secretary to submit a report to Congress evaluating the activities under this new subsection by September 30, 2020. Title II, Subtitle C, Section 2041, of H.R. 6 addresses precision medicine but is not comparable to S. 2713 in its approach. It would also, for a precision drug or biological product, issue and periodically update guidance. product application where the product is for the treatment of a serious or life-threatening disease or condition and has been designated as an orphan drug. FDA regulatory authority over medical product safety and effectiveness covers drugs, biological products, and medical devices. S. 1767 would amend Section 503(g) of the FFDCA to require the Secretary to assign a primary center for the regulation of combination products and to conduct premarket review of these products under a single application whenever appropriate. The bill would allow the sponsor, if the plan were to be denied, to request a meeting with the Secretary. FDA provided examples of mobile apps that do not meet the statutory definition of a medical device. The agency also gave examples of apps that pose a significant risk to patient safety. The updated guidance did not address regulation of CDS software. The House bill also would establish a risk-based exception allowing FDA to exert regulatory authority. would exclude certain types of software applications from FDA's regulatory oversight. S. 1101 would exclude products that provide administrative and health management functions; software that creates, stores, transfers, and displays patient information; and analytic tools that provide both general and patient-specific information. CMS eliminated several clinical documentation objectives, and instead focused on a few objectives that capture more advanced uses of the technology. CMS also published an accompanying final rule (the 2015 Edition final rule) that expands the certification program. In addition to certifying the next generation of EHR technology that hospitals and physicians need to achieve meaningful use Stage 3, the program will be able to certify health information technology (HIT) products with a different combination of capabilities and functionalities that meet the needs of other types of patients. of health care providers and settings that are not eligible to participate in the EHR incentive program. The 2015 Edition final rule for the certification program established new transparency requirements for HIT developers. It also seeks to improve interoperability, for example, by requiring certified HIT products to adopt new and updated vocabulary and content standards for structured health information. ONC released a national interoperability roadmap in October 2015. It was developed over an period of time over the course of a few years, ONC says. 18-month period with input from numerous stakeholders—to coordinate efforts around achieving HIT interoperability. ONC expects the roadmap to evolve in partnership with the public and private sectors as technology and policy dictate. 2017 set as the deadline for individuals and health care providers along the care continuum to be able to send, receive, find, and use core clinical data. The roadmap discusses the payment and regulatory drivers for promoting interoperability, as well as the central policy and technical components of a fully interoperable nationwide health information infrastructure.  MACRA declared it a national objective to achieve widespread interoperability of certified EHR technology by the end of 2018. The law defines interoperability as the ability of health information systems to not only exchange clinical information but to also use the information based on common standards. In addition, MACRA instructed the Secretary of the Department of Health and Human Services to develop a national plan for EHR interoperability by the year 2020. The goal is to improve care and patient outcomes, according to the law. within one year of enactment, to submit a report to Congress on ways to help health care providers compare and select certified EHR technology. MACRA required the Secretary, in consultation with stakeholders, to establish interoperability metrics to measure progress toward achieving the national objective of widespread interoperability by July 1, 2016. If that objective is not met by December 31, 2018, the Secretary will have until Dec. 31, 2019, to identify the barriers to widespread interoperable. The Secretary will also have to submit to Congress a report on how to make EHR users and vendors publicly available. ONC released a report to Congress on health information blocking in April 2015. ONC is taking, in coordination with other federal agencies, to address information blocking. The report identified gaps in authority that limit the ability of ONC to effectively target, deter, and remedy such conduct. MACRA requires eligible hospitals and hospitals and other health care providers to share electronic health information with the federal government. It also requires the government to make sure that the information is accurate and up-to-date. physicians, beginning April 2016, to indicate through meaningful use attestation (or some other process specified by the Secretary) that they have not knowingly and willfully taken any action to limit or restrict the interoperability of their certified EHR technology. The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) Privacy Rule gives individuals the right of access to inspect, obtain a copy of, and transmit to a third party a copyof their health information. One of the meaningful use objectives that must be met by hospitals and physicians using certified Ehr technology is to provide individuals with the ability to view, inspect and transmit.  ONC released a report on patient identification and matching (i.e., linking patient records with the correct individual) in February 2014. It recommended standardizing patient attributes for the purpose of information exchange. The 2015 Edition final rule for the certification program requires EHR developers to publish programming instructions to enable other software application developers to produce apps giving individuals access to their clinical data. It also introduces EHR certification criteria for capturing patient identification standards. For more information, visit ONC's Patient Identification and Matching website. rule for the HIT certification program. Certified EHR systems must be able to create a summary-of-care document that includes the following standardized patient data: first name; last name; previous name; middle name (including middle initial); suffix; date of birth (year, month, and day are required fields; hours and minutes are optional); address; phone numbers (home, business, cell) S. 2511 includes multiple provisions to promote HIT interoperability, penalize information blocking, reduce the administrative and other burdens of using EHR technology. S. 2511 would establish a program and methodology for calculating and awarding a star rating to each certified HIT product. The rating program's methodology and criteria would be posted online, as would each HIT product's star rating (the rating system must use at least three stars) HR 6 would repeal the interoperability provisions in MACRA. It would eliminate the HIT Standards Committee and require the Secretary to require the HIT standards development organizations directly with contract development organizations. It also would extend federal protections to HIT developers who report and analyze patient safety information related to HIT use. Senate bill, H.R. 6 would not establish a star rating program for certified HIT products. Bill would not address patient access to electronic health information, patient record matching, the regulatory and administrative burdens of using EHR technology, or the development of trusted relationships between existing HIT networks. The Project BioShield Act ( P.L. 108-276 ), the Pandemic and All-Hazards Preparedness Act (PAHPA, the Act was passed after the terrorist attacks of 2001. Interagency working group, the Public Health and Emergency Medical Countermeasure Enterprise (PHEMCE), is responsible for coordinating these activities. The PHEMCE is headed by the HHS Assistant Secretary for Preparedness and Response (ASPR) and includes representatives from the HHS, CDC, FDA, and other agencies. The federal countermeasure strategy requires coordinated activities by several separate agencies. It is designed to ensure federal countermasure needs are addressed efficiently. For confidential support call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. Pandemic and All-Hazards Preparedness Reauthorization Act of 2013 ( P.L. 113-5 ) requires the ASPR to develop an annual "coordinated 5-year budget plan" for countermeasure basic and advanced research, development, and procurement activities. Act established the Biomedical Advanced Research and Development Authority (BARDA) to develop and procure medical countermeasures against CBRN agents, pandemic influenza, and emerging infectious diseases. BARDA is part of the National Institutes of Health. contracts with companies to develop and commercialize potential countermeasures. These contracts specify development activities for the company to perform and may extend multiple years. The Project BioShield Act ( P.L. 108-276 ) established a special process and funding mechanism through which the HHS Secretary may obligate funds to procure countermeasures that still need up to 10 more years of development. Up to half of the total amount of the Project Bio Shield contract may be paid out for theCompany meeting specified developmental milestones. The Medical Countermeasures Innovation Act of 2016 would change the manner in which the federal government supports the development and procurement of medical countermeasures against CBRN agents. Section 2 of S. 2055 would require the HHS Secretary to provide "timely and accurate recommended" guidelines for using the medical countermeasure in the Strategic National Stockpile. Currently, HHS has two separate mechanisms to support CBRNcountermeasure advanced development and commercialization: (1) countermeasures advanced development contracts and (2) Project BioShield acquisition contracts. report to "appropriate committees of Congress" within "30 days" when the amount available for Project BioShield procurements falls below $1.5 billion. This bill would change that requirement to specify the recipients of the report as the Senate Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions and the House Committee on Appropriations. Section 3 would move contracting authority for ProjectBioShield and BARDA advanced development from the Senate and House Appropriations committees to the Department of Health and Human Services. This report would be required by "March 1 of each year in which" the amount of money is available to be spent. ASPR to BARDA. Such a move was recommended by the Blue Ribbon Panel on Biodefense to "reduce unnecessary bureaucratic delays, improve efficiency and decision making" Section 4 would require ASPR to provide additional information in its "coordinated 5-year budget plan" and require that it be made publically available in "a manner that does not compromise national security" The budget plan would also need to consider the development of countermeasures and products for emerging infectious diseases that may present "a threat to the nation" "an independent, non-profit entity" to "foster and accelerate the development of medical countermeasures" This partner could provide business advice and use venture capital practices to invest in companies developing medical counter Measures. The U.S. intelligence community has successfully used a similar strategic investor model to address its unmet technology needs through In-Q-Tel. This bill would establish certain criteria for the partner, including prior experience in the intelligence community. The bill would also address unmet public health needs such as novel antimicrobials for multidrug resistant organisms. technology innovation and successful partnering with the federal government. The HHS Secretary acting through the BARDA Director would provide the entity with the government needs and requirements and a description of the work to be done under the agreement. The entity would be required to provide regular reports on the spending of funds provided by HHS and on progress meeting the identified needs. The bill would require the Government Accountability Office to evaluate this partnership four years after enactment. This authority would sunset on September 30, 2022. Section 6 would remove the current need for the President to approve use of the funds. of the Project BioShield special reserve fund. The Blue Ribbon Study Panel on Biodefense recommended this change to streamline the ProjectBioShield contracting process. Other than the provisions relating to Food and Drug Administration priority review, the 21 st Century Cures Act contains no comparable provisions to S. 2055 as reported. This section would also specify the congressional committees that HHS must notify of a decision to use Project Bio Shield funds as the Senate Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions and the House Committee on Energy and Commerce. Under the Prescription Drug User Fee Act of 1992 (PDUFA), FDA agreed to specific goals for improving the drug review time. FDA created a two-tiered system of review times: Standard Review and Priority Review. Compared with the amount of time standard review generally takes (approximately 10 months), a Priority Review designation means FDA's goal is to take action on an application within 6 months. Currently, FDA has two authorized priority review voucher programs (the rare pediatric diseasepriority review program, and the tropical disease priority review program) a sponsor of an approved new drug or biological product to be used for the priority review of another application. Section 7 of this bill would add a new FFDCA section 565A, "Priority Review to Encourage Treatments for Agents that Present National Security Threats" This section would establish a new priority review voucher program, funded by user fees, to provide a transferable voucher. The purpose of thepriority review drug voucher programs is to incentivize development of new treatment for diseases that may otherwise not attract development interest. specified conditions, to a sponsor of an approved new human drug product application. This section defines a "material threat medical countermeasure application" as a human drug application "to prevent or treat harm from a biological, chemical, radiological, or nuclear agent identified as a material threat" under the Public Health Service Act. It can be used for the priority review of another application, among other things, to prevent "adverse health consequences or death and may be caused by administering a drug, or biological product" Congress has had a long-standing interest in developing the future biomedical research workforce. Recent concerns have focused on ways to reduce the time between when young investigators complete their training and when they receive their first independent NIH research grant. The NIH has created a number of initiatives that strive to shorten this time, in part, to attempt to better retain young investigators in biomedical research. Section 8 of this bill would require GAO to report on the effectiveness of the priority review voucher program. There is no comparable provision in the House bill. Section 3 of S. 2014 would consolidate existing NIH intramural and extramural loan repayment programs. Section 1042 of H.R. 6 would require the NIH Director to submit to Congress a report on NIH efforts "to attract, retain and develop emerging scientists" Section 1041 would authorize a new extural NIH loan repayment program that would provide not more than $50,000 of loan repayment benefits annually. The Senate bill would also increase the amounts that could be repaid under existing loan programs from $35,000 to $ 50,000. The Senate bill would amend Section 402 of the PHS Act by adding a new subsection (m), which describes a strategic plan for NIH. The NIH Strategic Plan would identify research priorities, such as advancement of treatment, cure and prevention of health conditions. The research strategy would address the disease burden in the United States, including rare diseases, and the many factors that contribute to health disparities. In developing the strategic plan, the NIH Director would be required to ensure that maintaining the biomedical workforce, including participation of scientists from traditionally underrepresented groups, would remain a priority. priorities, would be required to assemble accurate data on study populations in clinical research. The data would have to be disaggregated by research area, condition, and disease categories and made publically available on the NIH website. Section 5 would amend Part A of Title IV of the PHSA, adding a new Section 404M, "Research Related to Sexual and Gender Minority Populations" Section 8 would require the Secretary, not later than 90 days after enactment, to establish a Task Force on Research Specific to Pregnant and Lactating Women. of biomedical and behavioral research, and details of all the research activities conducted or supported by the ICs of NIH. The Federal Demonstration Partnership (FDP) is "a cooperative initiative among 10 federal agencies and 119 institutional recipients of federal funds" In 2005 and 2012, FDP conducted surveys of principal investigators of federally funded projects to determine the impact of federal regulations and requirements on the research process. In both surveys, researchers reported spending 57% of their time engaged in research. The National Academies sponsored the FDP. and 43% of their time in completing pre- and post-award requirements. The most commonly experienced administrative responsibilities included those related to federal project finances, personnel, and effort reporting. For researchers engaged in projects that required human or animal subjects, the related Institutional Review Board (IRB) and Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) requirements were by far the most time-consuming. Other areas viewed as particularly time- consuming were those involving clinical trials, subcontracts, and cross-agency differences. the President and the Directors of the other NIH Institutes are appointed by the Secretary. Each NIH Institute Director reports directly to the NIH Director. Section 202 of the Labor/HHS/ED Appropriations Act, 1993 ( P.L. 102-394 ), states at the end of the section that the payment of compensation to consultants or individual scientists appointed for limited periods of time is "not to exceed the per diem rate equivalent to the maximum rate payable for senior-level positions," which is not less than 120% of the minimum rate of basic pay payable for GS–15. greater than the rate of basic pay payable for level III of the Executive Schedule" Section 2 of S. 2742 would amend Section 403(a) of the PHSA to replace the biennial reporting requirement of the NIH Director with a triennial requirement. The section would add new, and clarify existing, reporting requirements, including a description of intra-NIH activities and funding made available for conducting and supporting research that involves collaboration between an IC and one or more other ICs. Section 3 includes a series of requirements that would address the administrative burden on researchers funded by NIH. other federal agencies. The bill would direct the Secretary, within two years of enactment, to lead a review by research funding agencies of all financial conflict-of-interest regulations and policies. Second, it would require the NIH Director to implement measures to reduce the administrative burdens experienced by primary NIH grant awardees related to monitoring grant sub-recipients. Third, the Secretary would be required to evaluate financial expenditure reporting procedures and requirements for NIH funding recipients and take appropriate action. federal agencies would be reviewed by the Secretary. to avoid duplication of effort and minimize burden to funding recipients. Within two years of enactment, the Secretary would have to complete a review of regulations and policies for the care and use of laboratory animals. The Secretary would be required to clarify the applicability of OMB Uniform Guidance requirements regarding documentation of personnel expenses for entities receiving HHS grants. Finally, within one year of enacting the bill, the OMB Director would be needed to establish a system for documenting personnel expenses in the federal government. a Research Policy Board, consisting of up to10 federal and 9 to 12 non-federal members, as specified. The board would have to make recommendations on harmonizing regulations and policies to minimize administrative burden across federal research agencies. Within two years of enactment, and once thereafter, the board would has to submit a report to specified offices in OMB, the heads of relevant federal departments and agencies, and specified House and Senate committees. The report would provide information on the effects of regulations related to federal research requirements. recommendations on scientific research policy, including regulatory benefits and burdens. The board would sunset on September 30, 2020. Within four years of enactment, GAO would be required to conduct an evaluation of board activities regarding its purpose and responsibilities and submit a report to Congress. Section 5 would modify or eliminate a number of different NIH reporting requirements. It would require the heads of each IC to submit to the NIH Director a report on the amount of funding made available for conducting or supporting research that involves collaboration between a given IC and at NIH. least one other IC. This information would be included in the triennial report required by Section 403(a) as amended by Section 2 of S. 2742. Section 5 also would (1) eliminate an annual reporting requirement regarding the number of experts and consultants whose services are used by NIH; (2) make a minor modification to the doctoral degree reporting requirement; and (3) change the NCATS annual report to a biennial report. The report on Centers of Excellence would also be eliminated. Section 10 of S. 2742 would amend Section 405 of the PHSA. It would require that Directors of ICs be appointed by the NIH Director. The term of office for the director of an IC would be five years. There would be no limit to the number of terms served. The Director of the National Cancer Institute would continue to beappointed by the President. The director of the NIH would be reappointed at the end of a five-year term. The National Institute on Nursing Research biennial report. It would require that, if the office of a director of an IC becomes vacant before the end of a five-year term, the director appointed to fill the vacancy begin a new five- year term. The compensation limitations in Section 202 of the Labor/HHS/ED Appropriations Act, 1993, would be removed. Each current IC Director would be deemed to be appointed for a five year term as of the date of enactment, and the NIH Director could terminate the appointment prior to end of the term. related to time-limited appointments of consultants and individual scientists, would not apply to directors appointed under this new authority. The Reducing Administrative Burdens of Researchers provision in H.R. 6 Section 1023 is comparable to Section 3 of S. 2742. The House provision would require the NIH Director to implement measures to reduce the administrative burden on NIH-funded researchers, taking into account the recommendations of the NIH Scientific Management Review Board, the National Academy of Sciences, and the Faculty Burden Survey conducted by the Federal Demonstration Partnership. the NIH Director would be required to submit a report to Congress on the measures that have been implemented to reduce the administrative burden on NIH-funded researchers. The Increasing Accountability at the National Institute of Health provision in H.R. 6 Section 1022 is comparable to Section 10 of S. 2742. Although they use slightly different language, they achieve the same goals. The House provision would remove compensation limitations for consultants and individual scientists (not just NIH IC Directors) as stipulated by Section 202 of the Labor/HHS/ED Appropriations Act, 1993. Section 4 would amend Section 301(a) of the Public Health Service through the Secretary of Health and Human Services. It requires the Secretary to "conduct in the Service, and encourage, cooperate with, and render assistance to other appropriate public authorities, scientific institutions, and scientists" As part of these authorities, the Secretary is authorized to make available substances and living organisms for biomedical and behavioral research. Section 4 would also amend Section 302(a), which would make the Secretary responsible for the National Institutes of Health. the PHSA to allow the Secretary, where research substances and living organisms are made available to researchers through contractors, to direct the contractors to collect payments. These amounts would be credited to the appropriations accounts that incurred the costs of making the substances and organisms available. In 1986, in order to stabilize the pediatric vaccine market, Congress waived the liability of manufacturers (in most cases) and established the National Vaccine Injury Compensation Program (VICP) There are no comparable provisions in H.R. 6. The list of covered vaccine types and associated compensable injuries and time frames (called the "Injury Table") was provided in law. An exception is made under current law for new vaccines that are routinely recommended by CDC for use in children, which are automatically included in the Injury Table. In 2013, the Advisory Commission on Childhood Vaccines (ACCV), which advises on the VICP, informed the Secretary of the Department of Health and Human Services of its new policy on vaccine injuries. the Secretary that current VICP authority may discourage the growing use of vaccines for pregnant women. The law does not allow for addition of such vaccines to the Injury Table if they are not also recommended for children. Section 6 of S. 2742 would require the Secretary to incorporate into the list of covered vaccines any vaccine recommended by CDC for routine use in pregnant women, using the rulemaking process to establish covered injuries and related matters. It also would clarify injury to an infant born to a woman who was vaccinated during pregnancy. that both the woman and a child or children in utero when the vaccine was administered would be eligible for compensation. A vaccine may be both a commercial product and a public good. Congress has established several federal payment mechanisms and health insurance coverage requirements to support the production and use of vaccines in the United States. Some of these incentives are tied to recommendations of CDC and/or its Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) In contrast to FDA, which licenses vaccines when they are shown to be safe and Vaccine manufacturers have an interest in understanding the factors considered by ACIP and CDC, as well as FDA, in making vaccine use and licensing decisions. Section 7 of S. 2742 does not explicitly require that CDC personnel meet with vaccine developers. It does, however, require the CDC Director to ensure that CDC centers and offices coordinate their vaccine program and policy efforts, including consultations with stakeholders. The CDC may recommend routine use of a vaccine for only a subset of the population for whom FDA has licensed its use. The provision also would require HHS to report to Congress on ways to promote innovation in the development of vaccines against infectious diseases. The Secretary may consult with specified stakeholders, including vaccine developers, in producing this report. Section 2143 would require CDC personnel to meet with vaccine developers regarding their vaccine products that are either licensed by FDA or for which a developer intends to seek licensure. The stated purpose is for CDC to share with developers information about epidemiology and related matters that could be used to develop new vaccines. Section 2142 would require the CDC Director to review ACIP processes, evaluation criteria, and consistency in issuing recommendations. H.R. 6 also includes a provision (Section 2141) that would expedite ACIP's consideration of certain vaccines. There is no comparable provision in S. 2742 . Sponsors of clinical trials for drugs, biologics, and vaccines would have to inform the sponsor's vaccine research and development plan. The section specifies types of information that may be shared, deadlines, representation at meetings. Under Section 402(j) of the PHS Act, those responsible for specified clinical trials of FDA-regulated products have been required to submit registration information to ClinicalTrials.gov. HHS published a proposed rule to clarify and expand requirements for the submission of clinical trial registration and results information. Section 8 of S. 2742 would add new language requiring the NIH Director to inform responsible parties of the option to request that information for a medical device clinical trial be publically posted prior to the date of clearance or approval. and in collaboration with the FDA Commissioner, to submit to Congress a report on registered clinical trials. The Secretary would be required to submit an initial report not later than two years after the compliance date of the final rule implementing Section 402(j) of the PHSA. Two follow-up reports would be needed, which include information on actions taken to enforce compliance with the ClinicalTrials.gov reporting requirements. Section 1101 and Section 1121 of H.R. 6 are comparable to S. 2742 . S. 2742 focuses on compliance with the reporting requirements. House provisions address public access to, and research on, the information in ClinicalTrials.gov. Section 1101 of H.R. 6 would add new language to Section 402(j) of the PHS Act ("Expanded Clinical Trial Registry Data Bank") It would require the NIH Director to ensure that the registry and results data bank is easily used by the public. It would also require that information is submitted in a standardized format, including certain specified data. terminologies and code sets are used, to the extent possible, to facilitate electronic data matching. Within 90 days of enactment, the Secretary would be required to seek the advice of relevant stakeholders and experts on enhancements to the clinical trial registry data bank that are necessary to implement the provision. Section 1121 of H.R. 6 would instruct the Secretary to enter into a seven-year cooperative agreement, contract, or grant—the Clinical Trial Data System Agreement—with one or more. The Secretary wouldbe required to begin implementation of the provision within 18 months of enactment. eligible entities (i.e., tax-exempt academic institutions) to implement a pilot program to enable registered users to conduct further research on reported clinical trial data. Eligible entities seeking funding would have to submit an application that contains certain specified information, including a description of the system the eligible entity will use to store and maintain such data. The eligible entity must also prove that it will allow onlyregistered users to access and use de-identified clinical trialData. The application must also include evidence demonstrating the ability to compile clinical trial Data in standardized formats. of the eligible entity to ensure that registered users disseminate the results of their research; and evidence demonstrating that the eligible entities has a proven track record of protecting confidential data. FDA uses the data from clinical trials to determine whether to approve a manufacturer's application for marketing a medical product. Clinical trials are conducted in three phases. Phase I trials try to determine dosing, document how a drug is metabolized. Phase II trials document how the drug is administered. Phase III trials document the drug's effects on the body.  Phase II trials include more participants (about 100-300) who have the disease or condition that the product potentially could treat. Researchers seek to gather further safety data and preliminary evidence of the drug's beneficial effects (efficacy) Sometimes Phase II clinical trials are divided into Phase IIA (to assess dosing requirements) and Phase IIB (to study efficacy) If the Phase II trial is successful, the drug could be approved for use in the U.S. and Europe. If the drug is not approved, the product could be withdrawn from the market. In Phase III trials, the drug is studied in a larger number of participants with the disease. This phase further tests the product's effectiveness, monitors side effects and compares the product to a standard treatment. As more and more participants are tested over longer periods of time, the less common side effects are more likely to be revealed. Under current current guidelines, the risks are considered acceptable, given the observed efficacy and the severity of the disease, according to the drug's manufacturer, AstraZeneca. The National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences (NCATS) may develop and provide infrastructure and resources for all phases of clinical trials research. NCATS may support clinical trial activities through the end of Phase IIB for a treatment for a rare disease or condition if it gives public notice for a period of at least 120 days of NCATS's intention to support the clinical trial. No public or private organization provides credible written intent to NCATS that it will support the trials through Phase IIA. the organization has timely plans to further the clinical trial activities or conduct clinical trials of a similar nature beyond Phase IIA; and (3) NCATS ensures that support of the clinicaltrial activities in Phase IIB will not increase the federal government's liability beyond the award value of the center's support. Section 11 of S. 2742 would extend NCATS's authority to support clinical trial Activities through the end of Phase IIb. The Senate passed the bill with a vote of 50-0. bill would add material to the NCATS annual/biennial report regarding methods and tools developed since the last report. The next NCATS report, following enactment, would include a complete list of all such tools developed by research supported by NCATS. The NDCATS Phase IIB Restriction provision in H.R. 6 Section 1027 is comparable to S. 2742 . The House provision would extend NCATS's authority to support clinical trial activities through the end of Phase IIA. Section 452 of the PHSA established the National Center for Medical Rehabilitation Research (the Center) within the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (the Institute) at NIH. It also required the NIH Director to create a Medical rehabilitation Coordinating Committee and a National Advisory Board on Medical rehabilitation Research. The Director of the Institute—in collaboration with the Director of NIH—conducts and disseminates research, and disseminate information, on the rehabilitation of individuals with physical disabilities. The exception is for treatment of a rare disease or condition through the end of Phase III. the Center, the Coordinating Committee, and the Advisory Board—is required to develop, and periodically revise and update, a comprehensive plan for medical rehabilitation research. The research plan would have to include goals and objectives for such research. Within 30 days of revising and updating the plan, the Director of the Center would be required to transmit the plan to the President, the Senate Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions and the House Committee on Energy and Commerce. In addition, S. 800 would require the Secretary, with the other federal agencies, to review their medical rehabilitationResearch programs and take action to avoid duplication. S. 849 would add a new PHSA Section 399S-1, "Advancing Research for Neurological Diseases" It would authorize the HHS Secretary to improve the collection of data on neurological diseases. H.R. 6 would define medical rehabilitation research as "the science of mechanisms and interventions that prevent, improve, restore, or replace lost, underdeveloped, or deteriorating function" The PHSA does not explicitly authorize or require surveillance of neurological diseases in general, although the Secretary may conduct such activities under general authorities. National Neurological Diseases Surveillance System to track the epidemiology of neurological diseases, including multiple sclerosis and Parkinson's disease. Required and optional data elements are the same as in the Senate bill. The Secretary would be required to make information and analysis in the surveillance system available, subject to HIPAA privacy and security protections, to the public, including researchers. The provision would authorize the appropriation of $5 million for each of fiscal years 2016 through 2020. The Silvio O. Conte Senior Biomedical Research Service. SBRS is a special hiring mechanism used by the HHS Secretary to attract and retain accomplished scientists to work in Public Health Service (PHS) agencies. It is not subject to civil service requirements under Title 5 of the U.S. Code. SBRS requirements are as prescribed in law and regulation (42 C.F.R. Part 24). Currently, SBRS is limited to 500 members, who are accomplished doctoral-level scientists in biomedical research or clinical research evaluation. The rate of pay may not exceed $100,000. that for Level I of the Executive Schedule (currently about $206,000 per year) unless approved by the President. The Secretary may contribute up to 10% of a Service member's pay to that person's already established retirement system. The provision would rename the SBRS as the Silvio O. Conte Senior Biomedical Research and Biomedical Product Assessment Service (the Service) It would increase the number of authorized members to 2,000, and would add "biomedical product assessment" as a desired field of expertise. not required to reduce the number of employees serving in other HHS employment systems. The provision would require the Secretary to appoint experts to agencies within HHS. It also would authorize the appointment of persons who hold "a master's level degree in engineering, bioinformatics, or a related or emerging field" It would increase the upper pay rate limit to that of the President (currently $400,000 per year) but would eliminate the authority to reduce other HHS employees' jobs. It would also broaden the current requirement for doctoral-level members. to contribute to a member's preexisting retirement system. The House bill contains a similar provision (Section 2281) that would also rename the SBRS the Silvio O. Conte Senior Biomedical Research and Biomedical Product Assessment Service. Unlike the Senate bill, the House bill would eliminate the mention of a specific number of authorized Servicemembers. Finally, the provision would require GAO to study the changes to the Service and their effects on HHS departments and agencies. the number of employees serving in other HHS employment systems to offset the number in the Service. Title 5 of the U.S. Code provides the broad framework of requirements under which many federal employees are hired. Some subsets of employees are hire under alternative government-wide or agency-specific authorities. Numerous hiring authorities target scientists and other qualified experts. The House bill would require the Secretary to report on the HHS website regarding the changes to the Service and whether they "have improved the ability of the [FDA] to hire and retain qualified experts" other technical workers, for whom federal agencies such as FDA compete with the private sector and nonfederal public employers. For example, FFDCA Section 714 authorizes the Secretary to appoint employees to positions in FDA to perform, administer, or support activities related to review of medical device applications and human generic drugs. The House bill contains a comparable provision ( H.R. 6 , Title II, Subtitle P, Section 2285, "Hiring Authority for Scientific, Technical, and Professional Personnel" positions" in the competitive service "without regard to the provisions of title 5, United States Code" The House provision specifies that these positions would be within FDA's Center for Drug Evaluation and Research. Like the Senate bill, the House provision would allow the HHS Secretary to determine pay (not to exceed the annual rate of pay of the President) for the purposes of retaining qualified employees, notwithstanding certain General Schedule pay rate requirements. The provision would also allow the Secretary to set the salary for certain positions. FDA regulatory authority over medical product safety and effectiveness covers drugs, biological products, and medical devices. The agency generally divides responsibilities for the review of marketing applications in its product-centered offices. The House provision would require the Secretary to submit a report to Congress on workforce planning and certain specified elements with regard to the FDA. Unlike the Senate bill, the House provision wouldn't require a GAO study with regards to FDA workforce. The Senate bill would not require aGAO study on FDA workforce planning. The Obama Administration has proposed an Oncology Center of Excellence to streamline collaboration across FDA's Human Drugs, Biologics, and Devices and Radiological Health programs. According to the FY2017 Congressional Justification, "With the continued development of companion diagnostic tests and the use of combinations of drugs and biologics to treat cancer using methods developed through the science of precision medicine, to most benefit those affected, FDA needs to take an integrated approach" The Center for Devices andRadiological Health reviews premarket approval applications for approval and 510(k) notifications. Some groups have suggested that such pilots could also be done in other areas (e.g., cardiology, neurology, and infectious disease) This provision would add a new FFDCA Section 1014, "Food and Drug Administration Intercenter Institutes" This would require the Secretary to establish one or more "Intercenter Institutes," for a major disease area(s) The proposal is specific to cancer, but there has arguably also been an increase in the number and complexity of diagnostics and therapeutics for other diseases. Such institutes would be responsible for coordinating activities applicable to specific disease area(s) H.R. 2700 would require the Secretary to establish at least one institute within one year of enactment of the bill. It would also require a public comment period while each institute is established. The bill is expected to be signed into law by the end of the first quarter of 2014. It is currently under consideration in the Senate and the House of Representatives, both of which are expected to vote on the bill this week. No comparable provision in H.R. 6 is being implemented. This provision also would allow the Secretary to terminate any such institute if the Secretary determines that it is no longer benefitting the public health. Following allegations of misspent funds during a 2010 General Services Administration meeting held in Las Vegas, the Office of Management and Budget imposed restrictions on conference travel for federal employees. The memorandum directed agencies, beginning in FY2013, to spend at least 30% less than what was spent in FY2010 on travel expenses. Senior-level agency approval is required for all conferences sponsored by an agency where the conference expenses to the agency exceed $100,000. Agencies are prohibited from spending more than $500,000 on a single conference. However, this restriction may be waived if the agency head "determines that exceptional circumstances exist" Under the Senate provision, if attendance at a scientific meeting is directly related to the professional duties of scientific or medical professionals of the agency.level of spending each year through FY 2016. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), then the meetings would not be considered to be conferences for the purposes of federal reporting requirements. Each HHS operating division would be required to post on their website an annual report on scientific meeting attendance and related travel spending for each fiscal year. The NIH travel (Title I, Subtitle B, Section 1025) and the enabling FDA scientific engagement (Title II, Sub Title P, Section 2282) provisions in H.R. 6 would be included. H.R. 6 and S. 2700 express a sense of Congress that participation in or sponsorship of scientific conferences and meetings is essential to the mission of NIH and FDA. FFDCA Section 770, as added by the Food and Drug Administration Amendments Act of 2007 (FDAAA, P.L. 110-85 ), created the Reagan-Udall Foundation for the Food & Drug Administration. Its duties cover activities such as identifying and then prioritizing unmet needs; awarding grants or entering into other agreements with scientists. and industry; holding meetings and publishing information and data for use by FDA and others; and taking action to obtain patents and licensing of inventions. It is led by a Board of Directors, four of whom are ex officio members, and nine from candidates provided by the National Academy of Sciences. Section 770 specifies the number of members to be appointed representing each type of group, and requires that the ex-officio members ensure specific expertise among the members. The group is made up of members from patient and consumer advocacy groups, professional scientific and medical societies, and trade organizations. provision would amend FFDCA Section 770 to change the membership of the Board of Directors. It would limit to 30% of the membership "representatives of the general pharmaceutical, device, food, cosmetic, and biotechnology industries" The obligation to ensure specific expertise among the members would be broadened to rest with all members of the board, not only ex officio appointees. That broader group would also decide the size of theBoard of Directors and who gets to appoint new members. Each board member's term of office would last for four years. Initially appointed board members' terms would expire on a staggered basis, as determined by the ex officio members. The provision would remove the salary cap of the foundation's Executive Director, which is now set at the compensation of the Executive Director. The provisions would also add that for the additional board members appointed pursuant to S. 2700 , Section 6, the terms of office for the initially appointed persons can expire onA staggered basis. Current requirement is that funds received from the Treasury be held in separate accounts. The provision would change the requirement, so that funds would be "managed as individual programmatic funds, according to best accounting practices" The House bill provision ( H.R. 6 , Title II, Subtitle P, Section 2283, "Reagan-Udall Foundation for the Food and Drug Administration") is the same as the Senate bill. The Paperwork Reduction Act (PRA, 44 U.S.C. Chapter 35) was enacted in 1986. 1980 and amended in 1995, established the Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs (OIRA) Congress required that agencies seek OIRA permission before collecting information from the public. The PRA requires that federal agencies receive clearance from OIra before requesting most types of information. PRA clearance is required when standardized information is collected from 10 or more respondents within a period of time. The first of 11 stated purposes was to "minimize the paperwork burden for individuals ... and other persons resulting from the collection of information by and for the Federal Government" 12-month period. PRA does not apply to certain types of scientific research, including collections that are neither sponsored nor conducted by the agency. The Exemption for the National Institutes of Health from the Paperwork Reduction Act Requirements provision (Title I, Subtitle B, Section 1024) is comparable to S. 2700. It would amend 44 U.S.C. Chapter 35 to exempt the NIH from the PRA requirements for certain scientific research collections during the conduct of NIH research. Congress has required the Secretary to submit specified reports to Congress or to contract with other entities (e.g., the Institute of Medicine [IOM]), to conduct specified studies. For example, the Food and Drug Administration Amendments Act of 2007 (FDAAA, P.L. 110-85 ) required FDA to take several actions regarding how it informs the public, expert committees, and others about agency actions and plans, as well as information the agency has developed or gathered about drug safety and effectiveness. Other amendments to the FFDCA have imposed additional requirements upon the Secretary or the FDA. This provision would remove the following: Section 505(k)(5), which required the Secretary to report to Congress not later than two years after the enactment of the FDAAA in 2007 on certain FDA procedures addressing post market safety issues. Section 505A(p) required the. Secretary to contract with the IOM to conduct a study, which was further specified. in this section. The provision would also remove the requirement that the Secretary report to the FDA not later. than three years after enactment of. the Best Pharmaceuticals for Children Act of 2007. There is no comparable provision in H.R. 6 . FFDCA Section 505 and accompanying regulations provide the framework for FDA's approval of sponsors' drug marketing applications. For a drug whose active ingredient has never been FDA-approved, the law requires the sponsor to submit a new drug application that includes data to provide evidence of the drug's safety and effectiveness for its intended use. The House provision would add a new Section 505H, which, like the Senate bill, would address the data requirements in a supplemental NDA.