The Army Guard is the oldest component of any of the uniformed services. It traces its roots to the colonial militia, and claims a “birth”of 1636. Today, the Army Guard exists in 54 locations that include all 50 states, the District of Columbia, and three territories: Guam, the Virgin Islands, and Puerto Rico. During peacetime, Army Guard units report to the adjutant generals of their states or territories, or in the case of the District, to the Commanding General. Reports to the governor of the state, or in the case of the District of Columbia, the mayor. At the state level, the governors have the ability, under the Constitution of the United States, to call up members of the Army Guard in times of domestic emergency or need. Army Guard units battle fires or help communities deal with floods, tornadoes, hurricanes, snowstorms, or other emergency situations. In times of civil unrest, the citizens of a state rely on the Army Guards to respond, if needed. The President has the authority to mobilize the Army Guard, putting them in federal duty status. While federalized, the units answer to the Combatant Commander of the theatre in which they are operating and, ultimately, to the President. Nonfederalized Army Guard members’ pay and allowances are paid with state funds while federalized Army Guards are paid for with federal funds. Even when notFederalized, The Army Guard has a federal mission to maintain properly trained and equipped units, available for prompt mobilization. enlist for 8 years and are entitled to a number of benefits while serving in the Army Guard. Army Guard members are required to attend one drill weekend each month and one annual training period (usually 2 weeks in the summer) each year. Initially, all nonprior service personnel are required. to attend initial entry training, also known as Basic Training. After Basic Training, soldiers go to their Advanced training. After their enlistment periods, former Army Guard member are entitled. to veterans’ benefits, such as health care and burial benefits. The Army Guard has armories and training facilities in more than 2,800 communities. The Army Guard is a partner with the active Army and the Army Reserves in fulfilling the country's military needs. The National Guard Bureau (NGB) assists the Army Guard in this partnership. NGB is a joint bureau of the Departments of the Army, the Air Force and is charged with overseeing the federal functions of the National Guard. For more information, visit the Army Guardsman's website or call 1-800-273-8255 or go to http://www.armyguard.org/. NGB helps the Army Guard and the Air Guard procure funding and administer policies. NGB also acts as a liaison between the Departments of the Army and Air Force and the states. All Army forces are integrated under DOD’s “total force” concept. Under this concept, active and reserve components are to be blended into a cohesive total force to meet a given need. The U.S. Army is the largest military service in the world, followed by the European Union and the United States. The President declared a national emergency as a result of the terrorist attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon. The Secretary of Defense delegated to the Secretary of the Army the authority to order Army Guard soldiers to active duty as part of the overall mobilization effort. Approximately 93,000 Army Guard troops were activated as of March.mission. The U.S. military is committed to the mission of preventing, detecting and responding to acts of terrorism and acts of war. The mission is led by the U.N. Security Council and the United Nations. Army Guard soldiers accounted for 34 percent of the total reserve components mobilized in response to the terrorist attacks on September 11, 2001. Army Guard soldiers participated in direct combat in Afghanistan under Operation Enduring Freedom. U.S. homeland security missions, Operation Noble Eagle, were also part of the 9/11 response. In general, missions to fight terrorism outside the United States were categorized under OperationEnduring Freedom, while missions to provide domestic defense were categorized as OperationNoble Eagle. For more information, visit www.armyguard.org. such as guarding the Pentagon, airports, nuclear power plants, domestic water supplies, bridges, tunnels, and other military assets were conducted under Operation Noble Eagle. The Army Guard also supported federal peacekeeping operations in Southwest Asia with Operation Desert Spring and in Kosovo with Operation Joint Guardian under various other military operations. While on active duty, all Army Guard soldiers earn various statutorily authorized pays and allowances. The types of pay and allowances soldiers are eligible to receive vary depending upon rank and length of service, dependency status, skills and certifications acquired. We focused on 14 basic types of pays and allowances applicable to Army Guard units we selected for case studies. We categorized these 14 pay and allowance types into two groups: (1) pays, including basic pay, special duty assignment pay, parachute jumping and foreign language proficiency skill-based pays, and location-based hostile fire and hardship duty pays. (2) allowances, including allowances for housing, subsistence, family separation, and cost of living for the continental United States. In this case study, we focused on the basic pay and allowances. There are three key phases associated with starting and stopping relevant pays and allowances for mobilized Army Guard soldiers. Army Guard units and state-level command support components, as well as active Army finance components and DFAS, have key roles in this process. There are five key computer systems involved in authorizing, entering, and processing active duty pays for mobilized soldiers. In addition to tax advantages, mobilized soldiers may be eligible for tax advantages associated with their mobilization to active duty, such as exclusion of certain military pay from taxable income.  DFAS Indianapolis is the central site for all Army military pay and is responsible for maintaining over 1 million MMPAs for the Army. Each MMPA contains a soldier’s pay-related personnel, entitlement, and performance data. Personnel data contained in the MMPA are generated by JUSTIS and DMO. All pay- related transactions that are entered into DJMS-RC, through Justis and D MO, update theMMPA. To learn more about DFAS, visit their website.  DFAS Denver is responsible for designing, developing, and maintaining customer requirements for the Military and Civilian Pay Services business line. DFAS-Indianapolis serves as a “gatekeeper” in that it monitors the daily status of data uploaded to DJMS-RC to ensure that all transactions are received and processed in DJ MS-RC. Users can sign on to DJms-RC directly from the Army Guard’s SIDPERS database, which is maintained and used by 54 state-level personnel offices.  JUSTIS is the pay input subsystem used by the 54 state-level Army Guard commands, including the USPFOs. This subsystem processes transactions for submission to DJMS-RC to create payments for Army National Guard soldiers. JUSTIS receives certain pay-affecting personnel data from SIDPERS. It also receives a limited amount of mobilization order data directly from AFCOS. These systems are decentralized in that each of the 54 sites owns and maintains its own JUSTIS database. It is used for file transfer transactions, online queries of MMPAs, and downloads of data files. DMO is the pay input subsystem used by active Army finance offices and the DOD military pay offices to update DJMS-RC. DMO can be used to create transactions for military pay and allowances that are not reported at the time of mobilization for upload. Additional data needed to create pay transactions associated with active duty pay and allowance must be entered manually into JUSTIS from hard copies of mobilization orders. JustIS and DMO share the same operating system platform and certain database tables. For more information on how to use JUSTIS, visit: www.justis.org. We found significant pay problems at the six Army Guard units we audited. These problems related to processes, human capital, and systems. The six units included three special forces and three military police units. The units were as follows: Special forces units Colorado B Company, 5th Battalion, 19th Special Forces Virginia B Company. Military police units Mississippi 114th Military Police Company, West Virginia C Company, 2nd Battalion, 3rd Battalion, 20th Special Armed Forces West Virginia, C Company. Six case study units were deployed to various locations in the U.S. and overseas in support of Operations Noble Eagle and Enduring Freedom. In addition, we conducted a limited review of the pay experiences of a seventh unit mobilized more recently and deployed to Iraq in April 2003. The Colorado Army Guard’s 220th Military Police Company was one of the seven units reviewed. The pay problems we found in our six cases study units persisted, as shown in figure 2. The unit was deployed to help perform a variety of critical tasks. For the six units we audited, we found significant pay problems involving over one million dollars in errors. These problems consisted of underpayments, overpayments and late payments that occurred during all three phases of Army Guard mobilization to active duty. Overall, for the 18- month period from October 1, 2001, through March 31, 2003, we discovered more than $1 million in errors in the Army Guard pay system. The Army Guard was responsible for providing security at the Pentagon shortly after the 9/11 terrorist attacks. identified overpayments, underpayments and late payments at the six case study units. For one unit, these pay problems resulted in largely erroneous debts totaling $1.6 million. Overall, we found that 450 of the 481 soldiers had at least one pay problem associated with their mobilization to active duty. Due to the lack of supporting documents at the state, unit, and battalion levels, we were unable to conduct a full analysis of the pay problems in each case study unit. The study was published in the online edition of the Journal of Military Economics. may not have identified all of the pay problems related to the active duty mobilizations of these units. The payment problems we identified at the six case study units did not include instances of fraudulent payments, which were a major finding resulting from the further investigation of improper payments found in our 1993 audit of Army military payroll. Nonetheless, we found the inaccurate, late, and missing pays and associated erroneous pays. We have provided documentation for the pay issues we identified to appropriate DOD officials for further research to determine whether additional amounts are owed to the government or the soldiers. Debts found during our current audit had a profound financial impact on individual soldiers and their families. DOD erroneously billed 34 soldiers in a Colorado National Guard Special Forces unit an average of $48,000 each. The largely erroneous total debt for these soldiers of about $1.6 million remained unresolved at the end of our audit in September 2003. As a result of confusion over responsibility for entering transactions associated with a Colorado. National Guard unit, DOD mistakenly billed the unit $48k each. Soldier’s spouse had to obtain a grant from the Colorado National Guard to pay bills while her husband was in Afghanistan. Some soldiers did not receive payments for up to 6 months after mobilization and others still had not received certain payments by the conclusion of our audit work. Four Virginia Special Forces soldiers who were injured in Afghanistan and unable to resume their civilian jobs experienced problems in receiving entitled active duty pays and related health care. We found that a substantial number of payment errors were caused, at least in part, by unclear procedural requirements for processing active duty pay. Audit finds Army Guard commands not performing effective reconciliations of pay and personnel record discrepancies each month. Several of the instances we identified in which soldiers received pay and allowances for many months after their release from active duty likely would have been identified sooner. DOD officials did advise us that, as a result of our work, they implemented a software change on September 18, 2003, intended to help avoid such problems in the future. The new warning messages have been added to JUSTIS that will appear when a transaction is entered to cancel or amend a tour of duty. Army Guard soldiers’ active duty pays were not stopped at the end of their active duty tours when they were released from active duty earlier than their units. DFAS-Indianapolis guidance provides only that “the supporting USPFO will be responsible for validating the status of any soldier who does not return to a demobilized status with a unit.” The guidance did not state how the USPfo should be used to carry out assigned responsibilities for soldiers who return fromActive Duty earlier than units. informed that a soldier did not return with his or her unit, or how the USPFO was to take action to validate the status of such soldiers. Data input and eligibility requirements for housing and family separation allowances were not clear, the audit found. A soldier returned early from a deployment when the soldier appeared at a weekend drill while his unit was still deployed. The audit found that procedural guidance was not clear with respect to transaction entry for soldiers returning early from deployment. The U.S. military has been accused of failing to properly vet soldiers who return early from deployments. and eligibility requirements for the basic allowance for housing and the family separation allowance, respectively. For example, during our audit work at one of our case study locations, we determined that because of inconsistent interpretations of existing guidance for “dependents” in entering transactions, a number of Maryland soldiers were not paid the correct amount. At another case study location, we found that existing guidance on eligibility determination was misinterpreted so that soldiers were erroneously refused the “single parent soldiers family separation allowances” to which they were entitled. policies and procedures were unclear with respect to organizational responsibilities. Confusion centered principally around pay processing responsibility for Army Guard soldiers as they move from state control to federal control and back again. To be effective, current processes rely on close coordination and communication between state (Army Guard unit and state-level command organizations) and federal (active Army finance locations at mobilization/demobilization stations and at area servicing finance offices) We found a significant number of instances in which critical coordination requirements were not clearly defined. A sergeant incurred pay problems during his mobilization and deployment to Afghanistan. The active Army and his state's USPFO were confused as to responsibility for processing pay input transactions associated with a promotion. The end result was the soldier was overpaid during the time he was in Afghanistan. A sergeant was promoted from a sergeant first class to master sergeant (E-8) and his demotion back to an E-7, and a second promotion back to a E-8. The sergeant was also overpaid for his deployment and demotion. period of his demotion. DFAS garnished his wages and collected approximately $1,100 of the soldier's salary. The soldier's wife had to obtain a grant of $500 from the Colorado National Guard's Family Support Group to pay bills. We found existing guidance did not provide for clear responsibility and accountability between USPFOs and the Army Guard’s and active Army’S mobilization station and in-theater finance offices to enter transactions for deployed soldiers. However, we found that existing guidance was not clear on who was responsible for the transactions. active Army mobilization stations and in-theater servicing finance offices with respect to responsibility for entering transactions while in the theater. For example, at one of our case study locations, this broad authority for entering changes to soldiers’ pay records enabled almost simultaneous attempts by two different pay offices to enter pay transactions into DJMS-RC for the same soldier. At another case study location we found that, in part because of confusion over responsibility for starting location-based payments, two pay offices tried to enter the same transaction. The West Virginia National Guard Special Forces unit was stationed in Uzbekistan. The unit was experiencing numerous pay problems. The local finance office did not have the systems up and ready, nor available personnel who were familiar with DJMS-RC. According to the sergeant, the active Army finance personnel were only taking care of the active.pays, a soldier was required to carry out a dangerous multiday mission to correct these payments. This page is intentionally left blank. It is intended to be a blank page. Pay technicians at the West Virginia USPFO attempted to help take care of some of the National Guard soldiers’ pay problems. They were told by personnel at DFAS-Indianapolis not to get involved because the active Army finance offices had primary responsibility for correcting the unit’s pay issues. Eventually, the sergeant was ordered to travel to the finance office at Camp Doha, Kuwait, to get its assistance. As illustrated in the following map, a soldier had to set aside his in-theatre duties to attempt to fix the problems. The sergeant left Uzbekistan for the 4-day trip to Kuwait. He first flew from Uzbekistan to Oman in a C-130 ambulatory aircraft (carrying wounded soldiers) From Oman, he flew to Masirah Island. From Masira Island, he had a 45-minute drive to Camp Doha. At Camp D Qatar, a reserve pay finance unit was sent from the U.S. to deal with the reserve component soldiers’ pay issues. The sergeant then flew back to Uzbekistan. The sergeant delivered a box of supporting documents used to input data into the system. He worked with the finance office personnel at Camp Doha to enter the pertinent data on each member of his battalion into DJMS-RC. The total travel time was 16 hours. On his flight between Oman and Uzbekistan, the sergeant’s plane took enemy fire and was forced to return to Oman. No injuries were reported. The next day, he left the Kuwait International Airport and flew to Camp Snoopy in Qatar. Oman and returned safely to Uzbekistan. While guidance that permits both Army Guard and active Army military pay personnel to enter transactions for mobilized Army Guard soldiers provides flexibility in serving the soldiers, we found indications that it also contributed to soldiers being passed between the active Army and Army Guard servicing locations. For example, at another of our case study locations, we were told that several mobilized soldiers sought help in resolving active duty pay problems from theactive Army’s mobilization station finance office at Fort Knox. active Army locations directed the soldiers back to the USPFO. Army Regulation 135-381 provides that Army Guard soldiers who are incapacited as a result of injury, illness, or disease that occured while on active duty for more than 30 consecutive days are eligible for continued health benefits. With medical extension status, soldiers are entitled to continue to receive active duty pays, allowances, and medical benefits while under a physician’s care. We also found procedures were not clear on how to ensure timely processing of active duty medical extensions. Four soldiers were eligible for continued active duty pay and associated medical benefits due to their involvement in Operation Enduring Freedom. Although these injuries precluded them from resuming their civilian jobs, they experienced significant pay problems as well as problems in receiving needed medical care. All four soldiers experienced pay disruptions because existing guidance was not clear on actions needed to ensure that these injuries were treated properly. The soldiers' pay problems were a result of the lack of clearly defined implementing procedures in this area, the authors say. soldiers were retained on active duty medical extensions. One of the soldiers told us, “People did not know who was responsible for what. No one knew who to contact or what paperwork was needed….” As a result, all four have experienced gaps in receiving active duty pay and associated medical benefits while they remained under a physician’s care for injuries received while on their original active duty tour. Four soldiers who were injured while mobilized in Afghanistan for Operation Enduring Freedom told us that customer service was poor and no one knew what to do. one was really looking after their interest or even cared about them. These problems resulted in numerous personal and financial difficulties for these soldiers. “Not having this resolved means that my family has had to make greater sacrifices and it leaves them in an unstable environment. This has caused great stress on my family that may lead to divorce.” “My orders ran out while awaiting surgery and the care center tried to deny me care. My savings account was reduced to nearly 0 because I was also not getting paid while I waited” at Walter Reed and my congressman. My orders were finally cut. In the end, I was discharged 2 weeks before my care should have been completed because the second amendment to my orders never came. The whole mess was blamed on the ‘state’ and nothing was ever done to fix it.” One sergeant was required to stay at Womack, the medical facility at Fort Bragg, North Carolina, while on medical extension. His home was in New Jersey. He had not been home for about 20. months, since his call to active duty. While he was recovering from his injuries, his wife was experiencing a high-risk pregnancy and depended upon her husband’s medical coverage. Even though she lived in New Jersey, she scheduled her medical appointments near Fort Bragg to be with her husband. The sergeant submitted multiple requests to extend his active duty medical extension status because the paperwork kept getting lost. Lapses in obtaining approvals for continued active dutyMedical extension status caused the sergeant’S military medical benefits and his activeduty pay to be cut. be stopped several times. He told us that because of gaps in his medical extension orders, he was denied medical coverage, resulting in three delays in scheduling a surgery. He also told us he received medical bills associated with his wife’s hospitalization for the delivery of their premature baby as a result of these gaps in coverage. We found several instances in which existing DOD and Army regulations and guidance in the pay and allowance area are outdated and conflict with more current legislative and DOD guidance. Some existing guidance reflected pay policies and procedures dating back to Operations Desert. Having out-of-date requirements in current regulations may contribute to confusion and customer service issues. The National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 1998 replaced the basic allowance for quarters and the variable housing allowance. However, volume 7A, chapter 27 of the DOD FMR, dated February 2002, still refers to the basic Allowance for Quarters and variable Housing Allowance. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. the variable housing allowance. The act also replaced foreign duty pay with hardship duty pay. Yet, chapter 8 of Army Regulation 37-104-4 (Military Pay and Allowances Policy and Procedures – Active Component) still refers to foreign dutypay. Further, current DFAS and Army mobilization procedural guidance directs active Army finance units to use transaction codes to start soldiers’ hardship duty pays that are incorrect. However, DOD amended FMR, Volume 7A, chapter 17, to establish a new “designated area” hardshipduty pay with rates of $50, $100, or $150 per month, depending on the area. December 19, 2002, directed mobilization site finance offices to use transaction codes that resulted in soldiers receiving a prior type of hardship duty pay that was eliminated in the December 2001 revisions. 91 of 100 Mississippi military police unit soldiers deployed to Cuba to guard al Qaeda prisoners were paid incorrect amounts. Army Regulation 37-104-4, dated September 1994, was still in effect at the end of our case study locations. We found that because the active Army finance office followed the outdated DFAS guidance for starting hardship duty pays. audit work, provides that mobilized Army Guard soldiers are to be paid through the active Army pay system. This procedure, in effect during the mobilizations to support Operations Desert Shield and Desert Storm, was changed in 1995. In 1995, it was agreed that Army Guard personnel would no longer be moved to the active duty pay system, DJMS-AC, when mobilized to active duty. Lacking sufficient numbers of well-trained, competent military pay professionals can undermine the effectiveness of even a world-class integrated pay and personnel system. There are no DOD or Army requirements for military pay personnel to receive training on pay entitlements and processing requirements associated with mobilized Army Guard soldiers. Pay technicians did not understand how to properly code data on the soldiers’ dependents status, which is used to determine housing allowances. Army Guard offers training for their military pay technicians, but we found that there was no overall monitoring of Army Guard pay personnel training. The lack of training on the importance of pay on the unit commander may have contributed to the problems we identified. DJMS-RC does not contain edit checks to reject payments over the threshold amounts or to require review and approval of payments over these amounts prior to their final processing. For example, at one of the case study units we audited, one soldier received an erroneous electronic payment totaling $20,110 without prior approval. In addition, our analysis showed 76 other payroll-related payments did not have edit checks for review or approval prior to final processing in DJMS- RC. For more information, visit the Department of Defense’s website. during the period October 1, 2001, through March 31, 2003, of over $7,000 (net) each that were paid by DJMS-RC. The Electronic Fund Transfer Excess Dollar Listing is printed after the payment is made. timely detection of errors is critical to help ensure that erroneous payments are recovered and that fraud does not occur. The system does not have system edits to prevent large debts from being assessed without review and approval prior to being processed. Our case studies identified individuals who received debt notices in excess of $30,000. At five of the 6 units audited, we identified 86 individuals who had total pay and allowance debts of approximately $300,000 as of March 31, 2003. A sergeant with the Colorado Army National Guard, Special Forces, encountered numerous severe pay problems associated with his mobilization to active duty. The sergeant’s active duty pay and other pay and allowances should have been stopped on December 4, 2002. However, when he was released from active duty, he was paid with no explanation. The sergeant’s mobilization orders called him to active duty for 730 days and not the 365 days that he was actually mobilized. The Army area servicing finance office at the demobilization station, Fort Campbell, did not enter the release from active duty date into DJMS-RC. The sergeant continued to improperly receive payments, as if he were still on active duty, for 2 and a half months totaling over $8,000. He was one of 34 soldiers in the company whose pay continued after their release. In February 2003, pay personnel at the Colorado USPFO created a transaction to cancel the tour instead of processing an adjustment to amend the stop date consistent with the date on the Release from Active Duty Order. When this occurred, DJMS-RC automatically processed a reversal of 11 months of the sergeant’s pay and allowances that he earned while mobilized from March 1, 2002, through February 4, 2003. This created a debt in the amount of $39,699 on the soldier's pay record. In May 2003, DFAS-Indianapolis erroneously processed a payment transaction instead of a debt correction transaction in DJMS-RC. This created a payment of $20,111, which was electronically deposited to the sergeant’s bank account without explanation. A debt of $30,454 still appeared on his Leave and Earnings Statement. About 9 months after his demobilization, the sergeant's unpaid debt balance was reportedly $26,559, but the actual amount of his debt had not yet been determined. as of September 2003. Under current procedures, if a soldier is determined to owe the government money while on active duty, he is assessed a debt and informed of this assessment with a notation of an “Unpaid Debt Balance” in the remarks section of his Leave and Earnings Statement. A soldier at one of our case study units told us that he was not notified in advance of his receipt of his leave and earnings statement that he had a large debt. In addition, we found that current procedures used to notify soldiers of large payroll-related debts did not facilitate customer service. debt assessment and that two- thirds of his pay would be garnished. As a result, he was not able to plan his financial affairs to avoid late payments on his car and other loans. This debt assessment notification procedure is even more egregious when debts, particularly large debts, are assessed in error. For example, at our case study units, we found that the only notice several soldiers received when they were erroneously assessed payroll debts was an “Unpaid Debt Balance” buried in the pay stub. The DOD has a major system enhancement effort under way in this area. The Defense Integrated Military Human Resources System (DIMHRS) is ultimately intended to replace more than 80 legacy systems. DIMH RS is described as the largest personnel and pay system in the world in both scope and number of people served. One of the major benefits expected is “service members receiving accurate and timely pay and benefits.” A $39,489.28 debt is shown in figure 8 of their Leave and Earnings Statements. functions across the department by 2007. In 2002, DOD estimated that integrated personnel and pay functions of DIMHRS would be fully deployed by fiscal year 2007. By the end of fiscal year 2003, DOD reporting shows that it will have invested over 5 years and about $360 million in conceptualizing and planning the system. However, our review of the fiscal year 2004 DOD Information Technology budget request shows that DOD is requesting $122 million and $95 million, respectively, for fiscal years 2004 and 2005. The original DIMHRS project completion milestone date has slipped about 15 months. Of the 152 soldiers mobilized in this unit, 54 soldiers were either overpaid, underpaid, or received entitled active duty pays and allowances over 30 days late. The personal toll that these pay problems have had on mobilized soldiers and their families cannot be readily measured, but clearly may have a profound effect on reenlistment and retention. The need for such actions is increasingly imperative in light of the current extended deployment of Army Guard soldiers. pay and allowance entitlements throughout their active duty mobilizations. Identify and evaluate options for improving customer service provided to mobilized Army Guard soldiers. Review the pay problems we identified at our six case study units to identify and resolve any outstanding pay issues for the affected soldiers. Evaluate the feasibility of using the personnel-to-pay interface as a means to proactively alert pay personnel of actions needed to start entitled active duty pays and allowances. The Army Guard is a joint service of the U.S. Army and the National Guard. or all of the current manual monthly pays, including special duty assignment pay, foreign language proficiency pay, hardship duty pay, and HALO pay. Evaluate the feasibility of using the JUSTIS warning screen to help eliminate inadvertent omissions of required monthly manual pay inputs. Evaluates the feasibility. of redesigning Leave and Earnings Statements to provide soldiers. with a clear explanation of all pay and. Earnings statements to. provide soldiers with aclear explanation ofAll pay and earnings statements. Evaluating the. feasibility of eliminating the use of the “other credits” for processing hardship duty (designated areas) and special duty assignments pay. allowances received so that they can readily determine if they received all and only entitled pays. Evaluate the feasibility of establishing an edit check and requiring approval before processing any debt assessments above a specified dollar amount. As part of the effort currently under way to reform DOD’s pay and personnel systems—referred to as DIMHRS—incorporate a complete understanding of the Army Guard pay problems as documented in this report into the requirements development for this system. In developing D IMHRS, consider the need for an Army Guard edit check. a complete reengineering of the processes and controls and ensure that this reengineering effort deals not only with the systems aspect of the problems we identified, but also with the human capital and process aspects. In its written comments, DOD concurred with our recommendations and identified actions to address the identified deficiencies. DOD’s response outlined some actions already taken, others that are underway, and further planned actions with respect to our recommendations. If effectively implemented, these actions should substantially resolve the deficiencies pointed out in our report. unless you publicly announce its contents earlier, we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days from its date. At that time, we will send copies of the report to interested congressional committees. We will make copies available to others upon request. In addition, the report will be available at the following sites: www.cnn.com, www.dailymail.co.uk, and www.theguardian.com. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. The Colorado Army National Guard’s B Company, 5th Battalion, 19th Special Forces, was mobilized to active duty on orders for a 2-year period. The unit was mobilized at Fort Knox and subsequently deployed in Afghanistan, Uzbekistan, and surrounding areas to search for Taliban and al Qaeda terrorists as part of Operation Enduring Freedom. No charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staff have any questions regarding this report, please contact me at (202) 512-9505. returned to Fort Campbell for demobilization and was released from active duty on December 4, 2002. The majority of soldiers from Colorado’s B Company experienced some sort of pay problem during one or more of the three phases of their active duty mobilization. Overall, all 62 soldiers with the company had at least one pay problem associated with their mobilization. These pay problems included not receiving pay or not being paid at the end of the mobilization. A timeline of the unit's actions associated to its mobilization under Operation Enduring Freedom is shown in figure 9. 56 soldiers did not receive certain pay and allowance entitlements at all, or within 30 days of their initial mobilization. 61 soldiers either didn't receive the hostile fire pay or other “high-risk location” pays they were entitled to receive based on their deployment in Uzbekistan and Afghanistan. 53 soldiers either improperly continued to receive hostile firepay after leaving high-risk locations. For some, overpayments of pays and allowances were found, as well as improper pay and allowances payments. overseas or continued to receive paychecks, as if they were still on active duty status, for over 2 months beyond their release from active duty. In total, we identified estimated overpayments of $494,000, underpayments, and late payments of $64,000. In addition, in trying to correct over payments associated with Colorado B Company’s departure from high-risk locations, the Defense Finance and Accounting Service (DFAS) billed 34 of the soldiers. the unit’s soldiers an average of $48,000 each, for a largely erroneous total debt of over $1.6 million. Many soldiers with the company characterized the service they received from the state United States Property and Fiscal Office (USPFO) and the active Army finance offices as “poor’ or “openly hostile” Some of the soldiers in the unit expressed significant dissatisfaction with the time and effort they, or their spouses were required to spend attempting to identify and correct their pay. special forces soldiers to address pay problems, in some cases, distracted them from important mission operations. In addition, several soldiers told us that the numerous pay problems they encountered would play a major role in their decision whether to reenlist. According to several soldiers from Colorado’s B Company, the combined effect of recurring pay problems adversely affects morale and may have an adverse effect on a soldier's willingness to continue his military career. The soldiers also reported receiving poor payroll customer service during their active duty tours. 56 out of 62 soldiers did not receive certain pays and allowances at all, or in a timely manner, after being activated on December 5, 2001. The underpayments and late payments resulted in adverse financial repercussions for a number of the unit’s members and their families. For example, 16 of the 62 soldiers in B Company received the wrong type of hardship duty pay, formerly called Foreign Duty Pay, in addition to the correct hardship duty location pay while they were deployed in Afghanistan. 39 of the unit’s 62 soldiers continued to receive active duty pay and allowances, some until February 14, 2003. The unit received orders to demobilize at Fort Campbell rather than Fort Knox where they originally mobilized. As a result, 34 soldiers received notice on their Leave and Earnings Statements that they owed debts for the 11 months of their active duty tour—an average of $48,000 per soldier, for a total debt of $1.6 million. We were told that it would take approximately 4 to 5 years for the soldiers to pay off these debts. administrator stated that many of these soldiers received amended orders after their initial mobilization when it was determined that they were not deployable for a variety of reasons, such as health or family problems. The overpayments occurred because the Maryland Army Guard command was not informed by either unit personnel or the active component that individuals (1) did not deploy or (2) were released from active duty early. The Maryland Army Guards command initiated amendment orders to stop the active duty pays when it became aware of the problem. The orders were not generated in time for the USPFO to stop active duty pay in the system. account, we determined that he continued to receive active duty pay and allowances for an entire year. The unit administrator and Maryland Army Guard command, along with the USPFO pay officials, were not sure why the amendment order was never processed. They believe that the amendment fell through the cracks due to the general confusion and the limited personnel processing the mass mobilizations after September 11, 2001. The soldier mobilized with the unit and was deployed for the entire year that he was paid, the unit administrator said. 42 soldiers from the unit were underpaid their entitled family separation allowance when they mobilized. The underpayments occurred as a result of Maryland USPFO military pay officials’ errors in calculating the start and stop dates for this allowance. Several soldiers did not receive the correct type of basic training. The Army Guard command generated an amendment on August 21, 2003, to reinstate the original order to avoid future questions regarding the soldier’s tour of duty. The amendment was passed by the Maryland Army Guard Command and signed into law on August 22, 2003. allowance for housing after being mobilized as specified in the DOD FMR, Volume 7A, chapter 26. We were unable to determine specific causes and amounts of all the unit’s problems associated with the basic allowance for housing because the unit had remobilized in July 2003. Some of the historical records relating to housing entitlements applicable to the prior mobilization could not be located. Based on our inquiries, we determined that some soldiers were underpaid their housing allowance because the Maryland unit had been mobilized in 2003. USPFO military pay officials entered the incorrect date for the tour and therefore shortened the unit’s soldiers’ allowance by 1 day. Other soldiers did not receive the correct amount for this allowance as a result of different interpretations of how to enter “dependent” information provided on housing allowance application forms. According to personnel officials, married soldiers are required to write in their spouses’ names as dependents on Form 5960 in order to receive the higher housing allowance amount. However, guidance did not clearly specify that simply checking the box indicating that they are married is not sufficient support. to receive the higher housing allowance (with dependents) rate. As a result, several soldiers’ dependent information was not loaded into the personnel system correctly, and they were paid a single rate housing allowance instead of the higher married rate allowance. Other soldiers did not receive the correct housing allowance because they did not turn in complete forms and documentation to initiate the correct allowance rate or were late in turning in documents. For example, one soldier, who appeared to have submitted his lease agreement 6 days after being called to active duty, did not receiving the correcthousing allowance amount. for the first 2 months of active duty. As of March 30, 2003, the soldier had not received the correct housing allowance for October and November 2001. Another soldier did not receive the correct amount of housing allowance after his mobilization and complained to the unit administrator. Seven months after his initial mobilization to active duty, finance officials agreed to pay the soldier back pay for his housing allowance underpayments. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. Finance officials at Fort Belvoir, Virginia, inadvertently entered a transaction to collect the entire amount of the housing allowance previously paid to the soldier. Sixty-two soldiers from the unit were overpaid their entitled subsistence allowance by active duty officials. As summarized in table 22, we identified a number of pay problems associated with five different types of active duty pays and allowances associated with the unit’s deployment. The problems were resolved by paying the soldier a “catch-up” housing allowance payment. Army finance personnel while stationed at the Pentagon during the period of December 15, 2001, through December 31, 2001. Prior to this period, the soldiers were stationed at Fort Stewart and were not provided lodging or mess. When the unit was redeployed to the Pentagon, mess facilities became available. However, active Army finance personnel did not reduce the unit’s subsistence allowance rate to reflect the available mess facilities. According to DOD FMR, Volume 7A, chapter 25, enlisted soldiers are not entitled to the full subsistence allowance when mess facilities are provided. Soldiers who perform duties in “designated areas” for over 30 days are entitled to hardship duty pay. The FMR specifies Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, as a designated area and provides payment of $50 a month to soldiers serving there. The soldiers were either underpaid, or were late in receiving their entitled hardship duty pays. In accordance with DOD FMR Volume 7A, chapter 17, the soldiers were paid $50 per month for 30 days in Guantanamo Bay. In 2002, three soldiers who received mobilization orders left Fort Stewart and traveled with the 115th Military Police Company to Guantanamo. While deployed to Cuba, the three soldiers were mistakenly paid the old type of hardship duty pay. The 200th Military Police Company returned to Fort Eustis around the end of August 2002 to begin the demobilization process. The soldiers did not receive all their entitled hardship duty pays. Furthermore, the hardshipduty pays they did receive were more than 30 days late. We are happy to clarify that this was not the case and that the soldiers were paid as part of the Army’s regular hardship pay program. did not identify any pay issues associated with the unit’s soldiers who were released from active duty on September 30, 2002. However, as shown in table 23, we did identify three soldiers who continued to receive active duty pay after their early release. Specifically, the three soldiers from the unit returned from Cuba, demobilized at Fort Stewart, and were released on July 10, 2002, while their original orders showed a September 30,. 2002, release date. They continued to receiving active duty Pay. The 49th Military Police Headquarters and Headquarters Detachment (HHD) was mobilized to active duty for a period not to exceed 24 months. The unit performed its active duty mission at Fort Lewis, where it provided base security as part of the military police force. The 49th MP HHD mobilized at its home station, Pittsburg, California, and then proceeded to its designated mobilization station, Fort Lewis on October 12, 2001. Fort Stewart did not provide the amended orders with the earlier release date in time to stop the pay.and allowances through July 15, 2002. of Operation Noble Eagle. The unit was demobilized from active duty at Fort Lewis on July 28, 2002. Almost all soldiers from the 49th Military Police Company experienced some sort of pay problem during one or more phases of the active duty mobilization. Overall, 50 of the 51 soldiers with the unit had at least one pay problem associated with their mobilization to active duty in support of Operation Noble Eagles. These pay problems included pay problems with food, shelter, medical care, and other benefits. not receiving pays and allowances at all (underpayments), receiving some pays and allowance over 30 days after entitlement (late payments), and the overpayment of allowances. 48 soldiers did not receive certain pay and allowances within 30 days of their initial mobilization entitlement. In total, we identified estimated overpayments of $17,000, underpayment of $1,300, and late payments of $67,000 associated with the pay problems we found. We found that 41 soldiers didn't receive the pay and allowance they were entitled to receive. Of the $17,000 in overpayments, we found that less than $100 was subsequently collected from the soldiers. We found a lack of sufficient numbers of knowledgeable staff. In addition, after-the- fact detective controls were not in place, including a reconciliation of pay and personnel records. Currently, as a matter of practice, pay and. personnel representatives from the USPFO conduct a manual reconciliation between the pay. and personnel system records. approximately every every year. The U.S. Navy is the largest military service in the world. The USPFO does not have the resources required to carry out such reconciliations each month. The purpose of the reconciliation is to ensure that for common data elements, the pay and personnel systems contain the same data. As summarized in table 25, we identified a number of pay problems associated with the unit’s mobilization to active duty. Failures to enter transactions or late entry of transactions needed to start active duty pays by Army GuardUSPFO military pay personnel and by active Army. military pay personnel at the unit’s mobilization station were the initial cause of the pay problems. In total, 48 out of 51 soldiers of the 49th Military Police Company did not receive certain pay and allowances and incentive pays at all, or not at all. Neither organization was prepared for the sheer volume of pay transactions associated with mobilizing soldiers to active duty, according to Army Guard and active Army officials. In addition, the California USPFO and the Fort Lewis Finance Office did not have sufficient numbers of knowledgeable personnel. did not receive them within 30 days after being mobilized on October 2, 2001. The types of pay entitlements either not paid at all or paid late associated with the unit’s initial mobilization included basic pay, basic allowance for subsistence, and family separation allowance. According to DFAS reserve component mobilization procedures; the California USPFO was responsible for initiating these pays. However, a late payments during the mobilization phase primarily resulted from military pay personnel's lack of understanding of their responsibility for initiating active duty pays. USPFO military pay official mistakenly instructed the unit to take its pay data to the mobilization station to enter transactions to start active duty pays. The USPFO did not start the active duty pay and allowances at that time because a copy machine was not available to make copies. As a result, the responsibility for initiating this allowance was improperly passed to the active Army finance office at the Fort Lewis mobilization station. The Fort Lewis finance office has since apologized for the mistake. The U.S. Army says it is investigating the incident. Finance office lacked sufficient numbers of knowledgeable military pay staff to expeditiously enter the large volume of transactions necessary to start active duty pay entitlements. One of the assigned pay technicians was not familiar with DJMS-RC and consequently entered data incorrectly for some of the unit’s soldiers. The company commander for the unit told us that he was frustrated with the level of customer support his unit received as it moved through the initial mobilization process. Late, under- and over-payments of foreign language proficiency to the 49th Military Police Company's soldiers primarily resulted from inadequate data entry. allowances for mobilized Army Guard soldiers during the period from October 1, 2001, through March 31, 2003, that were in excess of (overpayment) or less than (underpayment) the entitled payment. We considered as late payments any active duty pays or allowances paid to the soldier over 30 days after the date on which the soldier was entitled to receive such pays and allowances. We provided the support for the pay problems we identified to appropriate officials, at each of our case study locations so that they could fully develop and resolve any additional amounts owed. will prepare a standard information flyer to be given to all mobilizing reservists. The flyer will address entitlements as well as sources of pay support. The existing centralized information sources on individual soldiers pay will be expanded. The Army and DFAS will continue to work the correction of any specific cases identified as still open for these units. The National Guard Financial Services Center is working with each of the identified units and supporting USPFOs to ensure all pay issues are resolved. High altitude, low opening jump pay is scheduled for implementation for April 2004.