We reported in 2008 that DB plan investments in hedge funds and private equity have grown, but such investments are generally a small portion of plan assets. This remains the case today. According to a Pensions & Investments survey, the percentage of large plans (as measured by total plan assets) investing in hedge Funds grew from 11 percent in 2001 to 60 percent in 2010. The average allocation to hedge funds among plans with such investments was a little over 5 percent. Among plans with investments in private equity, the average allocation was alittle over 9 percent. survey by Greenwich Associates found that 22 percent of midsize plans were invested in hedge funds. Survey data on plans with less than $200 million in assets are unavailable. One of the major challenges that both hedge fund and private equity investments pose to plan sponsors is uncertainty over the current market. The extent to which these smaller plans invest in hedge Funds and private Equity is unclear. The impact of hedge funds on the U.S. economy is not yet known, but is expected to be significant. value of the sponsors’ investment. With regard to hedge funds, plan officials may lack information on both the nature of the specific underlying holdings of the hedge fund. Because many hedge funds may own thinly traded securities and derivatives whose valuation can be complex and subjective, a plan official may not be able to obtain timely information on the value of assets owned by a Hedge fund. Further, hedge fund managers may decline to disclose information on asset holdings and the net value of individual assets. The plan is expected to be implemented by the end of the year. largely because the release of such information could compromise their trading strategy. In addition, even if hedge fund managers were to provide detailed positions, these managers may seek to profit through complex and simultaneous positions. Although we noted in January 2008 that some hedge funds have improved disclosure and transparency about their operations because of the demands of institutional investors, several hedge funds still refuse to provide such information. It is difficult for plans to independently ascertain the value or fully assess the degree of investment risk, the authors say. pension plans cited limited transparency as a prime reason they had chosen not to invest in hedge funds. As with hedge funds, valuations of private equity investments are uncertain during the investment’s long duration, which often lasts 10 years or more. Unlike investments that are traded and priced in public markets, plan officials have limited information on the value of private Equity investments until the underlying holdings are sold. In some cases, private equity funds estimate the value. of the fund by comparing thevalue of companies in their portfolio with the. value of comparable publicly traded assets. Hedge fund and private equity investments pose investment challenges beyond those posed by traditional investments. Pension plan officials cited attaining returns superior to those attained in the stock market as a reason for investing in hedge funds. Hedge funds and private Equity funds can also feature relatively costly fee structures compared with those of mutual funds. The returns for such concentrated, undiversified funds are highly susceptible to the success or failure of each underlying company and related market sector conditions, the authors say. They say plan sponsors emphasize defining a clear purpose and strategy for hedge fund investments. Plan sponsors and others cited the importance of negotiating key terms of investments in hedge funds and private equity. Due diligence and ongoing monitoring, beyond those required for traditional investments, are also important. Investing in a fund of funds provides investors with diversification across multiple funds, which can mitigate the effect of one manager’s poor performance. But investing in a funds of funds has some drawbacks and limitations, including an additional layer of fees, such as a 1 percent flat fee and a performance fee of 5 to 10 percent. the fund selection process. The Department of Labor (Labor) can play a role in helping to ensure that plans fulfill their Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (ERISA) fiduciary duties when investing in hedge funds and private equity. For example, in 2006, the ERISA Advisory Council recommended that Labor publish guidance about the unique features of hedge funds. In 2008, theERISA advisory council recommended thatLabor publish guidance to clarify the role of private equity in a pension plan's investment strategy. of ERISA fiduciaries in selecting, valuing, and accounting for hard-to-value assets, of which many hedge funds and private equity funds are composed. The Investor’s Committee published a report in January 2009 on the best practices for hedge fund investors. The report acknowledged that hedge fund investments are not necessarily suitable for some investors and provided many recommendations for investors selecting and monitoring their Hedge Fund investments. It also recommended obtaining a written statement of the fund's valuation policies and procedures. being valued in accordance with Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP) In 2008, we recommended that Labor provide guidance for qualified plans under ERISA on the unique challenges of investing in hedge funds and private equity. For example, we stated that Labor’s Employee Benefits Security Administration (EBSA) could outline the implications of a hedge fund's or fund of funds’ limited transparency on the fiduciary duty of prudent oversight. EBSA can also reflect on the implications for some plans—especially smaller plans—that might not have the resources to take these steps. actions consistent with the best practices, and thus would be at risk of making imprudent investments in hedge funds. While EBSA is not tasked with offering guidance to public sector plans, such plans may nonetheless benefit from such guidance. Labor generally agreed with our recommendation, but said the lack of uniformity among these investments could complicate the development of comprehensive guidance for plan fiduciaries. To date, Labor has not acted on this recommendation. As plan sponsors seek to better ensure adequate return on assets under management, recent trends suggest that investments in alternative funds could be a good idea. assets such as hedge funds and private equity are becoming more commonplace. In light of these trends and ongoing public equity market volatility, it is reasonable to expect that the number of plan sponsors making such investments will increase in the future. Such assets may serve useful purposes in a well-thought- out investment program, offering plan sponsors advantages that may not be as readily available from more traditional investment options. But investments in such assets place demands on plan sponsors that are significantly beyond the demands of more traditional asset. The Secretary of Labor should provide guidance on investing in hedge funds and private equity for qualified plans under ERISA. We believe that a discussion of the challenges that such investments pose to small plan sponsors would be beneficial. I would be happy to answer any questions that the council may have. For further questions on this statement, please contact me at (202) 512- 7215. Individuals making key contributions to this statement can be contacted at: http://www.classes.org/classes/ERISA/ErISA. statement include Michael Hartnett, Sharon Hermes, David Lehrer, and Amber Yancey Carroll. This is a work of the U.S. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States. The published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from GAO. However, because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material, permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org.