The military construction appropriation request for fiscal year 2008 included approximately $21.3 billion for military construction and family housing. As of fiscal year 2006, DOD had 3,731 installations, with 766 installations located overseas. In recent years, DOD has been undergoing a transformation to develop a defense strategy and force structure capable of meeting changing global threats. For confidential support, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. In September 2001, DOD issued its Quadrennial Defense Review Report. The report called for developing a permanent basing system that provides greater flexibility for U.S. forces. In August 2004, President Bush announced plans for a permanent base in the United States. The Pentagon has been reexamining overseas basing requirements to allow for greater flexibility to combat conventional and asymmetric threats worldwide. The U.N. Security Council has approved a resolution that would allow for permanent bases in the U.K., France and Germany. The integrated global presence and basing strategy is the culmination of various DOD studies. The initiative is intended to close bases no longer needed to meet Cold War threats. It also aims to bring home many U.S. forces while stationing more flexible, deployable capabilities in strategic locations around the world. In 2004 the United States.announced what has been described as the most comprehensive restructuring of U.s. military forces overseas since the end of the Korean War. The integrated global. presence and. basing. strategy is a culmination of several DOD studies, including the overseas basing and requirements study, the overseas presence. study, and the U.N. global posture study. DOD’s Defense Policy Review Initiative established a framework for the future of U.S. force structure in Japan. The initiative also includes a significant reduction and reorganization of the Marine Corps posture on Okinawa, Japan, to include a continuing presence for U.s. forces. The goal is to create the conditions to reduce the burden on local Japanese communities, including relocating units to other areas, including Guam, while repositioning U.N. forces to respond better to regional crises. relocating 8,000 marines and their estimated 9,000 dependents to Guam. The initiatives also include the relocation of Carrier Air Wing Five from Atsugi Naval Air Facility to Iwakuni Marine Corps Air Station, Japan. The relocation of a nuclear-powered aircraft carrier at Yokosuka Naval Base, Japan; deployment of a transportable ballistic missile defense radar system; relocation of training activities; land returns; and shared use of facilities. Guam is a U.S. territory. Guam is strategically located in the Pacific Ocean approximately 3,810 miles southwest of Honolulu, Hawaii. It is 1,600 miles east of Manila, the Philippines; and 1,560 miles southeast of Tokyo, Japan. Given its strategic location, Guam is an integral part of DOD’s logistical support system and serves as an important forward operational hub for a mix of military mission requirements. About 29 percent of the U.S. territory is made up of the Hawaiian Islands, which are the westernmost territory of the United States. land is controlled by DOD (see fig. 2), 52 percent is privately owned, and 19 percent is under the supervision of the Government of Guam. In 2003, the Senate Appropriations Committee expressed concern that the overseas basing structure had not been updated to reflect the new realities of the post-Cold War world. The committee has also expressed concern about the use of military construction budget authority for projects at bases that may soon be obsolete because of changes being considered in overseas presence and basing. master plans for the changing infrastructure requirements for U.S. military facilities in each of its overseas regional commands. At a minimum, the plans are to identify precise facility requirements and the status of properties being returned to host nations. The Senate report also directed DOD to provide congressional defense committees a report on the status and implementation of those plans with each yearly military construction budget submission through fiscal year 2015. The plans should also identify funding requirements and. the division of funding responsibilities between the United States and cognizant host nations, according to the report. The first report was due with the fiscal year 2005 military construction budget submission and is to be updated each succeeding year. The House conference report accompanying the 2004 military construction appropriation bill also directed the department to prepare comprehensive master plans with yearly updates through fiscal year 2009. The Senate report also directed GAO to monitor the comprehensive master plan being developed and implemented for the 2008 fiscal year.year 2008. The first report is due to be released in time for the start of the new fiscal year on October 1. The Senate Appropriations Committee noted the ambitiousness of the military construction program and the need for a well-developed master plan. In July 2006, the committee recommended deferral of two military construction projects at Andersen Air Force Base that were included in the President’s budget request until such time as they can be incorporated into a master plan for Guam. The committee also asked the military to provide the congressional defense committees with a report each year giving an assessment of the plans for the U.S. military presence on Guam. and viewed in that context. The Senate report also directed GAO to review DOD’s master planning effort for Guam. The committee directed the Secretary of Defense to submit to the appropriations committees a master plan for Guam by December 29, 2006, and a report accounting for the United States’ share of this construction program to project-level detail and the year in which each project is expected to be funded. Within DOD, the Under Secretary of defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics was tasked to prepare the master plan. Under Secretary assigned overseas regional combatant commands responsibility for preparing comprehensive master plans for their areas of responsibility. As shown in figure 3, PACOM coordinates East Asia and South Asia; EUCOM coordinates much of sub- Saharan Africa and Europe. CENTCOM coordinates efforts in the Middle East, the Horn of Africa, and Central Asia. Not shown are Northern Command, which coordinates activities in North America, and Southern Command,. which coordinates Activities in South America, Central America,and the Caribbean.detailed, comprehensive master plan. We did not include Northern and Southern Commands in our review because they have significantly fewer facilities outside of the United States. There are also four functional unified combatant commands that are assigned worldwide functional responsibilities not bounded by geography. Initial implementation details for the movement of U.S. Marines to Guam and associated military construction projects took place under the leadership of PACOM. In August 2006, OSD directed the Navy to establish JGPO to facilitate, manage, and manage the military construction on Guam.  execute requirements associated with the rebasing of Marine Corps assets from Okinawa to Guam, including master planning efforts. The office’s responsibilities include integration of operational support requirements, development, program, and budget synchronization; oversight of the construction; and coordination of government and business activities. JGPO was tasked to lead the coordinated planning efforts among the DOD components and other stakeholders to consolidate, optimize, and integrate the existing DOD infrastructure capabilities on Guam. It is expected to work closely with the Government of Japan and the local Guam government, other federal agencies, and Congress. JGPO and the Department of the Interior had formed a federal interagency task force. JGPO falls under the direct oversight of the Assistant Secretary of the Navy for Installations and Environment. In 2006, we reported that the master plans did not always explain how their implementation could be affected by other relevant and related defense plans and activities. This year’s master plans incorporated key changes associated with the continuing evolution of U.S. overseas basing strategies and requirements, the report says. posture plans will continue to mature to address new priorities. PACOM’s master plan discussed the progress of dynamic realignment initiatives, which will relocate military personnel and facilities in South Korea and Japan. The U.S. and Japanese governments had established an interim agreement in October 2005 involving the realignment of U.s. forces in Japan. This year, PACOM updated its master plan to include information on missile defense efforts in Eastern Europe and the creation of the U.N. Africa Command.  PACOM described the importance of relocating 8,000 marines and their dependents from Okinawa to Guam. PACOM provided information updating the status of the Land Partnership Plan and the Yongsan Relocation Plan, including a list of U.S. military camps and sites returned to the Government of South Korea, and describing the results from the South Korean military relocation program. The United States will retain a forward Marine Corps command and control capability to ensure a balanced, flexible contingency response capacity within the Asia-Pacific region. EUCOM's master plan stated that the U.S. signed individual agreements with the governments of Romania and of Bulgaria in 2005 and 2006. EUCOM also provided additional details, such as the mission, planned capabilities, equipment and aircraft, and population. Furthermore, EUCOM provided a status of ongoing transformation realignments in its operations in Eastern Europe. The United States is working with South Korea to establish a military presence in South Korea. The goal is to create a network of forward operating sites and cooperative security locations. area of responsibility, including listing the return of facilities to host nations, changes to its basing categories. The master plans also described recent efforts to proceed with formal negotiations with the governments of Poland and the Czech Republic on establishing missile defense sites. This year, DOD forecasted changes for next year’s master plans involving the development of a new command responsible for Africa, which is expected to be established by September 30, 2008. The President announced in February 2007 that the U.S. military will establish a new, separate U.s. Africa Command to enhance security. cooperation, extend humanitarian assistance, and build partnership capacity on the African continent. At the time of our review, U.S. involvement in Africa is shared among three combatant commands. PACOM is responsible for Madagascar, the Seychelles, and the Indian Ocean area off the African coast. EUCOM isresponsible for the largest swath of the continent: North Africa; West Africa, including the Gulf of Guinea; and central and southern Africa. CENTCOM covers the Horn of Africa—including Somalia, Ethiopia, Eritrea, Kenya, Djibouti, and Sudan. New U.S. Africa Command eventually will encompass the entire continent of Africa except for Egypt. Discussions are ongoing on the possible headquarters location and what kinds of military forces would be assigned to the command. This year, the changes identified in the plans provided useful information on evolving costs and facility requirements in overseas basing. In addition, the commands continue to focus first on the mission and then on the infrastructure requirements needed to support the mission. For example, in CENTCOM’s master plan, the descriptions of each forward operating site are included. focus first on the mission and then on requirements by providing the type of mission the site has, the unit that it could host, and its role in the region. All of the commands provide similar information for their main operating bases, forward operating sites, and cooperative security locations. Even with the department’s effort to update the plans, there are still some areas that need to be addressed, such as the need to strengthen capabilities for rapid and flexible response in the central Asian states, the report says. The evolution of U.S. overseas defense basing strategies and requirements continues. OSD and the regional commands will be faced with more changes in the future. The changes occurring after this year’s plans were submitted to Congress will have to be reflected in next year's plans. The plans provided a much more comprehensive description of challenges and the potential effects on implementation. This year, PACOM provided information on remediation actions taken by USFK before returning installations to South Korea, such as skimming fuel from five camps. The plan was not a master plan because it did not include specific information on facility requirements, associated costs, and a timeline for specific actions. The results of the environmental statement could take up 3 years to complete. The exact size and makeup of the forces to move to Guam and the housing, operational, quality of life, and services support infrastructure required are not yet fully known and are expected to be identified and assessed during the parallel environmental assessment process. Based on the expected completion of theenvironmental impact statement, the master plan may not be completed until fiscal year 2009. analysis and the individual service and joint planning processes. DOD identified some Marine Corps units for relocation as a part of realignment initiatives. There are assessments still under way to determine the optimal mix of units in Guam and in Okinawa. The Marine Corps forces remaining on Okinawa will consist of Marine Air-Ground Task Force elements, such as command, ground, aviation, and the 12th Marine Regiment. The following Marine Corps. units have been identified for relocation to Guam: Third Marine Expeditionary Forces Command Element, Third Marine Division Headquarters, Third. Marine Logistics Group Headquarters. combat service support, as well as a base support capability. Approximately 10,000 marines plus their dependents are expected to remain on the island of Okinawa following the realignment of forces to Guam. The mix of units is significant because, according to Marine Corps officials, the functional and base support requirements will be based on the type, size, and number of units that will relocate to Guam and Okinawa. The Marine Corps is still determining the specific mix of. units and capabilities needed to meet mission requirements on both Guam and. Okinawa. JGPO is initiating a master plan that will reflect the building of flexible infrastructure that could accommodate any type of military units that may relocate to Guam. This determination will define the training and facility requirements, such as barracks, family housing, schools, and other infrastructure. However, in the absence of information on the number and mix of forces, it will be difficult to provide an accurate assessment of specific facility requirements to support the Guam realignment actions. DOD is still determining requirements for the Guam base. The Navy is planning on periodically berthing an aircraft carrier in Guam. A new carrier pier with additional capabilities will need to be constructed in order to accommodate this plan. Most of the aircraft from the aircraft carrier will also require temporary beddown at Andersen Air Force Base, which may cause additional facilities requirements. The exact size and mix of the Army missile defense task force as well as the infrastructure requirements are still being determined. The Army is currently training with the U.S. Air Force on how to defend against missile attacks. DOD is planning on basing a ballistic missile defense task force in Guam. The size and mix of this task force as well as the infrastructure requirements are still being determined. At the time of this review, Army officials projected that the missile defense site will be located at Andersen Air Force Base. DOD faces several significant challenges associated with its master planning effort for Guam, including funding requirements, operational challenges, and community impacts that could adversely affect the development of the island. The project is expected to be completed by the end of 2015.  Funding requirements for the military buildup on Guam are yet not fully identified and may be difficult to meet given other priorities and existing funding constraints. DOD agencies, such as the Defense Logistics Agency and Defense Education Activity, that will help support the services’ influx of personnel, missions, and equipment to Guam will likely incur additional costs that are not yet included in the current DOD $13 billion cost estimate. According to DOD officials, this cost estimate includes the costs to move Marine Corps forces.and implementation of the master plan. The Marine Corps move from Okinawa to Guam is estimated to cost about $10.3 billion. Of this amount for the move, the Government of Japan has agreed to contribute. However, the cost does not include the costs of other defense agencies to support the additional military personnel and dependents on Guam. According to JGPO, these costs will eventually be identified once further information is available on the master plan. The current DOD $13 billion cost estimate, for the Marine Corps Move, includes the cost of the move to Guam. $6.1 billion to develop facilities and infrastructure on Guam. Nearly half of Japan’s contribution, or $2.8 billion, is expected to be direct contributions. Government of Japan may encounter challenges in funding its share of the Marine Corps move. Guam is located in an area of the Pacific commonly referred to as Typhoon Alley, where on average 31 tropical storms develop annually. The area cost factors identify Guam as one of the more expensive locations for military construction in comparison with other locations in the United States. Marine Corps officials expect there will be additional facility repair costs periodically as a result of damage from typhoons and seismic shocks. Existing training facilities and ranges on Guam are not sufficient to meet the training requirements of the projected Marine Corps force. The effects of the increase in military forces, in terms of population and military infrastructure, on Guam’s unique economic and infrastructure requirements have not been fully addressed. The current population of Guam is estimated to be 171,000, and the projected future military population could increase it by more than 15 percent. Nonagricultural workers visas, capped at 66,000 per year, may be needed. Other challenges associated with an increase of foreign workers in Guam include providing support facilities and services. Future DOD operations may be constrained on Guam if improvements are not made to Guam’s infrastructure. DOD has not established a comprehensive and routine process to keep Congress informed on its progress dealing with these issues and the overall status of implementing the military buildup on Guam, the authors say. They say Congress is not in a position to help ensure the best application of limited federal funds and the leveraging of all available options. GAO: DOD needs several more years to complete a Guam master plan. GAO recommends that future PACOM plans address the extent to which they are seeking residual value compensation for U.S. capital improvements at installations returned to host nations. Congress should consider requiring the Secretary of Defense to report periodically to all the defense committees on the status of DOD’s planning efforts for Guam, GAO says. The report says DOD already provides status reports on its residual value negotiations to the Committees on Appropriations and Armed Services. address training limitations in its area of responsibility. Deputy Under Secretary of Defense responded that validated training requirements that are affected by force posture transformation plans should be addressed in overseas master plans. He further stated that nonprogrammed and nonvalidated training limitations experienced by service components were not appropriate for inclusion in the overseas commands’ risk assessment. While we are not aware of any non programed and non validate training limitations, our report discusses only those training limitations raised by senior command officials during our review. that if there is a need to make a distinction between nonvalidated versus validated training limitations, OSD and the overseas commands would work together to identify those validated limitations that should be addressed in their master plans. In response to this guidance U.S. Forces Japan provided information on training limitations. USFK omitted this information from the overseas master plan. This year OSD included in its guidance a requirement for the combatant commands to identify and discuss risks to their master plan as well as steps taken to mitigate those risks. inconsistency led to our recommendation that Congress require such reporting. We continue to believe that this information is necessary to provide a complete picture of the potential effects on infrastructure and funding requirements in South Korea. In commenting on our matter for congressional consideration that the Secretary of Defense report periodically to all the defense committees on the status of DOD’s planning efforts for Guam, the Deputy Under Secretary of defense responded that the Guam master plan is scheduled to be completed in 2008, at which time a copy will be provided. noted that Senate Report 109-286 directed DOD to submit a master plan for the military buildup on Guam by December 2006. DOD did not submit the plan for several reasons that we discuss in this report. Because the master plan cannot be completed until the environmental impact statement is completed, a process that could take until 2009. Also, DOD faces a variety of funding challenges, operational challenges, and community impacts that may both affect the development and timing of the Guam master plan and increase troop numbers. Costs for the U.S. government. In the interim before receiving a master plan, congressional oversight could be enhanced by periodically receiving an update on the planning efforts in Guam. DOD also provided technical comments on a draft of this report, which we incorporated where appropriated. We are sending the comments to the Department of Defense for further study and consideration. The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense’s comments are reprinted in appendix II. The exact size and makeup of the forces to be moved to Guam and the associated infrastructure required are not yet known. copies of this report to the Secretaries of Defense, the Army, the Navy, and the Air Force; the Commandant of the Marine Corps; and the Director, Office of Management and Budget. Copies will be made available to others upon request. In addition, this report will be available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staff have any questions about this report, please contact me at (202) 512-4523. We compared the reporting requirements in the congressional mandate and the Office of the Secretary of Defense (OSD) guidance, which incorporated our prior recommendations. In order to identify improvements to the overseas master plan, we compared and contrasted the fiscal year 2007 and 2008 plans. We assessed the quantity and quality of information provided by the Defense Department. We also assessed the extent to which the plans address the challenges faced by the Department of Defense during implementation.members who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix III. quality of one plan’s responses for each of the data elements, including details on base categories, host nation funding levels, facility requirements and costs. We compared them to equivalent responses in other plans; formed conclusions as to the completeness, clarity, and consistency of the latest plan's responses. We also discussed with DOD officials our observations and recommendations, specific reporting requirements, and whether improvements in the guidance and reporting were needed. we also interviewed cognizant officials from DOD about the plans. various changes and challenges that were identified within the plans. We met with officials from OSD and each of the following commands and agencies: U.S. Pacific Command (PACOM); U. s. Army Pacific; Commander, U. S. Pacific Fleet; U.s. Marine Corps Forces, Pacific. U.N. Secretary-General's Security Council meeting to be held later this month in New York City to discuss military operations in the region. The meeting will also be held in Washington, D.C. to discuss the future of the military in Asia. European Command, U.S. Army Europe, and Special Operations Command. In general, we discussed the reporting requirements contained in OSD’s guidance, host nation agreements and funding levels. We also analyzed available reports, documents, policies, directives, international agreements, guidance, and media articles to keep abreast of ongoing changes in overseas defense basing strategies and requirements. To see firsthand the condition of the bases, go to www.cnn.com/cnndefense. facilities and status of selected construction projects. To determine the status of DOD’s planning effort for the buildup of forces and infrastructure on Guam, we met with officials from OSD, the Navy, PACOM, and the Joint Guam Program Office (JGPO) In general, we discussed the development of a Guam master plan and Guam infrastructure development plans. We toured facilities at Camp Schwab, Camp Kinser, Camp Foster, Torii Station, Camp Zama, Yokosuka Naval Base, and Yokota Air Base, Japan. the Integrated Military Development Plan with PACOM and JGPO officials. We visited Naval Base Guam and Andersen Air Force Base in Guam to see the installations and future military construction sites firsthand. We also reviewed DOD’s military construction budgets for fiscal years 2007 and 2008 and planned for future military buildup in Guam. We met with officials from U.S. Pacific Fleet; U. s. Marine Corps Forces, Pacific; and Pacific Air Forces to discuss the various factors that can affect U.s. infrastructure requirements. years to identify U.S. funding levels and sources planned for the military buildup in Guam. To identify challenges associated with the buildup in this planning effort, we met with the aforementioned DOD officials and other interested parties. We did not evaluate concerns raised by the officials, but we reviewed relevant federal laws and discussed them with DOD officials. We also analyzed available reports, documents, international agreements, and other available documents and information. The Guam Women’s Group, the Chamber of Commerce, the Civil Military Task Force, and the Office of the Delegate from Guam to the House of Representatives were also consulted. Special Operations Command planning efforts were not specifically required for the master plans in response to the congressional mandates. Southern and Northern Commands have significantly fewer facilities overseas than the other regional commands in the Pacific, Europe, and Central Asia. We conducted our review from September 2006 through July 2007 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing. and media articles to keep abreast of ongoing activities in Guam pertaining to challenges that may affect DOD’s development and implementation of a master plan. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. standards.com. In addition to the contact named above, Mark Little, Assistant Director; Nelsie Alcoser; Kate Lenane; Erika Prochaska; Roger Tomlinson; and Cheryl Weissman made major contributions to this report. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255.