Fiscal year 2011 marked the eighth year of implementation of the Improper Payments Information Act of 2002 (IPIA) IPIA requires executive branch agencies to annually review all programs and activities to identify those that are susceptible to significant improper payments. IPERA, enacted July 22, 2010, amended IPIA by expanding the scope of the IPIA. The act was enacted to reduce improper payments for programs with estimates that exceed $10 million. It was also the first year of Implementation for theimproperpayments Elimination and Recovery Act of 2010. on the previous requirements for identifying, estimating, and reporting on programs and activities susceptible to significant improper payments. IPERA included a new, broader requirement for agencies to conduct recovery audits, where cost effective, for each program and activity with at least $1 million in annual program outlays. This IPERA provision significantly lowers the threshold for required recovery audits from $500 millionprograms and activities. Another new IP ERA provision calls for federal agencies’ inspectors general to annually determine whether their respective agencies are in compliance with key IPERA requirements. Under Office of Management and Budget (OMB) implementing guidance, these reports are required to be completed within 120 days of the publication of the federal agencies’ annual PAR or AFR, with the fiscal year 2011 reports for most agencies due on March 15, 2012. OMB has established guidance for federal agencies on reporting, reducing, and recovering improper payments has established various work groups responsible for developing work groups.and to report on their determinations. The scope for recovery audits to all OMB continues to play a key role in the oversight of the governmentwide improper payments problem. recommendations aimed at improving federal financial management activities related to reducing improper payments. Federal agencies reported improper payment estimates totaling $115.3 billion in fiscal year 2011, a decrease of $5.3billion from 2010. OMB, Circular No. A-136 Revised, Financial Reporting Requirements (Oct. 27, 2011); OMB Memorandum M-11-16, Issuance of Revised Parts I and II to Appendix C of OMB Circular A-123 (Apr. 14, 2011) the revised prior year reported estimate of $120.6 billion. Based on the agencies’ estimates, OMB estimated that fiscal year 2011 improper payments comprised about 4.7 percent of the $2.5 trillion in total spending. The decrease is attributed primarily to decreases in program outlays for the Department of Labor’s Unemployment Insurance program, and decreases in reported error rates for fiscalyear 2011 (compared to fiscal year 2010) OMB estimates improper payments totaled about $120 billion in fiscal year2011. The $115.3 billion in estimated federal improper payments reported for fiscal year 2011 was attributable to 79 programs spread among 17 agencies. Ten of these 79 programs account for most of the reported improper payments. The 10 programs with the highest error rates had rates ranging from 11.0 percent to 28.4 percent. A number of federal agencies have reported progress in reducing improper payment error rates in some programs and activities. The following are examples of agencies that reported reductions in program error rates and estimated improper payment amounts. For fiscal year 2011, OMB reported that governmentwide agencies recaptured $1.25 billion in overpayments to contractors and vendors. Over half of this amount, $797 million, can be attributed to the Medicare recovery audit contractor program which identifies improper Medicare payments in all 50 states. Cumulatively, the President’s goal of recapturing.overall improper payments by $50 billion, and recapture at least $2 billion in improper contract payments by the end of fiscal year 2012. at least $2 billion by the end of fiscal year 2012. Some agencies have not yet reported estimates for all risk-susceptible programs. We have also found that internal control weaknesses exist, heightening the risk of improper payments occurring. Until federal agencies are able to implement effective processes to completely and accurately identify the full extent of the problem, improper payments will continue to be made by the federal government, the report says. The full report is available at: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/30/politics/federal-government-improper-payments-report-2011-2012. extent of improper payments and implement appropriate corrective actions to effectively reduce improper payments. We found that not all agencies have developed improper payment estimates for all of the programs and activities they identified as susceptible. We are currently working on engagements related to improper payment reporting at both DOD and HHS. Additional analysis is needed to assess the root causes of improper Payments, a key factor in identifying and implementing effective corrective actions. The federal government will not have reasonable assurance that the use of taxpayer funds is adequately safeguarded. Three federal entities did not report fiscal year 2011 estimated improper payment amounts for four risk-susceptible programs. HHS cited statutory limitations for its state-administered Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) program. Despite these limitations, HHS officials stated that they will continue to work with states and explore options to allow for future estimates for the TANF program. To see the full report, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2011/01/30/healthcare/fiscal-year-2011/federal-financial-reports/index.html. For fiscal year 2011, the TANF program reported outlays of about $17 billion. For another program, HHS cited the Children’s Health Insurance Program Reauthorization Act of 2009 as prohibiting HHS from calculating or publishing any national or state- specific payment error rates. The new payment error rate measurement rule became effective on September 10, 2010. According to its fiscalyear 2011 agency financial report, HHS plans to report estimated improper payment amounts for CHIP in fiscal year 2012. For fiscal year2011, the CHIP program reported federal outlays in excess of $20 billion. about $9 billion. Defense Finance and Accounting Service (DFAS) Commercial Payfiscal year 2011 outlays of $368.5 billion and U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Commercial Pay with fiscal year 2011 outlay of $30.5billion. DOD reported that improper payment estimates for these programs were based on improper payments detected through various pre-payment and post-payment review processes rather than using methodologies similar to those used for DOD’s. With the exception of DFAS, OMB excluded estimated improper payment amounts for two DOD programs from the governmentwide total. other programs, including statistically valid random sampling or reviewing 100 percent of payments. In its fiscal year 2011 agency financial report, DOD stated that it plans to begin statistical sampling of the Commercial Pay program in fiscal year 2012. Both GAO and the DOD Inspector General (IG) have previously reported on weaknesses in DOD’s payment controls, including weaknesses in its process for assessing the risk of improper payments and reporting estimated amounts. Nonetheless, the DOD Comptroller testified in May 2011 that the agency plans to start statistical sampling in 2012. DOD assessed its commercial payment program as low risk because DOD management has concluded that it had a highly effective pre-payment examination process. That process includes a software tool that tests for potential improper payments before disbursement. However, the DOD IG has reported that the tool had a false positive rate of more than 95 percent and that its use was not standardized across payment systems. The DOD IG reported that DOD’s risk of making improper payments was high and identified deficiencies in DOD's estimate of high-dollar overpayments. For fiscal year 2011, two agency auditors reported on compliance issues with IPIA and IPERA as part of their 2011 financial statement audits. USDA auditors identified noncompliance with the requirements of IPERA regarding the design of program internal controls related to improper payments. HHS estimated an annual amount of improper payments for some of its programs. Until DOD fully and effectively implements astatistically valid estimating process for its commercial payments and addresses the known control deficiencies in its commercial payment processes, the governmentwide improper payment estimates are not complete. risk-susceptible programs, a key requirement of IPIA. The federal government did not report an improper payment estimate for its TANF and CHIP programs for fiscal year 2011. A number of actions are under way across the federal government to help advance improper payment reduction goals. Identifying and analyzing the root causes of improper payments is key to developing effective corrective actions and identifying the source of the problem, the report says. The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services reported noncompliance issues with IPIA for the eighth year in a row. implementing the controls needed to advance the federal government’s efforts to reduce and prevent improper payments. Proactively preventing improper payments increases public confidence in the administration of benefit programs. For considered. program design issues that are a factor in causing improper payments, addressing program design may be an effective preventive strategy. Effective monitoring and reporting can also help detect emerging issues. In addition, agencies can also enhance detective controls to investigate improper payments and overpayments in the federal budget. The federal government has a responsibility to protect the public from improper payments in its benefits programs. Agencies cited a number of causes for the estimated $115.3 billion in reported improper payments. These included insufficient documentation, incorrect computations, changes in program requirements. Information on the root causes of the current improper payment estimates is necessary for agencies to target effective corrective actions and implement preventive measures. For instance, enhancing incentives for grantees, such as state and local governments, could help increase attention to preventing, identifying, and recovering improper payments, the authors say. The authors found that agencies did not use the three categories to classify the types of errors and quantify how many errors can be attributed to them. fiscal year 2011 PARs and AFRs. Together, these programs represented about $46 billion, or 40 percent of the total reported $115 billion in improper payment estimates for fiscal year 2011. The estimated improper payment amounts were spread across the three categories, with documentation and administrative errors being cited most often. We did not calculate the dollar amounts in each category due to the imprecise narratives included in some of the agencies’ reporting of identified causes. Nonetheless, additional analysis regarding the root causes is needed. Many agencies and programs are in the process of implementing preventive controls to avoid improper payments, including overpayments and underpayments. Preventive controls may involve a variety of activities such as upfront validation of eligibility, predictive analytic tests, training programs, and timely resolution of audit findings. Data sharing allows entities that make payments—to contractors, vendors, participants—to share information. Further, addressing program design issues that are a factor in causing improper payments may be an effective preventive strategy to be considered. in benefit programs, and others—to compare information from different sources to help ensure that payments are appropriate. Data sharing can be particularly useful in confirming initial or continuing eligibility of participants in benefit programs. Analyses and reporting on the extent to which agencies are participating in data sharing activities is another important element needed to advance the federal government’s efforts to reduce improper payments. For example, the U.S. Department of Labor (Labor) reported that it had shared data with the Department of Health and Human Services. that its Unemployment Insurance Program utilizes HHS’s National Directory of New Hires Databaseto individuals who claim benefits after returning to work. In June 2011, Labor established the mandatory use of the database for state benefit payment control no later than December 2011. In another case, to address the issue of inaccuracy of self-reported financial income on applications for student aid, the Labor Department issued a program letter that included recommended operating procedures for cross-matching activity. to improve the ability to detect overpayments. Department of Education implemented a 6-month pilot version of an IRS data retrieval tool in January 2010 for its Pell Grant Program. Tool allows student aid applicants and, as needed, parents of applicants to transfer certain tax return information from the IRS directly to Education’s online application. Education reported that nearly 3.5 million students used the data exchange tool, representing approximately 21 percent of the applications submitted for the 2011 - 2012 academic year. Predictive analytic technologies. The analytic technologies used by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) The Small Business Jobs Act of 2010 requires CMS to use predictive modeling and other analytic techniques. The goal is to identify and to prevent improper payments under the Medicare fee-for-service program.technologies will be used to analyze and identify Medicare provider networks, billing patterns, and beneficiary utilization patterns and detect those that represent a high risk of fraudulent activity. Through such analysis, unusual or suspicious patterns or abnormalities can be identified and used to prioritize additional review of suspicious transactions before payment is made.are examples of preventive techniques that may be useful for other programs. legislation required that contractors selected begin using these technologies on July 1, 2011, in the 10 states identified by CMS as having the highest risk of fraud, waste, or abuse in Medicare fee- for-service payments. Training can be a key element in any effort to prevent improper payments from occurring. This can include both training staff on how to use these technologies and training providers and beneficiaries on how they should use them to prevent fraud. These predictive analytic contractors began using the technologies to screen all fee-for-service claims nationwide prior to payment as of June 30, 2011. how to prevent and detect improper payments and training providers or beneficiaries on program requirements. The Medicaid Integrity Institute, an initiative of CMS’s Medicaid Integrity Group (MIG), trains state-level staff and facilitates networking by sponsoring free workshops for states. The MIG sponsors education programs for providers and beneficiaries, such as for pharmacy providers, to promote best prescribing practices and appropriate prescribing guidelines based on Food and Drug Administration labeling. GAO, Standards for Internal Control in the Federal Government, GAO/AIMD-00-21.3.1 (Washington, D.C: Nov. 1999). Strong preventive controls remain the frontline defense against improper payments. agencies also need effective detection techniques to quickly identify and recover those overpayments that do occur. Detection activities play a significant role not only in identifying improper payments, but also in providing data on why these payments were made and, in turn, highlighting areas that need strengthened prevention controls. For provider enrollment, contribute to improper payments would lend insight to developing effective strategies for enhancing compliance and may identify opportunities for streamlining or changing eligibility or other program requirements. Data mining is a computer-based control activity that analyzes diverse data. The central repository of data commonly used to perform data mining is called a data warehouse. Data warehouses store tables of historical and current information that are logically grouped. As a tool in managing improper payments, applying data mining to aData warehouse allows an organization to efficiently query the system to identify potential improper payments. For more information on data mining, visit datamining.considered.com or go to www.datamining.com. example, in the Medicare and Medicaid program, data on claims are stored in geographically disbursed systems and databases. CMS has been working for most of the past decade to consolidate program integrity data and analytical tools for detecting fraud, waste, and abuse. The agency’s efforts led to the initiation of the Integrated Data Repository (IDR) program, which is intended to provide CMS and its program integrity contractors with a centralized source that contains Medicaid and Medicare data from the many disparate and dispersed legacy systems. the One Program Integrity (One PI) program, a web-based portal and set of analytical tools by which these data can be accessed and analyzed. Recovery auditing is used to identify and recover overpayments. The Tax Relief and Health Care Act of 2006 required CMS to implement a national Medicare recovery audit contractor (RAC) program by January 1, 2010. In fiscal year 2011, HHS reported that the Medicare Fee-for-Service recovery audit program identified more than $1 billion in improper payments. $961 million in overpayments and recovered $797 million nationwide. The Medicaid RAC program was established by the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act. Each state must contract with a RAC, which is tasked with identifying and recovering Medicaid over payments and identifying underpayments. Similar to the Medicare RACs, Medicaid Racs will be paid on a contingency fee basis—a percentage of any recovered over Payments plus incentive payments for the detection of under payments. It is important to note that some agencies have reported statutory or regulatory problems. Barriers that affect their ability to pursue recovery auditing. Only the Social Security Administration, Railroad Retirement Board, and the Department of Veterans’ Affairs may receive the information necessary to identify the withdrawer. OPM reported that based on current law and Treasury’s regulations, financial institutions are barred from providing OPM with the information needed to recover various overpayments. The Office of Personnel Management (OPM) reported that it faces regulatory barriers that restrict its ability to recover over payments for its Retirement Program. in the law to receive that type of information from financial institutions. Treasury has drafted language to address the issue and is working to publish a notice of proposed rulemaking to amend its regulation. In another instance, USDA reported that Section 281 of the Department of Agriculture Reorganization Act of 1994 precluded the use of recovery auditing techniques. Section 281 provides that 90 days after the decision of a state, county, or an area committee is final, no action may be taken to recover the amounts found to have been erroneously disbursed. the decision unless the participant had reason to believe that the decision was erroneous. This statute is commonly referred to as the Finality Rule. Federal-state incentives. Another area for further exploration is the broader use of incentives for states to implement effective preventive and detective controls. Agencies have applied limited incentives and penalties for encouraging improved state administration to reduce improper payments. Incentives and penalties can be helpful to create management reform and to ensure adherence to performance standards. Chairman Platts and Ranking Member Towns, this completes my prepared statement. For more information regarding this testimony, please contact Beryl H. Davis, Director, Financial Management and Assurance, at (202) 512-2623 or by e-mail at DavisBH@gao.gov. Contact points for our Offices of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of this testimony. Individuals making key contributions to this testimony included Jack Warner, Assistant Director; W. Tyler Benson; Francine Delvecchio; Crystal Lazcano; Kerry Porter; and Carrie Wehrly. Treasury. 2011 Financial Report of the United States Government. Washington, D.C.: December 23, 2011, pp. 211-231. Medicaid Program Integrity: Expanded Federal Role Presents Challenges to and Opportunities for Assisting States. DOD Financial Management: Weaknesses in Controls over the Use of Public Funds and Related Improper Payments. GAO-11-950T. Washington: September 22, 2011. Improper payments: Reported Medicare Estimates and Key Remediation Strategies.GAO-12-288T. Payments and Remaining Challenges. GAO-11-575T. Washington, D.C.: April 15, 2011. Improper Payments: Status of Fiscal Year 2010 Federal Improper payments Reporting. GAE-11:318SP. Washington. D.c.: March 1, 2011, High-Risk Series: An Update.GAO-09-442. Washington,. D.S.: July 29, 2009. Impropering Payments: Progress Made but Challenges Remain in Estimating and Reducing Improper. Payments. of Agencies’ Efforts to Address Improper Payment and Recovery Auditing Requirements. GAO-08-438T. Washington, D.C.: January 31, 2008. Improper Payments: Federal Executive Branch Agencies' Fiscal Year 2007 Improper payment Estimate Reporting.GAO-06-347. Washington,. D.c.: April 14, 2006. This is a work of the U.S. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States. The published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from GAO. However, because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material, permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org. In the U.S., call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255.