Climate change is having a variety of impacts on natural resources in the United States. Congress and the Executive Office of the President have directed federal agencies to address the potential impacts of climate change. The two key federal water resource management agencies included in this review have similar yet distinct roles in managing water for a wide variety of purposes. Both agencies are dealing with aging water management infrastructure with limited funding for maintenance and construction. In 2009, Congress passed the SECURE Water Act, requiring Reclamation to establish a climate change adaptation program. Since 2009, the Corps has broadly assessed how climate change could affect its missions. A phased assessment of the vulnerability of coastal projects is under way. More refined watershed-level vulnerability assessments are being developed. The Corps is conducting 15 pilot studies nationwide to test different methods and frameworks for adapting to climate change. The agency officials expect to complete the first phase of screening assessments in 2013, with more refined assessments to come in future years. The West-Wide Climate Risk Assessments are high-level, baseline assessments of the potential impacts of climate change on future water supplies. The need for observational data to support climate adaptation is increasing. But the observational networks crucial to increasing understanding are shrinking. USGS alone has deactivated or discontinued almost 1,700 surface-water stream gauges. To ensure the needed data is collected, the Corps has a formal agreement to provide funding to USGS. The Corps, Reclamation, and others are collaborating in a number of efforts to incorporate climate science into water management tools, the authors say.. For example the Corps partnered with NOAA’s National Ocean Service to create an online sea change calculator. The Corps and Reclamation are collaborating as coleaders in developing and implementing a training program. These agencies are collaborating with the University Corporation for Atmospheric Research’s COMET Program and the Western Water Assessment. The online course was designed to provide students with water resource planning knowledge, while the residence courses offer opportunities for gaining hands-on experience in applying that knowledge. The Corps’ climate adaptation policy states that collaborations are the most effective way to develop strategies to identify and reduce vulnerabilities to potential future climate change. were incorporated, as appropriate. As agreed with your offices, unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier, we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date. At that time we will send copies to the Secretaries of Defense and the Interior; the appropriate congressional committees; and other interested parties. In addition, the report will be available at no charge on the GAO website at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staff members have questions about this report, please contact me at (202) 512-3841. The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (Corps) is composed of four program areas including Civil Works, Military Construction, Real Estate, and Research and Development. To carry out its Civil Works missions nationwide, the program is organized into eight geographic divisions composed of 38 districts. Division and district geographic boundaries are generally aligned with watershed boundaries. GAO staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix III.may be found on the last page of this report. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. Program is implemented through nine business areas that represent the diversity of the nation’s water resource management needs. These include Navigation, Flood and Coastal Storm Damage Reduction, Hydropower, Recreation, Emergency Management, Water Supply and Executive Direction and Management. The program also provides leadership, strategic planning and executive direction and management for the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and the Army National Guard. For more information on the program, visit www.ArmyNavy.com. For information on how to get involved, visit ArmyNavyProgram.org or call 1-800-273-8255. The Corps has a large inventory and wide variety of water management infrastructure. As of September 2012, its inventory includes 702 reservoirs and 75 hydropower facilities. In the area of navigation, the Corps’ inventory includes 12,000 miles of commercial inland waterways, 193 lock sites with 239 chambers, and 926 harbors. For flood measurement.performance measurement, visit the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers’ website at: http://www.usace.org/flood. reduction, the Corps inventory includes 14,501 miles of levee systems. In 2012, the National Research Council reported that the Corps’ infrastructure had an estimated value of approximately $164 billion. The Department of the Interior’s Bureau of Reclamation (Reclamation) is, according to agency records, the nation's largest wholesale water supplier. The Bureau provides water to over 31 million people and irrigation water to one out of five western farmers on 10 million acres of farm land. which produce 60 percent of the nation’s vegetables and one-quarter of its fresh fruit and nut crops. Reclamation is also the second largest producer of hydropower in the United States. According to agency records as of 2011, Reclamation’'s asset inventory includes 476 dams and dikes, creating 337 reservoirs with a total storage capacity of 245 million acre-feet of water. These plants provide an average of more than 40 megawatt of power. To carry out its mission and operations, the agency is organized into five regions. hours of energy per year. In 2011, Reclamation, estimated that the replacement value of its assets was approximately $90 billion. About two-thirds of the assets in Reclamation’s inventory are “transferred works’ The Corps is conducting pilot studies nationwide to support the development of adaptation guidance and guidance. The Corps was founded in 1864 and is based in San Francisco. It is now based in Los Angeles and has offices in San Diego, San Francisco, and Los Angeles. a portfolio of adaptation approaches. Reclamation is conducting Basin Studies to develop strategies to mitigate climate change impacts on water supplies. The Corps is conducting 15 pilot studies nationwide to test different methods and frameworks for adapting to climate change. As of September 2013, the Corps has completed 5 of these studies, and 10 others are ongoing. According to the Corps’ September 2012 report, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers plans to initiate 1 additional pilot in 2013. It has completed 1 pilot study so far this year. on its climate change adaptation pilots, each study addresses a central question. For example, because the reliability of a planned flood reduction project could depend on how climate change affects future flooding, the Corps launched a pilot study. The pilot study aims to determine whether tools and data are available for the Corps to provide reliable estimates of future flooding using climate projections and climate projections. The study also aims to collect information needed to develop policy and guidance for incorporating adaptation into all agency activities, officials say. It is designed to help the Corps test new ideas, develop and utilize information at the project-level scale. Pilot study’s results supports the Corps’ effort to design an approximately $1.8 billion flood risk reduction project on the Red River of the North. Climate change is expected to contribute to long-term imbalances in water supply and demand. Reclamation is partnering with nonfederal entities to conduct focused assessments, known as Basin Studies, to identify specific water resources vulnerabilities and to develop strategies to mitigate climate change impacts on water supplies. All three of the completed Basin Studies projected climate change to result in warming and changes in precipitation that will alter the snow cover and runoff.