TPPs prepare teaching candidates to employ effective teaching techniques and gain real-world experience in the classroom. TPPs take many forms and may be operated by a variety of organizations (see table 1) State oversight responsibilities related to TPPs may be held by one or more state agencies, including the state department of education, the state board of Education, or a state agency. For example, the structure of TPPs can vary widely, from “traditional” TPPs such as four-year undergraduate programs with student teaching requirements, to “alternative route’ TPPs. state independent standards board. States have discretion in how they conduct oversight of TPP quality. States can define the types of TPPs that may operate in the state, such as undergraduate or post-baccalaureate TPPs, or alternative route TPPs. They can also set licensing requirements that teaching candidates must satisfy that often include completing an approved TPP and passing licensing tests that assess subject-matter knowledge or other other criteria. State can also assess whether any TPPs are low-performing, as required under the Higher Education Act.  states are now using or developing academic standards that are explicitly tied to college and career preparation. In 2010, the Council of Chief State School Officers and the National Governors Association spearheaded the effort to help states develop common college- and career-ready standards for grades K-12 in math and English. As of the beginning of the 2014-15 academic year, 44 states and the District of Columbia have adopted the Common Core State Standards. The Common Core Standards will be rolled out to all states by the end of the year. the District of Columbia were using the Common Core Standards that were developed and published in 2010. The remaining states were using or developing their own college- and career-ready standards. Education does not have direct oversight authority over TPPs.main ways it influences the quality of TPPs are (1) implementing the Higher Education Act Title II reporting requirements and (2) awarding and administering several competitive grants. Title II requires states and institutions of higher education that conduct TPPs to annually report specific information. colleges or universities that offer TPPs submit the required data using reporting templates developed by Education (see table 2). In this report we use the term “college or university” to mean “institution of higher education” as defined by the act. This table presents a summary of the templates developed for reporting purposes. It is not intended to provide an exhaustive list of the Higher Education Act Title II reporting requirements. For the statutory reporting requirements, see 20 U.S.C. §§ 1022d-1022f. colleges and universities offering TPPs provide the required information. The agency also compiles and disseminates the information to the public in annual reports, webpages and data spreadsheets. The proposed rule was available for Title II reporting requirements through February 2, 2015. On December 2, 2014, Education published a notice of proposed rulemaking, which among other things, proposed to modify the proposed rule. As part of this announcement, the Department of Education is releasing a list of proposed changes to the rules. Education administers several competitive grant programs that provide funding for TPP reforms. Of these competitive grants, the largest that is focused specifically on improving TPP quality is the Teacher Quality Partnership Grant program. In September 2014, Education selected 24 partnerships, including TPPs and partnering school districts, to receive a combined $35 million in grant funds. The grants are intended to improve teacher preparation primarily for science, technology, engineering, and math teachers. The Transition to Teaching grant program also provides grants to recruit and retain teachers. Teachers in high-need schools and encourage the development and expansion of alternative route TPPs. All states reported that they review traditional TPPs before approving them to prepare new teachers and may renew approval. For example, Investing in Innovation grants funded 25 projects related to TPPs out of the 143 projects the program has funded during fiscal years 2010-2014. For more information on the Race to the Top Fund and the Supporting Effective Educator Development program, go to: http://www.racetothetopfund.org/ and http:// www.supportingeffectiveeducatordevelopment.org. on a periodic basis. Nearly all states reported that they review TPP program design and data about candidates before approving them to prepare new teachers. More than half also use one or more types of information to assess graduates’ effectiveness as teachers. To assess program design, 49 states and the District of Columbia reported in our survey that they assess whether TPPs seeking approval are meeting standards for program quality.specify that teaching candidates should be trained to identify the. For example, these standards may appropriate teaching techniques for particular learning needs or achieve a particular threshold. Nearly all states reported in our survey that they examine data about teaching candidates. More than half of states reported that they also review certain information about graduate effectiveness when assessing TPPs for approval or renewal. States reported using data about the proportion of candidates who obtain a teaching license (48 states) as part of their approval process for all traditional TPPs (see fig. 1). These results are based on our survey of all 50 states and the District of Columbia. See the related e-supplement, GAO-15-599SP, for the original language. procedures are sufficient to ensure quality without having a process to identify low-performing TPPs. For example, officials in 2 of the 7 states that reported they do not have a process for identifying low- performing programs in our survey told us that it was not necessary. While it is possible that all TPPs are meeting states’ performance criteria and do not merit a low-performance designation, states are still required to have such a process in place, the report says. For more information on the report, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/29/health/healthcare/top-10-health-care-policies-and-reforms-in-the-united-states. Officials from two other states told us that they are developing or planning to develop a new process for identifying low- performing TPPs. Education does not verify whether states use the process they describe in their Title II reports to identify low-performing programs or ensure that all states have such a process. According to Standards for Education, states can choose to change their process from time to time, but they are expected to use the previous process until the new one is implemented. To see the full report, go to CNN.com/Education. Under the Higher Education Act, Education has responsibility for ensuring the quality of the data submitted in Title II reports. State officials are expected to certify the accuracy of the Title II data they submit to Education and Education reviews the state reports for obvious instances of non- compliance. Agency officials were not aware that two states did not describe a process to identify low-performing programs in their most recent Title II report. The Education Department says it has no plans to change the way Title II is administered in the future. Education officials also said that Education does not verify that states are in fact implementing the procedures they describe in their Title II reports. All seven states that reported in our survey that they did not have a process for identifying low-performing TPPs described a process to Education in the Without a monitoring Title II report that was reported in October, 2014, Education may miss instances of noncompliance. Reports. If states are failing to comply with the federal requirement to conduct an assessment to identify low- performing TPPs. The majority of states (43) reported to us that they had a process for identifying low-performing TPPs. The most common criteria they used to identify low- performing TPPs were failure to meet the state’s TPP or teaching standards and denial or conditional approval during the state approval or renewal process. According to data that states submitted as part of their Title II report, 6 states identified one or more TPPs as low-performance and 13 states identified a TPP as at risk of becoming low performing in 2013 or 2014. TPPs of their status. Most also publicized this status (4) and increased their monitoring of the TPPs (5) Two of the six states that identified low-performing programs also identified programs at risk of becoming low- performing. As states shifted to new K-12 standards, most reported taking steps to help TPPs prepare prospective teachers to teach lessons aligned with the new standards. 37 states reported in our survey that they provided TPPs with information on the standards to help them understand the standards. The U.S. Department of Education, At-Risk and Low- Performing Programs by State for 2013 and 2014, in the Title II Data Tools. TPPs with written resources, information sessions, or both. One state convened a half-day workshop that included information about the new standards. Officials then posted a recording of the session and additional resources about the standards online. Three states reported inviting TPPs to K-12 conferences that discussed the new Standards. Officials in one of those states said that this approach allowed them to foster a positive environment for TPPs. The standards are set to go into effect on January 1, 2015. For more information, visit the U.S. Department of Education's website. communication and coordination among K-12 districts and TPPs. Most states reported that they modified their oversight activities to verify that TPPs were aligning with new K- 12 standards. 34 states reported deliberately modifying their TPP approval process to assess such alignment. Twelve other states did not report modifying their approval process for this specific reason, but did report assessing some or all TPPs against standards for TPP quality that may nonetheless provide information about alignment. For example, the Interstate Highway System provides transportation links between states and the federal government. Teacher Assessment and Support Consortium (InTASC) standards are commonly used standards for TPP quality. 27 states reported taking steps to modify the process for identifying low-performing TPPs. California reported modifying its process for approving TPPs to assess alignment with new K-12 standards. No states reported identifying a TPP as low- performing during the 2013-2014 academic year because of limited alignment with K- 12 standards. States also used modified licensing tests designed to assess individual teaching candidates’ preparation. such tests are used by 43 states. The testing companies both reported modifying those tests to align with new K-12 standards. Among the 8 states that do not use such tests, 4 reported in our survey that they modified their licensure requirements in other ways in response to thenew K- 12 standards. For example, all four of these states contract with testing companies to design customized tests and may request revisions. Pearson officials described working with one such state to modify its testing requirements to comply with the new standards. All 14 TPPs we interviewed made changes that ranged from large-scale reforms to more modest modifications. The changes generally fell within increasing subject-matter knowledge, modifying coursework related to teaching techniques, and using classroom training to provide real world experience. Examples of such changes, and related challenges, are listed below. Officials from 11 of 14TPPs described changing coursework.custom tests to align with new K-12 standards by adding more questions that measure teaching candidates’ ability to teach non-fiction texts. coursework or coursework requirements to ensure that teaching candidates had sufficient subject-matter knowledge to teach to the new K-12 standards. The three TPPs that did not make such changes were graduate-level programs or otherwise required teaching candidates to obtain a bachelor’s degree before attending the TPP. Officials from a few TPPs stated that most or all subject- Matter knowledge should be obtained prior to starting theTPP. The TPPs did make changes sometimes coordinated with other departments, such as math and English. For example, one TPP began offering courses that were co-taught by subject-area and TPP faculty. some academic departments were more receptive to modifying their curriculum than others, due to department priorities or other factors. For example, officials from one TPP observed that the new K-12 standards for English require the participation of teachers from multiple academic disciplines. TPP faculty members who were not in the English department were sometimes reluctant to modify their courses accordingly. Modifying coursework related to teaching techniques: Officials from all but one of the 14 TPPs we contacted described modifying courseworkrelated to teaching Techniques. For. example, one TPP said that candidates should learn teaching techniques that focus on the individual student. Officials from five TPPs said the new K-12 standards led them to start or expand courses on teaching techniques that are subject-matter specific. Using classroom training to provide real world experience: Officials from all 14 TPPs highlighted the importance of providing candidates with ample opportunities to apply the new standards in real classrooms. For example, officials from one TPP and a school district said it was important for candidates to make connections between different subject areas.on collaboration and officials from another said that it was key for students to be able to connect the dots between different subjects. Officials from 9 of the 14 TPPs described assessing candidates’ preparedness for the new K-12 standards. Officials from half of the TPPs acknowledged the difficulty of training new teachers in real classroom settings. In particular, officials from 6 TPPs said that school districts are training veteran teachers in the new standards at varying rates. Several TPPs also acknowledged that veteran teachers are being retrained at a higher rate than they were in the past. That could be a problem for the future of the profession. As states continue to implement the new K-12 standards, several TPPs said that they planned to make further modifications. One TPP that made a number of modifications to its program recently surveyed faculty and administrators to evaluate its efforts and identify any ongoing needs. Many states are beginning to adopt assessments to measure K- 12 students’ performance on the new standards. Officials from fiveTPPs said it will be important for them to measure students' performance on these new standards, as well as other issues. The current Title II data requirements may be of limited use in helping to improve the quality of TPPs. Education has not taken steps to evaluate whether any of them should be eliminated. Each state collects Title II information from colleges and universities that offer TPPs in the state and submits information about TPPs and some information about state oversight processes to Education annually. For example, they report the number and demographics of teaching candidates enrolled in and completingTPPs. As described below, states, TPPs, and other stakeholders often reported. 5 states said the Title II data were “very useful,” 19 said they were ‘moderately useful’ Less than half the states told us that they use the goals and assurances section of the reports. 8 of the 14 TPPs said very little of the data was useful to them for assessing the performance of their own programs. Few states reported using the data to inform state funding decisions or to provide information to school districts that are hiring teachers from TPPs, the authors say. A large online TPP defines most of its teaching candidates as enrolled in the state where the TPP is headquartered. The Title II report lists that state as one of the nation’s top teacher-producing states, while state officials told us that in fact the state faces teacher shortages. A TPP completer is someone who has met all the educational or training requirements in a state-approved course. Other requirements such as a certain sequence of courses can make it difficult for students to complete the program. of study for initial teacher certification or licensure. However, this definition allows for states or TPPs to choose whether they require their students to take and pass all state licensing tests before they can complete all of those educational or training requirements. As a result, different definitions of completer can lead to inconsistent data and make it difficult to make comparisons across TPPs or obtain a national picture. These varying ways of calculating and reporting key Title II data have persisted despite Education’s efforts to clarify guidance and improve reporting tools. its Title II contractor, have included clarified definitions, new guidance documents, and additional data checks in the online Title II reporting system. Education identified some potential data inconsistencies, such as differences in state definitions. Several states and TPPs with whom we spoke praised Education’s efforts to facilitate the Title II submission process, noting particularly that they have received excellent technical assistance when they have questions about the process. However, states andTPPs also noted remaining challenges, including how to interpret the requirements within the context of each state or TPP's specific circumstances. of alternate route TPPs, in its most recent Title II annual report, which presented information about the 2009-2010 academic year. Education does not include clarifications about potentially inconsistent data elements in published spreadsheets and on its website. Education officials told us they did not include such explanatory material in these other formats because they considered the explanations in the previous annual report to be sufficient. However, these documents are available on the Education Department's website and are available to the general public in a searchable form. By not providing the explanatory material, the data may be potentially misleading and make it difficult for users to compare across states or programs. By not providing these explanations, Education’s approach is not consistent with federal internal control standards, which require that pertinent information should be identified, captured, and distributed in a form that permits users to perform their duties efficiently. Education has made few efforts to share expertise about TPP quality among its offices. Various offices and programs within Education influence TPP quality, according to the report. The Office of Postsecondary Education administers Higher Education Act Title II reporting requirements. However, the agency does not have mechanisms in place to promote regular, sustained information-sharing among these offices. Education officials said the agency and its Title II contractor occasionally create custom Title II data runs for Education program offices. But there is no systematic effort to share Title IIData within the agency, officials said. Officials in one office that administers competitive grants related to TPP quality described discussing grant results internally, but did not systematically discuss TPP quality. Teacher quality workgroup has been inactive since the office in which it was housed reorganized in the fall of 2014. Education officials noted that such workgroups, particularly when operating out of high-level offices in the agency, have been very helpful for systematically sharing information across offices. This represents a missed opportunity to use relevant information, officials said. The agency has not subsequently resumed these information-sharing efforts, they said. It is unclear when the agency will resume the teacher quality workgroups. to bolster the effectiveness of several Education programs, such as Race to the Top and Supporting Effective Educator Development. Federal internal controls standards emphasize that effective information-sharing efforts are those that flow broadly across an agency in a form that is helpful for those who need it to carry out their responsibilities. Without such mechanisms, programs and offices within Education may not have access to clear and useful information about TPP quality. Furthermore, Education’s efforts to support or enhance TPP quality reach a limited number of states. to Education officials, several technical assistance and research entities and the office that administers competitive grants such as the Teacher Quality Partnership Grant Program. Only about one third of states reported receiving information from Education about TPP oversight or enhancing TPP quality. About half of all states said they would like additional support from Education on this topic. This suggests that Education is also missing opportunities to support states that could use relevant research and assistance from Education to enhance TPP quality, according to the report. 15 states surveyed said they want more information from the Department of Education about teacher preparation. states reported in our survey that they oversee TPPs through an independent standards board. Four states expressed concern about their access to Education resources for TPP improvements. Gaps in the agency’s efforts to disseminate information result from information- sharing being left to individual offices’ initiative rather than an agency-wide mechanism, Education officials noted in a follow-up inquires. The Education Department says more could be done to improve the TPP system in the U.S. and that it is looking into the matter. GAO: States must assess whether teacher preparation programs are low-performing. Without such an approach, Education may be missing opportunities to support state efforts to enhance TPP quality, GAO says. Education agreed with our four recommendations. GAO is sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees, the Secretary of the Department of Education, and other interested parties. If you or your staff have any questions about this report, please contact me at (617)88-0534 or EmreyArrasM@gao.gov. GAO: We conducted our work from March 2014 to July 2015 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. To identify how states oversee TPPs, we surveyed state oversight entities from all 50 states and the District of Columbia. To assess the extent that Education’s data supports and encourages high quality, we reviewed select state reports and reports from Education contractors. We also conducted case studies in 5 states.