Offshoring, also known as offshore outsourcing, has been taking place for decades. The extension of offshoring from U.S. manufacturers to service providers has heightened public policy concerns. CRS: The short- and long-run labor market implications of offshore outsourcing remain unclear. The report attempts to sort through all the issues raised, some of which are addressed in the above-referenced CRS report. It then synthesizes the information released since the early 2000s on outsourcing's impact on employment. More than 14 million jobs in 49 service occupations, representing about 11% of total U.S. employment in 2001, have attributes that could allow them to be sent overseas. These attributes include no in-person customer servicing required; an IT-enabled work process that can be accomplished via telecommuting; jobs that are routinized; a fairly wide gap between a job's pay in the United States compared to in a destination country; and a relatively high cost of living in the U.K. and a destination country having few language, institutional, and cultural barriers. The occupational groups identified as being vulnerable to offshoring include office support, auditors and tax preparers, computer programmers and software engineers. They are concentrated in such industries within the service sector as information, finance and insurance, and professional and business services. A study released by the Brookings Institution built upon the work of Bardhan and Kroll, Forrester Research, and others to develop projections of the share of jobs in 246 metropolitan areas that might be lost. Just 2.2% of the jobs in these 246 areas likely to be offshored between 2004 and 2015. Five metro areas might lose somewhat more jobs (between 3.1% and 4.3%) by 2015. Boulder, CO; Lowell, MA; San Francisco, CA; San Jose, CA. and Stamford, CT. Another 23 areas might have between 2.6% and 3.0% of their jobs offshoring. Those metropolitan areas estimated to be most vulnerable to services offsh outsourcing tend to be very populous. having 1 million or more inhabitants. They tend to be located in the Northeast (e.g., Bergen-Passaic, NJ; Boston, MA; and Hartford, CT) and West. They generally have high concentrations of IT jobs or IT-enabled back-office jobs such as data-entry keyers and telemarketers. Jensen and Kletzer developed a different geographically based approach to estimate the share of tradable and nontradable (nonoffshorable) jobs in manufacturing and manufacturing. About 9.4% of total U.S. employment in 2000 was found to be in offshorable industries. Both manufacturing and professional services industries were estimated to have above-average percentages of vulnerability to offshoring. A service occupation's relative degree of offshorability was positively associated with its level of educational attainment. In 2007, there were some 30 million jobs in these off shorable service-providing occupations; they accounted for over one-fifth of total employment in that year. in the highly offshorable and offshoring categories. Blinder added to the conservative estimate those occupations in category III he ranked as most susceptible to being offshored to create a moderate estimate totaling 25.6% of all U.S. workers. His aggressive estimate includes all of category III and totals almost 40 million workers or 29.0%. Blinder stated that "Contrary to conventional wisdom, the economy is not in a state of crisis" and that the economy will continue to grow. more offshorable occupations are not low-end jobs, whether measured by wages or by education. The correlation between skill and offshorability is almost zero. Blinder and Krueger used three alternative survey methods to try to determine how many of the jobs that workers held in 2008 were vulnerable to being moved overseas. All three methods found that the majority of jobs were not at risk of being offshored. The different measures of off shorability the analysts developed may explain their different results. about one in four U.S. jobs are potentially offshorable. This is about the same as Blinder's moderate estimate based on an entirely different approach. The analysis of Blinder and Krueger suggests that offshorability is especially prevalent in factory and administrative support occupations, and on an industry basis, in manufacturing, finance, information, and professional services. One explanation for why perhaps only one-tenth of the potential market for offshoring global IT and business processes work was realized through 2006 is that "executives have a lot of money" Deloitte Consulting concluded that outsourcing will lose "holy grail" status. In the future, companies will not outsource because it is the latest management fad. Organizations will carefully define core, strategic, and "thought-leadership" functions and will keep those inhouse to retain knowledge, confidentiality, and control over key functions. Some organizations will decide to outsource only short-term. Some, therefore, are cautious about the future pace of moving abroad potentially vulnerable U.S. jobs. Many organizations will also engage in large scale re-insourcing thereby further eroding the outsourcing market. Dell, for example, returned some help services to the United States due to customer dissatisfaction. Some have credited "reshoring" for part of the sector's employment rebound since the 2007-2009 recession's end. Other companies have begun returning call center operations and legal support work to the U.S., specifically to firms located in rural low-cost areas. The outsourcing market is expected to continue to grow. Perry: About one-fifth of U.S. companies brought production back from overseas in 2011. He attributed what he regards as a nascent trend to "China's shrinking manufacturing wage and cost advantages" Caterpillar, National Cash Register, Wham-O, Otis Elevator, and Buck Knives are examples of those that have returned production and jobs to the United States, he says. He provides more than 10 companies as examples of Those that have Returned Production and Jobs to The United States. Despite 9/11, U.S. airline carriers have continued their outsourcing of maintenance jobs overseas. Concern periodically has arisen among U.s. outsourcers over unrest in some regions (e.g., disputes between India and Pakistan) The outsourcing of airline maintenance jobs has increased in places like Singapore, Brazil, the Dominican Republic, and the Philippines, says the report. The report concludes that offshoring in the United States has increased over the past 10 years, but not as much as it did in the early 2000s. Software companies are placing more of their clients' work in a variety of countries, including the "near-shore" markets of Canada and Mexico. Some individual U.S. employers reportedly believe that moving work to nearby Canada, which has fewer cultural differences with the United States than India or the Philippines, reduces their customers' potential antipathy to offshoring. And, despite the cost of labor rising in some Asian nations (e.g., India), there are many others whose low wages continue to draw U.N. jobs. a comprehensive regularly collected data series does not exist on the number of U.S. workers who have lost their jobs to offshore outsourcing. Empirical analyses have focused on determining those jobs with characteristics that make them susceptible to movement beyond U.s. borders. This approach may overstate the number. of jobs that actually have been or will be lost to offshoring because. it does not consider other factors that may affect employers' decisions. about the location in which work is performed.