Social Security plays an important role in reducing poverty, not only among the aged but among children as well. In addition to receiving Social Security benefits in their own right, children may economically benefit from Social Security by living with other family members who receive benefits. Social Security Administration (SSA) data indicate that in December 2012, 3.3 million Social Security beneficiaries (5.7% of all beneficiaries) were children under the age of 18. Average monthly benefits of children of disabled workers were lowest, about $323. The U.S. Census Bureau Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP) data are used in this report. The most recent SIPP data are from the 2008 panel, which is designed to interview a representative sample of families every four months over a 64-month period. The SIPP collects detailed information on family composition, labor force participation, income, and program participation among families and their members in each of the 64 months they are included in the survey. With children, other data sources must be used. CRS analysis of SIPP data for April 2013 indicates that among an estimated 73.0 million children under age 18, an estimated 8.5 million (11.6%) lived in families in which one or more family members received Social Security. This is over two and one-half times the number of children estimated to receive Social Security benefits based on the administrative data discussed above from four months earlier (3.3 million in December 2012). As discussed in greater detail, the methodology used in this report is described in the Appendix. Among 8.5 million children living in families that received Social Security in April 2013 based on SIPP data, an estimated 3.2 million (37%) were in families in which Social Security was reported as having been received on behalf of at least one of the children in the family. Another 1.9 million (22%) lived in families where a parent or guardian reported receiving Social Security benefits. These 5.1 million children are grouped together in analyses that follow as child beneficiaries and children of parents or guardians that receive Social Security. Security benefits may have been received by an extended family member (e.g., grandparent, aunt or uncle, cousin, niece or nephew) For this latter group, children may incidently be affected by Social Security, but not directly as a matter of policy aimed at them. For such purposes, poverty status of children must be estimated both before and after counting families' income from Social Security. Also, the after-the-fact comparison of poverty status by family Social Security receipt doesn't take into account the effect that Social Security itself has in reducing poverty. Social Security lifted nearly 2.0 million children above the poverty line in April 2013. The effect is limited to just the 8.5 million children that are in families that received Social Security. In families where Social Security benefits are received on behalf of children or by parents or guardians, Social Security reduces their poverty rate from 54.2% to 27.2%. The relative effect of Social Security on the poverty status of all 73.0m children in the U.S. appears much more modest. Among families with child beneficiaries, about $3.847 billion in Social Security benefits were reported in April 2013. Of this amount, nearly half (49.2% ) went to families that had total incomes, excluding Social Security , below the poverty line. This is more than five times the estimated $4.485 billion in federal cash welfare spending under the Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) program in FY2013. Whereas TANF may be considered "target efficient," in terms of targeting the poor, Social Security is more targeted. Social Security plays a much greater role in reducing poverty among children than does TANF. The estimates presented in this report are based on survey data and are subject to respondent misreporting. The SIPP data do not provide the comprehensive detail to precisely identify child beneficiaries. It should also be noted that estimates of the pre-transfer poverty status of children (i.e., poverty status excluding Social Security from total income) provide one measure of the relative importance of Social Security in combating child poverty. It is not possible to precisely identify the Social Security beneficiary status of children on the SIPP. The SIPP collects information on Social Security receipt and the reasons for receipt for persons age 15 and over. It collects information about whether an adult collects Social Security on behalf of children. The pre-transfer poverty estimates should not be confused with the full effects on poverty of eliminating the Social Social Security program, as some individuals would alter their behavior in absence of the program. For more information, visit www.poverty.org. under age 21. In such cases, however, it does not identify the specific children in the family for whom Social Security benefits are received. Some adults may include the child's portion of their Social Security benefit as their own, without explicitly indicating that they received Social Security on behalf of a child. In total, about 8.5 million children under age 18 were identified on the SIPP in April 2013, according to the Social Security Trusteeship Program for Individuals with Disabilities, or SIPP. as living in families in which Social Security benefits were reported, either on their own behalf, or on behalf of another family member. In April 2013, an estimated 3.148 million children under age 18 on the SIPP were identified as Social Security child beneficiaries. An additional 1.893 million children lived with a parent or guardian who reported receiving Social Security but who did not indicate that benefits were received for a child. In some cases the benefits received by these parents or guardians may contain an allowance for beneficiary children that is not separately identified.