Congress has been deeply involved for decades in setting policy, providing funding, and supporting or rejecting programs for the nuclear weapons enterprise. For example, it established the National Nuclear Security Administration (NNSA), a semi-autonomous component of the Department of Energy. It also rejected a major facility to manufacture a key nuclear weapon component. It initiated and later rejected the Reliable Replacement Warhead; and directed NNSA, the Government Accountability Office, and others to conduct studies on nuclear weapon issues. One U.S. policy is not to build new-design nuclear weapons for new missions. Some argue that the capacity to manufacture new pits may be needed to extend the service life of certain existing weapons. A pit is a hollow plutonium shell that is imploded with conventional explosives to create a nuclear explosion that triggers the rest of the weapon. During the Cold War, the Rocky Flats Plant was the U.S.'s only nuclear weapons production facility. It was closed in the 1990s. Rocky Flats manufactured as many as 2,000 pits per year (ppy) In 1989, armed agents from the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the Environmental Protection Agency raided Rocky Flats to investigate suspected environmental crimes. DOE first suspended pit production later that year, subsequently halted it permanently, and eventually dismantled the plant and remediated the site. Congress and the Administration searched for many years for a way to make pits. NNSA proposed a two-track strategy. In one track, Plutonium Facility 4 (PF-4), the main plutonium building at Los Alamos National. Laboratory (LANL) (NM), would house a pilot plant to develop pit production processes and manufacture a small number of pits. It took until 2007 for LANL to make its first "war reserve" pits, i.e., those certified for use in the stockpile. In that year, LANL made 11 such pits, the highest number since 1989. The second track involved a facility with the capacity to make pits on an industrial scale, on the order of 100 or more ppy. The U.S. has no plans to build a pit facility. PF-4, which opened for operations in 1978, is the last plutonium processing building to come online. As of June 2014, NNSA had the capacity to produce up to 450 ppy of plutonium. NNSA has no immediate plans to increase production of plutonium to that level, however. The agency has no current plans to produce more than 125 ppy at any one time, though it has the capability to produce as much as 500 ppy. manufacture about 10 non-war reserve pits per year in PF-4. War reserve (WR) pits are those judged acceptable for use in the nuclear stockpile. Other pits are manufactured for such purposes as development or process qualification. With most work atPF-4 halted in June 2013, the actual manufacturing rate in June 2014 was zero for pits of any type; work is resuming at the end of June 2014. Since there was no requirement to manufacture WR pits, some processes needed to certify pits as WR had been suspended after the halt. NNSA anticipates manufacturing a few pits a year in the near future to prepare to manufacture WR pits. The schedule for ramping up pit production is uncertain. A Department of Defense (DOD) official stated in 2013 that there is no daylight between the Department of Energy and the Defense on the need for a near-term pit manufacturing capacity of 10 to 20 and then 30 by 2021, and then in the longer term for a capacity of 50 to 80 per year.previous WR build of W88 pits was completed in FY2011. Nuclear Security Administration (NNSA) document stated, "Preliminary plans call for pit production of potentially up to 80 pits per year starting as early as FY 2030" In 2014, an NNSA document changed the date for achieving a 30-ppy capacity to "by 2026" Section 3114 of the FY2015 defense authorization bill, H.R. 4435 , as passed by the House, would require NNSA to produce 30 WR pits during 2023, at least 50 during 2026. and to demonstrate for at least 90 days during 2027 the ability to manufacture WR pits at a rate of 80 per year. Some favor a capacity of greater than 80 ppy, while others argue that a lower number would suffice. The debate over that capacity would take on added salience to the extent that it moves within the realm of the military's range. The report focuses on how to achieve the high end of DOD's range because that is the high-end of its range. It is beyond the scope of this report. Congress remains deeply involved in efforts to increase pit production capacity. Section 3114 of H.R. 4435 sets a schedule for production of WR pits. In its report on S. 2410, the Senate Armed Services Committee directed NNSA to include construction of modules (described later) The modules would support an exit from a 1950s-era plutonium strategy. The modules are described later in this article. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. The House Appropriations Committee recommended a substantial increase in funding. Use of retired pits in life extension programs would reduce the number of new pits that would have to be manufactured. The committee also recommended $35.7 million for moving certain activities at LANL by 2019. It would be a separate line item in the FY2016 budget "to add additional visibility into the process," the committee said in a report. The report was published by the Center for American Progress, a nonprofit that promotes free and open dialogue. out of the Chemistry and Metallurgy Research building (described below), which became operational in 1952. While DOD has a requirement for up to 80 ppy, some key questions about how to manufacture at that rate remain not only unanswered but also unasked. Without answers to these questions, Congress cannot know whether existing buildings, without modifications, could manufacture 80 pPy; or if modest upgrades would suffice. If major construction would be needed to augment capacity, this report provides a framework for such construction. This report presents three key decisions and an approach to help structure them. It focuses on two metrics: the amount of two facility resources (laboratory floor space and Material At Risk (MAR), discussed next) available for pit manufacturing. It shows that it is not known whether available amounts suffice. While NNSA has extrapolated space, it has not determined how much will be needed to meet the needs of the pit industry. It also raises the possibility that Congress may choose to direct NNSA to generate the data needed to answer these questions. Space and MAR requirements for manufacturing 80 ppy have never been calculated rigorously, though they could be. Comparing space and MAR required vs. available would show whether there is enough space andMAR at the moment. Over time, however, various factors will affect availability and requirements. This report discusses ways to offset any adverse effects from these factors. In addition, decisions will be needed to make the right decisions for the future of the industry in the U.S. and around the world. Pit fabrication casts "hemishells" (half-pits) of plutonium, machines them to remove excess material, and welds two together to form a pit. Pit manufacturing also involves such supporting tasks as purifying plutonium for use in pits, certification to ensure that finished pits meet required standards, material control and accountability; waste management; and analytical chemistry. For background, see CRS Report R43406, U.S. Nuclear Weapon "Pit" Production Options for Congress. Pit fabrication requires extensive AC for every pit. AC supports other pit manufacturing tasks, and non-pit tasks as well. The building at Los Alamos National Laboratory (LANL) that currently performs AC to support pit manufacture and many other plutonium tasks is in poor shape and not seismically robust. DOE wants to halt work there by 2019, so one or more other facilities will be needed. Laboratory floor space , or "space," is needed for pit fabrication. Laboratory buildings have space for corridors, offices, etc., but not floor space. "Material At Risk" (MAR) is "the amount of radioactive materials … available to be acted on by a given physical stress" It is material that could be released by a disaster, such as an earthquake that collapses a building followed by a fire. Each building that works with plutonium has a building-specific MAR allowance. MAR is expressed in units of plutonium equivalent. Plutonium is the fissile material in pits. Four forms are relevant here: Plutonium-239 (Pu-239) Pu-239 is the fissile isotope in pits. pits contain other plutonium isotopes in addition to Pu-239. That mixture is called weapons-grade plutonium (WGPu) Since some of the other isotopes are more radioactive than Pu- 239, WGPu is about 1.5 times as radioactive as Pu-238. It is relevant to pit manufacturing options because 40% of the MAR allowance in PF-4 is allocated to Pu.238. Moving some or all Pu- 238 work out ofPF-4, the main pit manufacturing tool. plutonium building at LANL, would make MAR and space available for other purposes. MAR is measured in units of plutonium equivalent (PE), which is about 1.38 times as radioactive as Pu-239. This measure is linked to potential dose if plutonium is released, such as by an earthquake and fire. PF-4 is the only building in the United States with the combination of attributes required to make pits. Its current MAR allowance is 1,800 kg PE. It is located atLANL, the nation's "center of plutonium production" PF-4 is the last U.S. plutonium processing facility to be brought online, in 1978. It is the only remaining U.s. multi-program, multi-function plutoniumprocessing facility. It would be about a half-century old when production is anticipated to reach 80 ppy. The Chemistry and Metallurgy Research (CMR) building currently provides AC support for limited pit support. The only place that has made pits since 1989, LANL has the scientific, engineering, and craft expertise needed to make pits. The Radiological Laboratory-Utility-Office Building (RLUOB, pronounced "rulob") was completed in FY2010. It is configured for AC. NNSA plans that RLUOB would house AC equipment needed to support pit manufacture, and possibly enough to support manufacture of 80 ppy. The building is "genuinely decrepit" and "structurally unsound," in the words of two studies, and is much more vulnerable to collapse in an earthquake than more recent buildings. In 1992, the United States began a moratorium on nuclear testing that continues to the present. An issue became how to demonstrate confidence in the safety and reliability of these weapons. One approach, developed by LANL and Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL), was Quantification of Margins and Uncertainties, or QMU. This section describes that approach, then modifies it to make it applicable to pits. The idea underlying QMU is that nuclear weapons can be maintained without testing. QMU was that several steps in a nuclear weapon must all work for the weapon to function. Each step, or "gate" in QMU terminology, can be quantified. For example, a certain amount of energy must be transmitted to the secondary for it to detonate. Another QMU concept is margin. If the minimum amount of. energy needed to. detonate the secondary is X, and the amount needed to detonated the secondary. is Y, then the margin is X. of energy predicted to be transmitted to the secondary is 3X, then there is a margin of 2X, i.e., margin is the amount by which the predicted quantity exceeds the minimum required quantity. Did the calculation incorporate all relevant variables? Were there biases in experiments on which the calculations were based? Were the most relevant nuclear tests used as a data source? The uncertainty can be quantified through calculations (such as computer models); further, the amount of uncertainty is bounded because each gate has an upper and a lower. QMU provides three key concepts relevant to decisionmaking on pit manufacturing. Margin is the amount by which (1) space available for pit manufacturing exceeds (2) space required to manufacture 80 ppy. The degree of confidence at each gate is expressed as margin divided by uncertainty; the higher the number, the greater the confidence.limit. If margin exceeds uncertainty for a particular gate, then there can be confidence that the weapon will "pass through" that gate satisfactorily, and if margin exceeds. uncertainty for all gates, there is confidence that it will work. by which (3) MAR available for pit manufacturing exceeds (4) MAR required to manufacture 80 ppy. (The two margins are independent.) Thus, solving for margin requires four numbers. LANL has examined space and MAR needed to fabricate 80 p py in a preliminary fashion, but has not performed a detailed analysis of the full pit manufacturing process, including plutonium supply, waste management, AC, external support activities, and fabrication. To enable calculation of margin, Congress would need to obtain two numbers. Nuclear weapons complex has ample space and MAR for AC for 80 ppy. Uncertainty: Margins can change over time. It would not be acceptable to let uncertainties that materialize into actual events reduce margin below zero. A study would need to take into account that there are many ways to make more space or MAR available and to reduce space orMAR requirements, thereby increasing margin.. A detailed analysis would be needed to determine whether enough MAR allowance and space could be made available in PF-4 to manufacture 80 p py. On the other hand, AC to analyze process problems requires fast turnaround to minimize the time the process is shut down. Increasing the amount of plutonium would require adding electrorefining furnaces, increasing space requirements. Since the United States no longer produces plutonium, all U.S. plutonium is "old," such as from retired pits. As plutonium decays, it produces other elements, such as uranium and americium. These must be removed by chemical processes to purify plutonium for use in new pits. PF-4 uses 10,400 sf for plutonium recycle and purification. How much plutonium could that area purify per year? How many ppy would that capacity support? How much more space would be needed to provide plutonium for 80 ppy? Alternatively, could these processes be moved to another site, such as Savannah River Site? Pit fabrication generates some plutonium scraps. Providing for recycle of this plutonium requires space, and producing 80 p py would require more space than 30. How much space would plutonium disposition require? While major construction could make more space available, increasing efficient use of existing space could increase the space margin. LANL is currently redesigning the existing pit fabrication space in PF-4. The process line was intended as a pilot plant to develop, quickly, techniques for resuming production. It was not intended as the nation's pit production site; other proposed facilities, such as the Modern Pit Facility, were to fill that role. It could be done in several ways, including: Designing work flow to minimize space utilization. PF-4 to manufacture up to 30 ppy instead of 10; increased efficiencies of this type would reduce space requirements for 80 ppy, increasing margin. Develop equipment and processes for faster work flow so fewer pieces of equipment to manufacture a specified number of pits, reducing floor space. Repurpose unused space or space used for lower-priority programs, as discussed. Make more efficient use of PF-4's basement, which houses the nuclear materials vault and most utilities, and provides space for shipping and receiving and for staging waste drums. drum storage, freeing space to house such laboratory-floor operations as nondestructive analysis, and some waste management operations. Move some equipment out of PF-4. For example, a gas gun, which propels a metal slug into a plutonium target to study how plutonium behaves under impact. The gas gun uses 1,200 sf of laboratory space inPF-4 and some basement space. Moving it to RLUOB (if that building's MAR were to be increased substantially) or to another site would release space. of space by allowing fewer pieces of equipment to produce a given amount of product, thereby reducing space requirements. Rocky Flats Plant, for example, generally operated using three shifts per day. On the other hand, a higher tempo for an extended period could increase operating cost, require more maintenance, reduce time available for maintenance, and increase the likelihood of equipment failure. Such options would almost surely be faster and less costly than major construction, but without data on space required for 80 ppy, it is not possible to know if they would. provide enough space. As with space, there are options to provide more MAR. The total MAR allowance for PF-4 on February 27, 2013, was 1,800 kg PE. Pu-238 work accounted for 24.5% of that allowance; pit fabrication, for 16.4%; and other tasks, for lesser amounts. As noted, this analysis assumes that seismic upgrades increasePF-4 MAR to 2,600 kg PE, which is the current allowance. The gray space, 21.5%, represents the PF-3 MAR allowance unused on February 26, 2013. amount of MAR to the same scale as Table 1 and assumes that programs other than pit manufacturing use the MAR they used on February 27, 2013, for the foreseeable future. It shows that if the newly-available 800 kg PE of MAR and the unallocated MAR are both allocated to pit manufacturing and combined with the pit fabrication MAR, then 57.0% of the MAR in PF-4 would be available for pit work. (While the amount of MAR used by other tasks remains the same, the percentage of MAR they use is lower than in Table 1 because each task accounts for different amounts of MAR) for a smaller fraction of the higher MAR allowance. If adding 800 kg of MAR is not sufficient to support 80 ppy, at least three other options would release more MAR. While Pu-238 is only a small fraction of PF-4's radioactive material by weight, it is so radioactive that it is allocated 40% of the MAR allowance, though it did not use that much on February 27, 2013. Nor is MAR spread evenly within a program space, as discussed below. For more information, or to request a copy of the report, visit the National Nuclear Security Administration website. Plutonium Recycle and Purification (PRP) uses aqueous (plutonium dissolved in acid) processes and molten processes to recover pure plutonium from scrap or from retired pits by chemically removing impurities. This option would move about 198 kg of MAR out of PF-4. Module 1 would have 1.5% as much MAR asPF-4 and Module 2 would house molten plutonium from Pit Fabrication and from PRP. (This would eliminate PRP within PF- 4.) 2 would have 6.5% as much. MAR available in PF-4 for pit manufacturing would increase to 62.5%. Option 2 would move the Pu-238 MAR contained in 5,000 sf ofPF-4 to one module. This option requires half as many modules as the first option. Under Option 2, pit fabrication would be allocated 72.4% of the 2,600 kg PE of MAR inPF-3. Under this option, the MAR available for repurposing would also be allocated to pit fabrication. and releases twice the MAR as Option 1. Option 3 (not shown) would move all Pu-238 work to INL or SRS. This would free up all the MAR, vs. 91% for Option 2. As with space, it may be possible to increase MAR margin without major construction. One approach is to strengthen PF-4 seismically to reduce the risk of building collapse through such steps as wrapping supporting columns in carbon fiber bonded with epoxy to strengthen them, anchoring them. wall more strongly to the ceiling, installing braces that tie columns to beams, building shear walls, and installing a drag strut on the roof of PF-4 (see Figure 5 ). Other steps could reduce the risk that plutonium would escape even ifPF-4 collapsed. plutonium escaping in an accident causes dose, and dose is the key factor in determining the amount of MAR permitted. Removing tons of combustible material from production areas could also reduce plutonium escape risk in the event of a building collapse. AC involves little MAR because it uses tiny samples, such as a few milligrams of plutonium dissolved in a small amount of acid. AC involves much more space per unit MAR than does pit fabrication because each laboratory instrument is housed in a glovebox or hood that might occupy a lot of space. Anchoring gloveboxes more strongly to the floor to reduce the likelihood that an earthquake would knock them over, exposing plutonium to the air, in which case a fire could generate plutonium oxide particles and release them into the atmosphere. Most pit-related AC is performed in the CMR building. NNSA plans to halt programmatic operations there "in approximately 2019" Producing 80 ppy would require additional AC, as AC must be performed for each pit. N NSA plans to achieve a 30-ppy capacity by FY2026, so work currently done in CMR would have to be performed elsewhere.dozen square feet of space. Many analyses must be done for each individual pit. The number of instruments and their housing increase in tandem with manufacturing capacity. on multiple samples for each pit, and increasing manufacturing capacity would require more equipment. Finding enough space and MAR for AC should be simpler than for pit manufacture because more options are readily available to meet requirements for AC. At the height of the Cold War, the Department of Energy's Rocky Flats Plant produced between 1,000 and 2,000 pits per year. Because currently-anticipated rates do not approach that level, the nuclear weapons complex has a considerable amount of excess plutonium that could be used. space and MAR suitable for AC. This capacity resides at several buildings in the complex, including Building 332 at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL) and Building 773-A at SRS. Each of these facilities would apparently have enough floor space and MAR allowance to conduct the AC needed to support manufacture of 80 ppy. PF-4 might perform some additional AC for higher-MAR work, such as sample preparation (which takes several-gram samples from larger pieces of plutonium) and certain analyses. For example, LANL is validating an AC system that may require a sample size of 1.5 mg of WGPu instead of 225 mg. Not at issue is that LANL would need the capability to perform all AC tasks even if it did not have the capacity to perform AC for 80 ppy. The case for having a second site perform some of the AC needed for 80ppy while maintaining the full suite is not clear. The issue is whether all AC should be done at LANL and, if not, how much AC should been done there and how much at another site.  LANL would gain little if any technical competence by conducting AC for 80 ppy vs., say, 40. It may be difficult to provide enough MAR and floor space at LANL for the AC. LANL and a second site could cross-check the accuracy of each other's AC measurements and processes from time to time. LNL and LLNL have for decades, since before the end of nuclear. LLLNL and RLUOB have a long history of working together. L LLNL and LLUOB work together regularly. testing, held that peer review is essential in developing or maintaining weapons. A second site could accommodate a surge in AC needs or provide a backup in case AC operations at LANL were suspended or disrupted. It might cost more to perform AC at two sites rather than one, but it would be better for the U.S. to have two sites instead of just one. The U.N. Secretary-General has called for the creation of a second site for plutonium AC testing, which would be based at a different location. A second site would necessitate shipping many plutonium samples per year from LANL to another site. It might be beneficial to have all plutonium AC technicians at one site so they would have the same training and operate according to the same formal and informal procedures. Concentrating as much plutonium work as possible at LANL would strengthen its position as the nation's plutonium center. While SRS and LLNL could both do this work, their facilities presumably have the facilities to do it.one, though it is impossible to know without the data. different capacities and would require different upgrades to support whatever level of AC was required. Data on the MAR and space requirements, and the cost of the LANL, LLNL, and SRS options, would be needed to provide a basis for decision. The option of having LLNL or SRS conduct a substantial fraction of the AC needed to support manufacture of 80 ppy must be evaluated in light of a revised path forward for AC that NNSA developed in June 2014. Based on an initial analysis by Los Alamos National Laboratory, NNSA determined that the combination of PF-4 and RLUOB withPF-4 would be the best solution. a higher plutonium limit, if properly equipped, could likely conduct all the AC needed to support manufacture of 80 ppy. NNSA further found that RLUOB would have sufficient space for the needed equipment. The planning for this approach will be conducted by personnel from NNSA headquarters (including the Office of Defense Programs) and Los Alamos National Laboratory over the summer and fall of 2014 to understand the costs and benefits of this approach. A Radiological Facility like RLU OB would be a good place to start. is permitted to hold up to 38.6 grams of plutonium-239 equivalent (Pu-239E), or 26 grams of WGPu. Radiological Facilities do not require stringent safety or security measures because the dose to onsite or offsite personnel in the event of a worst-case accident would be very low. NNSA considered several options for raising the MAR limit in RLUOB. One option was to retrofit the building by adding various safety upgrades to make it HC-3. the highest level (1760 grams WGPu) That option would have been costly and time-consuming. Another option was to create a "Hazard Category 4," splitting off the lower part of the HC-3 range into a separate category. That option, however, would have necessitated a revision of 10 C.F.R. 830, Nuclear Safety Management. The various limits on plutonium are based on the dose to onsite workers and on-site workers. The upper bound, say, 900 grams Pu-239E. offsite personnel that a worst-case accident could be expected to cause. There are myriad other regulations, all of which come together in a document called a Documented Safety Analysis, or DSA. While each building in the Hazard Category system requires a DSA, a Radiological Facility, such as RLUOB, does not because the amount of radioactive material in the building is not considered a hazard. The DSA is tailored to each building and specifies the amount the building can hold and still remain below the dose thresholds set by DOE Orders. is so small. NNSA calculated that RLUOB, with 400 grams WGPu, could likely be operated as HC-3 without significant facility modifications. Because of modern building features, the dose from the increased material in a worst-case accident would still be below the dose thresholds set by DOE Orders. Operating RLU OB as an HC-2 facility would not require congressional approval. Instead, congressional oversight would come through the normal reviews associated with the normal review process for such facilities. the Chemistry and Metallurgy Research Replacement (CMRR) line item construction project. CMRR-NF was "deferr[ed] … for at least five years" in the FY2013 budget request on cost grounds. NNSA plans to include funds for two subprojects in the C MRR construction project beginning with the FY2016 request. While there are no cost estimates for NNSA's path forward, it would cost substantially less than CMRr-NF because it would avoid building a large plutonium facility. Congress would need data on MAR margin, space margin, and cost for various pit manufacturing options. Data on space and MAR requirements are also needed to calculate margin. It might turn out that once seismic improvements are made, PF 4 would have enough space for 80 ppy. But without data, one cannot know which options are infeasible, which provide excess capacity and thus entail excess cost, and which are "just right" The following questions highlight how these data could support decisionmaking. The next step would be to estimate the cost of the feasible options. would release a little more MAR but another 4,600 sf, as compared to a module. Would one module release enough MAR and space in PF-4 for pit manufacture? (This assumes that the immediately-repurposable space inPF-4 would also be used for pit manufacturing.) If yes, would that be the case if pit casting were moved to the module, or if Pu-238 were moved in the same way? Would the module be the only place in the United States that performs high-MAR, high-security pit casting? work on plutonium and can manufacture pits. Unused space therefore represents opportunity for plutonium work forgone. Would moving the entire Pu-238 line, 9,600 sf, to another site have the same result? Or would the released space be needed to accommodate added equipment needed to manufacture 80 ppy? At present, RLUOB is permitted to have 26 grams of WGPu MAR for AC, which is not nearly enough to perform the AC for 80 p py. If this limit remains in If the MAR limit for RLUOB is increased to 400 grams of WGPu for AC, how much more MAR and space, if any, would be needed for AC at LLNL or SRS? If the 26-gram limit is retained for R LUOB, would it be less costly to perform the remaining AC atLLNL or at SRS. What would it cost to enable RLU OB to hold 400 grams W GPu? How much more space would it take to perform remaining AC? for 80 ppy, would it be less costly to perform the remaining AC at LLNL or at SRS? LANL is conducting projects to bolster the seismic robustness of PF-4. If 2,600 kg PE is not enough MAR, could additional projects raise the MAR allowance enough to accommodate manufacture of 80 p py? LANl maintains that each successive module should cost less than the one before it. On the other hand, it is possible to increase the MAR from 1,800 to 2, 600 kg PE (or more or less) that some lessons learned would lead to increased costs. What is the first module estimated to cost? The second? How sensitive is the cost of pit manufacturing to capacity, and what tradeoffs might a sensitivity analysis reveal? As a hypothetical example, if it cost an additional several billion dollars to move from 70 to 80 ppy, would it be worth spending the added money? Would it be less costly to move Pu-238 to INL, SRS, or a newly-built module? manufacture, Congress would likely want to know if there is enough space margin and MAR margin for 80 ppy. Margin, the available resource (space or MAR) minus the required resource, must be greater than zero. Available space and MAR are known, as of certain dates, as this report shows. Congress may choose to direct NNSA to provide these two numbers. For pit manufacturing, is there currently enough margin for space andMAR in PF-4? If not, what would Congress do? Excess space and MAR exist at other sites in the nuclear weapons complex. How much AC should be done at LANL, and what is needed to support that amount of AC? What steps can be taken to maintain these margins over decades in the face of uncertainties? What can be done to provide enough space and margin for pit manufacturing? What is needed for the future of nuclear weapons production in the U.S. and around the world? What are the implications for the world for nuclear weapons development and production? Analytical Chemistry (AC) analyzes plutonium samples taken from each pit at various stages in its manufacture. AC measures the isotopic composition of the plutonium and the amount of alloying materials and impurities a sample contains. AC typically uses samples on the order of milligrams. Before a pit type can be accepted into the stockpile, it must be certified as acceptable for war reserve use. This involves validating weapons codes, among other things. Validation, in turn, draws on experimental data. PF-4 prepares test items for experiments at the Nevada National Security Site that do not produce a nuclear yield. PF-4 supports some of these experiments, such as by preparing samples for analytical chemistry and materials characterization. MC measures bulk properties of plutonium such as tensile strength, magnetic susceptibility, grain structure, and surface characteristics. MC typically uses samples on the order of a fraction of a gram to measure these bulk properties. For more information, visit www.pf-4.data. Pit Fabrication involves casting "hemishells" (half-pits) of plutonium. ARIES converts excess pits to plutonium oxide (a powder) and places it in special containers for long-term storage. MR&R examines containers of plutonium in PF-4 that are to be sent to WIPP for permanent disposition. If the containers have deteriorated, MR& R repackages the plutonium in new containers.tens of grams of plutonium per kilogram of material. finished pit with x-ray imaging, physical measurements, etc., to ensure it meets specifications. Pits are monitored at Pantex Plant (TX) and PF-4.PF-4 monitoring techniques include taking physical measurements and checking for release of gases that may indicate deterioration of the pit. While Pantex can perform some of these tasks, pits can be disassembled only. The NNSA and its predecessor organizations have monitored the condition of nuclear weapons using a variety of techniques since the beginning of the nuclear weapons program. Pu-238 is the heat source for radioisotope power systems (RPS) for space probes. It is manufactured by bombarding rods of neptunium-237 with neutrons in a nuclear reactor. It undergoes radioactive decay much more rapidly than does Pu-239, producing uranium and other impurities. PF-4 receives Pu-238, removes the impurities through chemical processes, and makes plutonium oxide, which it presses into capsules. It mates some capsules with other equipment to make RPSs for military applications. capsules to Idaho National Laboratory, which does the same to make RPSs for space probes. Plutonium Recycle and Purification (PR&P): This area recovers plutonium from scrap plutonium (such as from lathe turnings, pits scrapped for not meeting standards, or retired pits) Plutonium is then precipitated out of solution as plutonium oxalate, and is then roasted to produce plutonium oxide. This area also recovers and purifies plutonium using high-temperature chemical processes. RTBF is NNSA's program for operating the nuclear weapons complex and maintaining its infrastructure. Within PF-4, RTBF space is used for functions that support multiple programs, such as shipping and receiving, waste management, and material control and accountability. NNSA operates the weapons complex from a base in Virginia, Virginia, which is home to the U.S. Navy's F/A-18 Hornet aircraft carrier. The F/E-18 is based in Virginia and is part of the Navy's P-4 fleet.