In 1999, an estimated 90 million persons 16 and older reported that they had participated in some sort of formal learning activity. Much of this learning takes place outside of formal credential programs that confer a certificate or degree. In the workplace, where employers offer classes for job-specific skills, or in the many courses offered by postsecondary institutions that are not part of a formal credential program. The U.S. Census Bureau estimates that 1 in 4 adults are involved in some form of learning in the United States. In the 1999-2000 academic year, an estimated 7.1 million adults were enrolled as undergraduates in the nation’s postsecondary institutions. About three- quarters of these adult undergraduates were between the ages of 24 to 40, while about one-quarter were 41 or older. Compared with undergraduate students under the age of 24, adult students enrolled in.credential program, such as a continuing education class. The average age of these students was 24.5 years old. 1999-2000 were more likely to be working full time (35 or more hours per week), to be married, to have dependents, and to lack a conventional high school diploma. While the majority of undergraduates under the age of 24 were enrolled in baccalaureate programs, adult undergraduate students were primarily enrolled in certificate or associate programs in 1999-2000. Most adult students (55 percent) were enrolled at 2-year public institutions, while another 22 percent were enrolling in a public 4-year institution. Adult students received about $3.3 billion in grant assistance and $8.5 billion in loan assistance from programs authorized under Title IV of the Higher Education Act. To receive federal financial aid, adult students must apply for federal WIA and TANF funds. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. aid, students must meet several eligibility requirements, including being enrolled in a degree or certificate program, and maintaining satisfactory academic progress. Institutions are required to establish qualitative and quantitative criteria of satisfactory progress, and to monitor student progress. Taken together, these requirements help to ensure that Title IV funds are used in ways that benefit both students and the larger public, rather than purely recreational or leisure activities. Postsecondary institutions must also meet eligibility requirements to participate in Title IV programs, including legal authorization by the state in which they offer postsecondary education. Programs authorized under Title IV include Pell Grants for low-income students and Stafford Loans. Stafford loans may be either subsidized or unsubsidized. If the loan is subsidized, the federal government pays the interest cost of the loan for the time a student is enrolled in school. The borrower is responsible for paying interest during the life of theloan. Title IV also authorizes programs funded by the Pell Grants program and by the Stafford Loans program. The federal government does not pay interest on Stafford loans. Students who apply for Title IV aid must do so using the Free Application for Federal Student Aid (FAFSA) Information from the FAFSA is used to determine the amount of money that the adult student is expected to contribute to his or her own education. Statutory definitions establish the criteria that students must meet to be considered independent of their parents for purposes of financial aid, and statutory formulas are used to calculate the expected family contribution (EFC) The EFC is the amount that students are expected to pay for their education. establish the share of income and assets that are expected to be available for the student’s education. If the EFC is greater than the cost of attendance, the student is not considered to have financial need for federal Title IV aid programs. As table 2 indicates, the elements included in the student's cost of. attendance for the purpose of calculating the Pell Grant award vary according to the extent of. their enrollment. The elements included for the purposes of calculating Pell Grant awards vary depending on the institution. Pell Grant awards are calculated by subtracting the student’s EFC from the maximum Pell Grant award. In 1999-2000, the maximum award for a less-than- halftime student was $781. The maximum subsidized Stafford loan award is equal to the student's calculated financial need, subject to statutory limits on annual and cumulative borrowing. Students attending less than halftime are eligible to receive one-quarter of the maximumelliport award. For full-time students, maximum award was $3,125 for fulltime students. The maximum unsubsidized Stafford loan award is equal to the student’s cost of attendance, subject to statutory limits on annual and cumulative borrowing. Adult students also received financial aid from states, postsecondary institutions, and other federal sources. In 1999-2000, states awarded a total of $975 million to adult students enrolled in undergraduate education, typically on the basis of estimated financial need. About half of the states did not have aid programs in which adults enrolled less than halftime were eligible to participate. of considerations other than financial need. About $1 billion was available to the nation’s veterans and eligible service members through the Montgomery GI Bill. Financial assistance was also available to adult students from work- related sources. Employers may pay postsecondary educational expenses directly, or indirectly through employee reimbursement, and they are encouraged to do so by the federal tax code, which provides favorable tax treatment for them. The federal higher education tax credits and from employer-provided educational assistance are also available. In 1999-2000, employers provided $1.28 billion in assistance to adult students enrolled in undergraduate postsecondary education. Most often to those workers who were most likely to increase company productivity or profitability as a result of their education, such as high-skill, high-demand workers and managers. Assistance was also available to students through two federal higher education tax credits, the HOPE and HOPE tax credits.Employees were usually required by employers to meet a number of conditions to obtain this educational assistance. They were not obligated to enroll in degree or certificate programs, or to complete their studies. Both credits are nonrefundable. Eligibility for the HOPE credit is limited to students who are enrolled halftime or more in a degree or certificate program. The Lifetime Learning tax credit may be used by tax filers who enroll for any number of credits. If the filer has no tax liability, they cannot receive the credit. The HOPE tax credit and the Stafford student loan programs are not eligible for the Lifetime Learning credit. They are only available to students enrolled in their first 2 years of postsecondary education. and for any course that aids in learning new or improving existing job skills, including those that are not part of a degree or certificate program. Tax filers may use the credit for as many years as they are enrolled, without regard to degree progress or completion. In 1999-2000, all of the first $1,000 and half of the next $1,.000 of qualified education expenses per student could be used to compute the HOPE credit, for a maximum credit of $1.500. tax filer could use 20 percent of the first $5,000 in qualified educational expenses to compute the Lifetime Learning credit for a maximum credit of $1,000. Under WIA, adults and dislocated workers may be eligible to receive job training. Federal programs authorized by WIA and PRWORA may also provide some adults with assistance in meeting the costs of postsecondary education. For taxpayers filing jointly, both credits were initially phased out at $80,000 adjusted gross income, and fully phased out in 2014. Under PRWORA, block grants are made to states, which may use these funds to assist TANF recipients in meeting costs associated with vocational training or education. WIA funds may be used for postsecondary training only for expenses remaining after the receipt of Pell Grant and other sources of assistance. State and local workforce investment boards are authorized to establish limits on the amount of time or the amount of WIA  funds that may be used to meet training expenses. Under PRWORa, block grants are made to states, which may use these  funds to assist TANF recipients in meeting costs. In 1999-2000, one-third of adult undergraduate students, about 2.3 million, enrolled less than halftime. The typical less-than-halftime adult student was older, more likely to be working and married, and had a higher household income. More often enrolled without being in a degree program, according to the study. In addition to tuition and fees, childcare, and transportation, these costs may include tuition and Fees, childcare and transportation. For more information, visit www.education.gov. In 1999-2000, one-third, about 2.3 million, of adult undergraduate students were enrolled. Of those adults who expected to complete a certificate or degree and enrolled on a less than halftime basis during their first year of school, most had not completed a degree or certificate, and were no longer enrolled in school. Although less- than-halftime enrollment may permit adults to complete one or two courses helpful to their employment prospects, such enrollment appears to be an ineffective long-term strategy. less than halftime. Other adult students were either enrolled fulltime (12 or more credits), half- or three-quarters time (6-11 credits), or were in a combination of different enrollment types (mixed) Compared with adult students enrolled halftime or more, less-than-halftime adultStudents were older, and more likely to be working fulltime, be married, and have dependents. Less- Than Halftime adult students more often enrolled in 2-year postsecondary institutions, and less often pursued a baccalaureate degree. proportion of adults who enrolled on a less-than-halftime basis had household incomes over $30,000 than did adults enrolled halftime or more. An estimated 7 percent of all adult students enrolled less than halftime in 1999-2000 had. household incomes at or below 100 percent of the federal poverty guideline, which for a three-person household in 1998 was $13,650. A further 14 percent had incomes at. or below 150 percent of federal poverty guidelines, or $20,475 for aThree-person Household. School administrators say many adults have too little time to be a fulltime student. The routines of adult lifecompete with class attendance and the completion of course assignments, they say. Faced with this, many adults find it difficult to balance work and school, the administrators say. It's a balancing act that many adult students find difficult to achieve, they add. It can be difficult to meet family responsibilities and work obligations at the same time, school administrators say, adding that many adults struggle with this balancing act. “juggling act” some adult students may have to pursue postsecondary education on a less-than-halftime basis. College administrators we contacted also identified several other significant reasons why adult students might not enroll. These include the difficulty meeting the direct costs of school, scheduling conflicts, and students’ limited readiness for post secondary education. While many adult students receive some financial support towards postsecondary costs, most students pay the majority of school costs from their own resources. Because adult students find it difficult to economize on housing costs by searching for housing, some may not enroll at all. Working students may be unable to enroll on a halftime or fulltime basis due to the inflexibility of course and program options. Scheduling conflicts also played a role, according to college administrators. While some postsecondary institutions offered the majority of their programs, some offered less than halftime. Less than halftime can provides them with a way to reduce out-of-pocket costs associated with tuition and fees, as well as transportation, childcare, and books. The cost of group housing can also be reduced. Adults may find it easier to plan and manage their schedules over 5 to 7 weeks than they do over longer time periods, such as a traditional 10 or 15- week semester. At one 4-year school, only 10 percent of the undergraduate courses were offered during evening hours. At another institution, administrators noted that 3,000 course sections were offered each semester, but only 10 were available to adults in a shorter 5-7 week format, owing to reluctance of faculty to teach them. Administrators at one community college pointed to a lack of flexibility in employer work schedules. Adult students often need to refresh or develop college-level skills, they noted. Some adults may also lack confidence in themselves or their abilities, or feel out of place in school.in alternative times and formats. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S., call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. National data indicate that adults enrolled on a less than halftime basis are more likely to be encountering academic difficulties than other adult students. Some adults who enroll in credit-bearing courses at postsecondary institutions may not intend to complete a degree or certificate. Some may choose to complete only a few courses, finding this sufficient to acquire the skills that help them gain employment, obtain a promotion, or find personal satisfaction. We estimate that about two-thirds (66 percent) of adults who began in 1995-1996 did not complete a certificate or degree by 2001-2002. In 1999-2000, about 7 in 10 of the nation’s less-than-halftime adult students received assistance equaling about 44 percent of their school costs. Student financial aid from federal, state, and institutional sources comprised the majority of assistance received by lower-income adults. The average Lifetime Learning tax credit was significantly smaller than the average Pell Grant award. Adults who work part-time receive employer financial assistance for enrollment in credential programs less often than those who work fulltime. In Maryland, the Baltimore City Community College and city and state officials established the School Counts Program. TANF recipients who enroll at the community college are provided with advising, assistance with transportation and childcare expenses, and federal work study assistance. These supports permit a relatively large proportion of program participants to complete a certificate or degree. The program is not available in all states, but in Maryland, it is available to TANf recipients who are enrolled in community college. It is also available in other states, such as New Jersey, New York and Pennsylvania. Proposed changes to the Pell Grant program include allowing room and board and miscellaneous personal expenses, as is done for fulltime students. Another proposed change would be to allow less-than-halftime students to participate in the Stafford Loan programs. Administrators of postsecondary institutions in the four states we visited expressed concern about potential negative consequences of the Stafford loan proposal. Allowing, for all less- Than-Halftime students, the inclusion of room andBoard and mis Miscellaneous Personal expenses would provide some less- than-hal halftime students with additional aid. of room and board and miscellaneous personal expenses in their cost of attendance, as is done for other students. We estimate that about 13,000 less-than-halftime students who do not receive a Pell award under current law would receive an average award of $630 under this alternative in the 2003-2004 academic year. In addition, about 150,000  students would get a Pell Grant award increase of $111 per year in 2003- 2004. (See table 4.) The proposal would also increase Pell award amounts for those who already receive a grant. total federal budget cost of changing Pell Grant policy for less-than-halftime students would be approximately $25 million for the 2003-2004 academic year. This cost estimate assumes that adults who are not enrolled in school will not choose to enroll in response to the policy change. If about 35,000 individuals who were not in school respond to this change in policy by enrolling less than halftime, an estimate implied, in part, by some research, could be an additional $10 million. Current law does not permit less-than-halftime students to participate in the Stafford loan programs. Some have proposed that these students be allowed to participate. This change to the loan program would increase federal subsidy costs associated with the Stafford programs. Campus administrators anticipate that the change could have undesirable effects on postsecondary institutions and on students. We estimate that the average unsubsidized Stafford loan taken out by adult students would increase by $113 million in fiscal year 2004. The change could also have a negative effect on students and their parents. enrolled less-than-halftime would be approximately $680, while the average subsidized loan would be about $1,200. Administrators, particularly those at public 2-year postsecondary institutions, expressed the potential disadvantages associated with expanding eligibility. Students who do not complete a certificate or degree, research indicates, are especially likely to default on their loans. Some students might prefer—or better cope with—enrollment as a less- Than-Halftime student, but are encouraged by Stafford eligibility rules to take six or more credits. adults, and a range of funding sources that support participation in them. Some sources of funding available to adult learners permit short- term study that does not lead to the completion of a degree or certificate. Federal student assistance programs authorized under Title IV of the Higher Education Act provide assistance for adult learning that takes place in eligible postsecondary institutions. Requiring that students enroll in—and make progress toward—a postsecondary credential ensures that the federal investment in Title IV programs is used to support learning that is broadly beneficial. less than halftime basis do not intend to complete a degree, and many others expect to do so, but are unable to continue to completion. If less than halftime adults who do not complete a credential nonetheless benefit from completing a few postsecondary courses, then federal policy tools designed to support shorter-term and non-credential adult learning can better assist these learners than can Title IV programs. The potential costs—to the federal government, institutions, and students—of proposed changes to the Pell Grant and Stafford Loan programs, particularly the latter, are significant. Permitting less-than-halftime students to participate in the Stafford student loan programs would provide a new source of borrowing for these students. Allowing less- than-hal halftime students to include room, board, and personal expenses in calculating their Pell Grant cost of attendance would most often assist students who are currently receiving a Pell grant. This would provide them with an estimated $100 annual increase in assistance, rather than providing a widely available source of assistance. It may be accompanied by unintended and unwanted consequences, including increasing the volume of loans at risk of default. assistance to adults who are not currently receiving Pell Grants. In written comments on our draft report, Education stated that it appreciated our thorough review and examination of the financial, and other, impediments that are often unique to adult learners. Education noted that the report would complement a recent report of its own and that it would assist Education in achieving one of its departmental strategic goals. Education also provided technical comments, which we incorporated where appropriate. Education’s written comments appear in the report. in appendix IV. As agreed with your offices, unless you publicly announce its contents earlier, we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days from its date. At that time we will send copies to the Secretary of Education and other interested parties. We will also make copies available to others on request. In addition, the report will be available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staff have any questions or wish to discuss this material further, please call me at (202) 512-8403. contacts and staff acknowledgments are listed in appendix V. We were asked to determine: (1) the extent to which adults enroll less than halftime, the characteristics and factors associated with less-than- halftime enrollment, and the rates of completion among these students. The implications, including the budgetary impact, of changing the Pell Grant Program to allow room and board and miscellaneous personal expenses to be considered in the calculation of grant amounts for postsecondary education are also discussed in the report. The report was published by the American Council on Education. less-than-halftime students and changing the Stafford loan programs. For the purposes of this report, adult students are those who are 24 years or older. In designing our study, we reviewed data and literature pertaining to financial aid for adult students and part-time students. We analyzed focus group findings examining the barriers to enrollment and persistence faced by low-income adults. We interviewed officials at the Department of Education, researchers, and representatives of higher education organizations, such as the American Association of Community Colleges. administrators of two institutions of higher education not included in our four sample states: the City University of New York and Kaplan College. We also reviewed studies and surveys of employer- provided educational assistance. To determine the extent of less-than-halftime enrollment among adult students, we analyzed national data and visited selected postsecondary institutions. We analyzed two datasets created by the National Center for Education Statistics: the 1999-2000 National Postsecondary Student Aid Study (NPSAS) and the 2001 Beginning Postsecondary Students Study (BPS) We computed estimates of the Lifetime Learning credits received by less-than-halftime adult students. NPSAS data are collected at the individual student level, and cannot be aggregated into families or linked to tax filing status. We treated individual students as if they were credit claimants and recipients. We reviewed existing information about the sample to assess the reliability of the N PSAS and BPS sample data. The study was published in the online edition of the Journal of the American College and University Studies. We determined that the NPSAS and BPS data were sufficiently reliable for this report. Because both surveys are samples of a larger student population, there is some sampling error associated with them. Sampling errors are often represented as a 95-percent confidence interval: an interval that 95 times out of 100 will contain the true population value. The upper and lower bounds of the 95- percent confidence intervals for each estimate are presented in the tables in appendix II. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. National datasets provide valuable but limited information. For example, NPSAS is a cross-sectional rather than longitudinal study. We interviewed school administrators from 19 postsecondary institutions in four states. These institutions were located in California, Maryland, Ohio, and Virginia. The data were collected from 2-year and 4-year institutions in California and Maryland, and 2- year and 4 year institutions in Virginia. It is not clear if the data can be used to identify the duration for which students enrolled on a less-than-halftime basis. costs for resident tuition and fees at public 2-year institutions and the amount of available state aid varied. For example, in California the cost for resident 2- year tuition was lower than for all other states ($330), but no state aid is available to students pursuing their postsecondary credentials on a less-than-halftime basis. Maryland ranked 9th among states in tuition and Fees ($2,564) and, like California, did not have state financial aid available to less- Than-Halftime students. Both Virginia and Ohio had state aid available for less- than- Halftime students; however, Virginia’s $1,304 tuition was higher than that of Ohio. Ohio ($2,300). Within each state, we contacted three to six institutions (see table 1). Because most less-than-halftime adult students are enrolled at 2-year public institutions, we visited more of this type than other postsecondary schools. In addition, we selected institutions with large proportions of adult students in their overall student body. We met with a range of school administrators at these institutions, including financial aid officers, student affairs officers, directors of institutional research, and other administrative officers. collected institutional data on less than halftime enrollment among students graduating from 10 of the 19 we visited. We solicited information from each institutional research officer about the reliability of these data. Because these are not samples of a larger student population, there are no confidence intervals associated with them. The following steps were taken to estimate the additional federal budget costs associated with permitting degree-seeking students enrolled less than halfway to include room, board, and miscellaneous personal expenses in calculating their cost of attendance (alternative COA) for the purpose of receiving a Pell Grant. We estimated Pell Grant awards under the current law, and under an alternative COA for the 1999-2000 school year. The federal cost associated with changing the Pell Grant policy was calculated as the difference between the estimated federal cost under current law and the estimated total federal costs under the alternativeCOA. We used the National Postsecondary Student Aid Study to estimate the grants for all students in the sample who were less-than- halftime students seeking a certificate or undergraduate degree. To receive a Pell Grant under the alternative COA, the individual must have applied for financial aid. Federal costs for school year 1999-2000 were projected to school year 2003-04 by assuming that the ratio of these estimated federal costs to the total cost of the Pell grant program were the same as in school year1999-2000. To estimate the average Pell grant, we projected the estimated number of Pell grant recipients in schoolyear 1999- 2000 who are less than halftime students seeking a certificate or undergraduate degree. school year 2003-04, we projected the estimated number of Stafford subsidized and unsubsidized recipients in school year 1999-2000 who are less than halftime students seeking a certificate or undergraduate degree. For each student we estimated a cost of attendance (minus room and board and personal expenses) for the period enrolled in school. We also calculated each student’s estimated financial assistance, adding federal, state, private, and institutional aid. All students were assumed to borrow the Stafford loan amounts for which they qualify. Students who are already enrolled less than halftime in postsecondary education are unlikely to change their enrollment in response to the policy change. Seftor and Turner estimated price elasticities that fall in the range of –0.34 to -0.14. We found that the Pell Grant policy change would increase the average Pell Grant award from $0 to $630 for 0.63 percent (12,679/2,007,542) of the less-than-halftime student population. This enrollment response would cost the federal government $9,764,063 ( x $630+ [33,000,000 X 0.075 x 111/500 x 0.24] x $111).