As of May 2016, the UN reported that more than 4.8 million Syrians had fled the country and registered as refugees. U.S. funding obligated in support of humanitarian assistance for people affected by the conflict in Syria began in fiscal year 2012 and totaled just over $5 billion, as of February 2016. Food, shelter, nonfood items, health and nutrition, and water, sanitation and hygiene are among the main types of assistance provided inside Syria. The United States provided more than a quarter of the total international funding for the 2015 Syria humanitarian response. operating from Damascus largely remain within Syrian government controlled areas, but may also utilize cross-line deliveries. Financial oversight in humanitarian assistance programs includes managing program funds to ensure they are spent in accordance with funding instruments. Figure 6 shows this complex operating environment. According to USAID, its NGO implementing partners rarely utilizeCross- line deliveries. Figures 6 and 7 are from the U.S. Agency for International Development's (USAID) report on the situation in Syria, released on November 14. Government provides the overall framework for establishing and maintaining internal control. The Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission has issued an internal control framework. Internal control generally serves as a first line of defense in safeguarding assets, such as food and nonfood items. In implementing internal control standards, management is responsible for developing the detailed policies, says the Treadsway Commission. The framework is widely used around the world and includes the five components of internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities, information and communication. A dangerous operating environment, access issues, and remote management of programs can hinder the delivery of humanitarian assistance. U.S. agency officials must manage programs from outside of Syria, creating challenges for financial oversight, such as increasing the opportunity for fraud and diversion. The increasingly violent and widespread Syrian conflict has hindered effective delivery of aid. Based on our research, we have developed procedures, practices, and practices to fit the entity’s operations and to ensure they are built into and are an integral part of operations. Humanitarian assistance is routinely prevented or delayed from reaching its intended target due to shifting conflict lines, attacks on aid facilities and workers. The years of conflict have led to shifting areas of control as armed groups claim and lose territory. In late May 2015, for example, after ISIS took over the city of Palmyra, it was reported that aid workers had not been able to reach the city. The UN has released a report on the situation inside Syria, as well as interviews with officials providing assistance to Syria. Humanitarian workers inside Syria must work within the insecure operating environment, affecting their ability to carry out their mission and placing their lives at risk. Aid facilities are often indirectly impacted or directly targeted, leading to widespread damage. In one instance, an air strike hit the Syrian Arab Red Crescent offices in Idlib, destroying ambulances and vehicles. The capacity of the Red Crescent to provide first aid services in the city was curtailed. Administrative procedures put in place by the Syrian government have delayed or limited the delivery of humanitarian assistance, according to UNSG reports. As of May 2016, the UN reported that 4.6 million people inside Syria are located in hard-to-reach areas. More than 500,000 of those remain besieged by ISIS, the government of Syria, or non-State armed opposition groups. Parties to the conflict heavily restrict or deny humanitarian access to besieged areas, and people risk infectious disease, malnutrition, poor sanitation, and lack of medical care. The UN estimated that the lives of roughly 42,000 people remained besieged by government forces in the towns of Madaya and Buqayn. The UN reported that in 2015, only 10 percent of all requests for UN inter-agency convoys to hard-to-reach and besieged areas were approved and delivered. Even when these convoys were approved, the officials participating in delivering the assistance were sometimes subjected to hours-long delays, stretching into the middle of the night. State's and USAID’s implementing partners also told us that they rarely operate inside ISIS controlled areas because they cannot ensure that they will be able to operate. within the humanitarian principles of humanity, impartiality, neutrality, and operational independence. The UN reports contain multiple instances of ISIS blocking humanitarian and commercial access into and through areas under its control. For example, in November 2015, the UN reported that ISIS controlled and blocked humanitarian access to a stretch of highway leading to the western parts of Aleppo city. As a result, theUN was unable to deliver assistance to over 220,000 people. Due to restrictions, USAID and State staff manage the delivery of humanitarian assistance in Syria remotely from neighboring countries. in 2012 due to security conditions and the safety of personnel, among other factors. According to State and USAID officials, the inability to access Syria limits the visibility that staff have over the provision of humanitarian assistance. USAID also acknowledged several gaps in their monitoring system due to remote management, such as verifying progress, obtaining comprehensive information. The U.S. State Department says it is working with the Syrian government to improve the security situation in the country and provide more access to humanitarian assistance to the Syrian people. monitoring data on individual activities, and assessing the quality of monitoring data reported to USAID. In the absence of direct program monitoring, USAID and State officials noted that they utilize information provided by implementing partners to help ensure effective delivery of assistance and to help their financial oversight. USAID officials in the region explained to us that while partners provide data and information, their inability to consistently access project sites limited the extent to which partners could obtain and use the data. The report was based on interviews with officials from USAID, the State Department, and the United Nations. verify progress. Staff from several USAID-funded implementing partners told us they were unable to access project sites in southern Syria. Past audit work has shown challenges to such an approach, including cases of partners not fully implementing monitoring practices, resulting in limited project accountability. USAID Office of Inspector General (OIG) has reported that assistance projects implemented in developing countries are at significant risk of fraud, waste, and abuse, and further noted that those risks are multiplied when projects unfold in Syria. USAID OIG has noted that aid organizations providing life-saving assistance in Syria and the surrounding region face an extremely high-risk environment. The absence of adequate internal controls, among other challenges, can jeopardize the integrity of these relief efforts and deny critical aid to those in need. State and USAID do not require implementing partners to conduct comprehensive risk assessments for humanitarian assistance delivered to people inside Syria. While most partners assessed safety and security risks associated with such programs, most did not assess financial risks, such as the risk of financial losses.  USAID drafts memoranda highlighting potential risks for material support to terrorist groups. State asks its implementing partners to have internal control policies in place and report information on certain risks. Without such formal assessments, implementing partners may not have all information needed to design appropriate controls to mitigate such risks. U.S. agency officials charged with overseeing these programs might not have visibility into areas of risk, such as fraud and loss due to theft and diversion. Of fraud, USAID requires implementing partners operating humanitarian assistance to people inside Syria to conduct risk assessments. USAID’s Office of Food for Peace (FFP) and Office of U.S. Foreign Disaster Assistance (OFDA) require some implementing partners to create a Safety and Security Plan. USAID noted that it works closely with partners to ensure accountability and to ensure that assistance is reaching beneficiaries. While there is not a requirement, according to State, it has established framework agreements with its implementing partners emphasizing the commitment of the partner to internal controls, including risk management. However, the voluntary contribution agreements between State and these implementing partners do not reference the framework agreements or require comprehensive risk assessments. USAID OIG has four ongoing investigations of allegations of fraud and mismanagement related to programs for delivering humanitarian assistance to people inside Syria. Two of the investigations involve allegations of procurement fraud, bribery, and product substitution. Four of the nine partners in our sample conducted cross-border delivery operations from neighboring countries such as Turkey or Jordan and, therefore, procured goods in the host country or the region and warehoused them prior to transport into Syria. The inability of some partners to consistently access areas in Syria and directly monitor programs has created challenges for oversight.