GAO: 23 federal housing programs target or have special features for the elderly. It says waiting lists for many types of subsidized housing, including housing for elderly, are long. GAO: HUD and USDA programs target families at lower income levels, but not all. Agency: Only 4 of 23 programs require property owners to provide supportive services to the elderly, and those are not required to do so by HUD or the USDA. The federal government’s system for providing assistance to low-income people is highly fragmented, it says. the delivery of meals and nonmedical supportive services to elderly and disabled residents of public and multifamily housing. While HUD provides up to 40 percent of the cost of supportive services, grantees must pay at least 50 percent. Like the Elderly/Disabled Services Coordinator Program under ROSS, the Congregate Housing Services Program has provided no new grants since 1995. Congress has provided funds to extend expiring grants on an annual basis. The Neighborhood Networks program encourages property owners, managers, and residents. of HUD-insured and -assisted housing to develop computer centers. HUD does not fund each center’s planned costs but encourages property owners to seek cash grants, in-kind support, and donations from sources such as state and local governments, educational institutions, private foundations, and corporations. The ROSS grant program links public housing residents with appropriate services. This program differs from the Service Coordinator Program in that it is designed specifically for public housingResidents. The program is free and open to the public. ROSS program has five funding categories, including Resident Service Delivery Models for the Elderly and Persons with Disabilities. Resident Services funds can be used to hire a project coordinator and assess residents’ needs for supportive services. The Elderly/Disabled Service Coordinator Program has not provided new grants since 1995 but still services existing grants. The Service coordinator program provides funding for managers of multifamily properties designated for the elderly and disabled. The program is funded by federal, state, and local assistance programs. to hire coordinators to assist residents in obtaining supportive services from community agencies. Service coordinators can be funded through competitive grant funds, residual receipts (excess income from a property), or rent increases. According to HUD’s fiscal year 2003 Performance and Accountability Report, service coordinators were serving more than 111,000 units in elderly properties. Elderly residents of public and federally subsidized multifamily housing can also receive supportive services through partnerships between property owners and community agencies, according to HUD. owners and local organizations and through programs provided by HHS. For example, property owners can establish relationships with local nonprofit organizations, including churches, to ensure that residents have access to the services that they need. In Greensboro, North Carolina, we found several examples of such partnerships. At their discretion, propertyOwners may establish relationships that give the elderly access to meals, transportation, and housekeeping and personal care services. Although GAO did not obtain data on the extent to which such services are made available at all public and federally subsidized multifamily housing, in site visits to HUD and USDA multifamily properties, we find several examples. In Plain City, Ohio, residents of a Section 515 property receive meals five times a week in the community’s senior center. A local hospital donates the food and a nursing home facility prepares it. The senior center uses the funds collected from the lunch for its activities. In Carolina, Dolan Manor, a Section 202 housing development, has established a relationship with a volunteer group from a local church. The volunteer group provides a variety of services such as transportation for the residents. Guthrie Properties, also a Section 515 property, has established a relationship with the local Area Agency on Aging. The agency assists residents of Guthrie Properties in obtaining a variety of services, including meals and transportation to a senior center. Some elderly residents of public and federally subsidized housing may also obtain health-related services through programs run by HHS. For example, HHS’s Public Housing Primary Care Program provides public housing residents with access to affordable comprehensive primary and preventive health care. The United Way provides most of the funding for the senior center in Guthrie. The program awards grants to public and nonprofit private entities to establish the clinics. The organizations must work with public housing authorities to obtain the physical space for the clinics and to establish relationships with residents. Currently, there are 35 grantees, 3 of which are in rural areas. According to a program administrator, although clinics are not specifically geared toward public housing designated for the elderly, they can be established at such properties. Elderly residents of federally subsidized housing may also be eligible for the program's assistance. the Medicaid Home and Community-Based Services (HCBS) Waiver Program, which is administered by HHS’s Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. HUD has identified these waivers as an innovative model for assisting the frail elderly in public housing. In addition, eligible elderly residents of federally subsidized housing may receive health care through the Program of All-Inclusive Care for the Elderly (PACE) Like the HCBS waiver program, this program, like PACE, is also administered by the CDC. enables eligible elderly individuals to obtain needed services without having to live in an institutional setting. The program integrates Medicare and Medicaid financing to provide comprehensive, coordinated care to older adults eligible for nursing homes. Figure 1 provides information on the housing assistance programs that can use federally funded supportive services programs that assist the elderly. Mr. Chairman, this concludes my prepared statement. I would be happy to answer any questions at this time. For further information on this testimony, please contact David G. Wood at (202) 512-8678. Section 502 Rural Housing Loans (Direct) Section 502 Direct Housing Natural Disaster Loans Section 502 Guaranteed Rural Housing loans Section 504 Rural Housing Repair and Rehabilitation Loans Section 515 Rural Rental Housing Loans. Section 521 Rural Rented Assistance (Section 8 and Rent Supplement) (inactive) Section 8 Moderate Rehabilitation (in active) Section 207 Mortgage Insurance for Manufactured Home Parks Section 207/223(f) mortgage Insurance for Existing Multifamily Properties. Section 213 Mortgage insurance for Cooperatives Section 221(d)(3) Below-Market Below- market. Before fiscal year 1992, the Section 202 program also supported the development of housing for the disabled. The Section 515 program’s Congregate Housing subprogram requires properties to provide supportive services. Section 221(d)(3) Mortgage Insurance Section 236 Mortgage Insurance and Interest Reduction Payments (inactive) Section 236 (d)(4) mortgage insurance and interest reduction payments (in active) Section 221 (d) mortgage Insurance and interest Reduction Payments ($1,000 to $1,500) ($2,500 to $5,000)