Security experts have raised concerns that terrorists may try to smuggle radiological or nuclear materials into the United States to produce either an RDD or IND. Sealed sources are used throughout the U.S. and are commonly called a sealed radiological source. This radioactive material is encapsulated, or sealed, in metal, such as stainless steel, titanium, or platinum, to prevent its dispersal and is commonly known as a sealed Radiological Source (RDS) or dirty bomb. The RDD is a bomb made from a mixture of nuclear and radioactive materials. other countries in equipment designed to diagnose and treat illnesses, preserve food, detect flaws in pipeline welds, and determine the moisture content of soil. Depending on their use, sealed sources contain different types of radioactive material, such as strontium- 90, cobalt-60, cesium-137, plutonium-238, and plutonium-239. While no terrorists have detonated a dirty bomb in a city, Chechen separatists placed a canister containing cesiam-137 in a Moscow park in the mid- 1990s. In contrast, detonating an IND would require a terrorist group to obtain nuclear weapons material. Another form of nuclear terrorism occurred with the dispersal of radioactive materials through a sequence of events in London during November and December 2006. On November 23, 2006, Alexander Litvinenko, a former officer of the Russian Federal Security Service, was poisoned with a milligram of polonium-210—about the size of a grain of salt. The perpetrators of that attack dispersed the poloniam by the perpetrators of the 2006 London bombings. The crime and the victim resulted in widespread contamination across London and even abroad. His poisoning was detected only after he was hospitalized for a few weeks and tested for symptoms of radiation exposure because of hair loss. Following the poisoning, forensic investigators examined 47 sites across London for traces of polonium. Of these locations, about 12 showed signs of this radioactive material, including a restaurant, hotel room, soccer stadium, and an eastbound British Airways plane. British investigators also identified over 1,000. people who might have been in various ways exposed to the polonium. Health officials tested 738 of them and found that 137 had reportable levels of this substance. Few of these individuals turned out to have levels that warranted medical attention. The decontamination activities at these sites spanned 19 days, involved a number of methods and technologies, and cost more than $200,000. The estimated total cost of managing this incident, including law enforcement investigation, testing individuals, sampling materials, and cleanup, was $4 million. incidents as evidenced by not (1) developing a national disaster recovery strategy as required by law and (2) issuing specific guidance to coordinate federal, state, and city planning to recover from RDD or IND incidents. The Post-Katrina Emergency Management Reform Act of 2006 requires FEMA to develop, coordinate, and maintain disaster recovery plans. FEMA has not developed a national recovery strategy or issued specific guidance. Federal agencies have conducted few exercises to test recovery plans for these incidents, as shown in the table below. a national disaster recovery strategy. Among other things, the strategy is to clearly define the roles, programs, authorities, and responsibilities of each agency. The federal government has placed a higher priority on developing a strategy to respond to domestic incidents, including RDD and IND incidents. For example, the response strategy, captured in the 2008 National Response Framework, is focused on domestic incidents. The recovery strategy should focus on the recovery from these incidents, rather than domestic incidents as a whole, the report says. A FEMA coordinator says the agency is working on a national disaster recovery strategy. The strategy would provide guidance to federal, state, and local agencies, he says. The lack of a national recovery strategy that would include RDD and IND incidents is problematic, authors say. Most localities would count on the federal government to carry out analysis and environmental cleanup, they say. The authors say the new administration has decided to rethink the entire approach to disaster recovery. these activities should be primarily a federal responsibility, they write. FEMA has not issued specific guidance describing how federal capabilities would be integrated into and support state and local plans for recovery from RDD or IND incidents. FEMA has delayed issuing this guidance pending the reevaluation of its planning approach by the new administration. FEMA is developing regional support plans, including for RDD and IND incidents, through its regional offices. EPA indicated that as no single federal department or agency has the sole requisite technical capacity and capabilities to respond to the scope of RDD incidents, it is expected that numerous federal agencies would need to work together. There is evidence that the agencies could effectively carry out the analysis and environmental cleanup of localized areas contaminated by radioactive materials. EPA has published inventories of radiological methods and technology guidance for contaminated sites, surfaces, and media. DOD has also played a major role in studying potential applications for innovative technologies for its Superfund sites. There are limitations in federal efforts to help address, in a timely manner, the magnitude of cleanup capabilities to help with an RDD or IND incident, the authors say.  limitations in federal capabilities to complete some analysis and environmental cleanup activities might slow the recovery from an incident. For example, the current predictive capability of various plume models is not sufficient, and may never be sufficient to reduce the time necessary to fully characterize the extent of contaminated areas. EPA agreed that characterization of areas contaminated with radioactive materials from RDD or IND incidents would be challenging because existing plumemodels are not entirely applicable to urban areas. NNSA officials informed us they are working with FEMA on a multiyear program to improveFederal capabilities to model the release of material during a radiological or nuclear incident. of contaminated areas and levels of cleanup after applying decontamination approaches. FEMA’s proposed process for determining cleanup standards during the recovery phase for RDD and IND incidents has not been fully exercised. EPA has conducted an examination of federal, state, local, and private laboratory capabilities to conduct environmental sampling and testing. EPA determined that there was a significant capacity and competency gap in the nation's laboratory capacity to support environmental monitoring and decontamination of chemical, biological, and radiochemical-nuclear agents. meeting the laboratory evaluation needs for an RDD scenario. In addition, while EPA did not conduct a detailed assessment of the national planning scenario for an IND incident, it determined that such an incident could contaminate 3,000 square miles and require potentially millions of samples for laboratory analysis. According to EPA documentation, the gap in laboratory capacity would result in the lack of timely, reliable, and interpretable data. EPA has documented that it is currently establishing an all-media Environmental Response Laboratory Network. Decontamination expert: An important consideration in decontamination is the starting level of radioactivity and desired ending level. No technology removes all of the contamination all the time; some technologies are more efficient than others at removing certain kinds of contamination. The current DHS planning guidance for decontaminating urban areas is not clear on this issue, the expert says. The goal is to enhance the capacity and capability of public laboratories, says the expert, and to reduce the cost of decontamination. RDD and IND incidents recommends a framework for incident cleanup and recovery using a process called “site-specific optimization” for determining the level of environmental cleanup after RDD or IND incidents. The guidance recommends that this process include potential future land uses, technical feasibility, costs, cost-effectiveness, and public accountability. EPA informed us that draft guidance intended to outline the structure of, and responsibilities for the conduct of the optimization process as they pertain to EPA’s involvement in RDD andIND incidents is under review by the new Administrator. There are limitations in federal capabilities to help state and local governments address the interim storage and eventual disposal of the radioactive waste. A 2008 report found gaps in our nation’s capabilities to effectively remove and dispose of radioactive debris in the event of an RDD or IND incident. This is due, in part, to current technology and technology development.forward to the lessons to be learned from the upcoming Liberty RadEx exercise in 2010, which officials believe should provide significant insights into the issues under discussion. restrictions on accessing possible disposal facilities for the radioactive debris stemming from such incidents. According to NNSA officials, DOE’s disposal sites currently can only accept low-level and mixed low- level radioactive waste from its own and DOD facilities. EPA is concerned about access to commercial radioactive waste disposal sites in the event of such an incident, according to an EPA decontamination expert. Currently, there is only one low-levels radioactive waste. disposal site located in Utah that could be used by most states for radioactive debris disposal. waste disposal facilities for waste generated by users of radioactive materials in their states. Another issue is paying for waste disposal. In the Superfund program, EPA can bill the responsible party, if known. However, covering the cost of waste disposal would be complicated in the case of RDD or IND incidents. One additional complicating factor would be the mixing and problematic separation of radioactive, biological, and chemical materials in the debris that would stem from such incidents. According to a recent research paper on disposal issues, the proper characterization of the quantity, properties, and level of debris contamination and decontamination is important. Residue from an RDD or other radiological incidents can have significant impacts on cleanup costs and restoration timelines. Concerns about limitations in these federal capabilities were expressed by many city, state, and federal regional office emergency management officials who responded to our survey. Respondents from nearly all the cities and states expressed the need for a national disaster recovery strategy to address gaps and overlaps in current federal guidance in the context of a radiological incident. The EPA is currently developing a suite of decision support tools for the management of waste and debris from a variety of different events. Most cities expressed the need for greater planning interactions with the federal government. EPA and FEMA regional office emergency management officials offered a number of suggestions on ways to improve federal preparedness. The UK reported taking the following actions to prepare for recovery from RDD and IND incidents: Enacted civil protection legislation in 2004. Established generic framework for multiagency response and recovery for all levels of government. The U.S. has not yet developed a national disaster recovery strategy for RDD or IND incidents. Guidance emphasizes that response and recovery are not discrete activities and do not occur sequentially. The Government Decontamination Service provides advice and guidance to local governments, maintains and builds a framework of specialized analysis and environmental cleanup contractors. Updated the recovery handbooks for radiation incidents in 2008 and 2009. The handbooks are intended to aid decision makers in developing recovery strategies for contaminated food production systems, drinking water, and inhabited areas following the release of radioactive materials into the environment. The lessons learned from this exercise were incorporated into the United Kingdom’s recovery strategy.