The focus of patent examination is to determine whether the invention in a patent application satisfies the legal requirements for a patent, including that the invention be novel and not obvious. USPTO’s manual for patent examiners establishes certain requirements and processes that examiners must follow in examining patent applications, including performing prior art searches. There are generally two types of prior art—patent literature or patent expert exhaustive readiness. The examining process involves a variety of steps, at least one of which includes prior art searches. Patent literature consists of previously issued U.S. or foreign patents and published patent applications. Nonpatent literature can include such things as product manuals, standards established by international organizations, textbooks, periodicals, or conference presentations. Both patent and nonpatent Literature may be written in a language other than English, referred to as foreign-language art in this report. USPTO’s manual for patent examiners requires them to conduct a thorough prior art search and directs them to consider all prior art unless they can justify with reasonable certainty that no more patents are needed. Examiners are expected to complete their examination of an application in a certain number of hours. The time allotted varies depending on factors such as the technology and the seniority of the examiner. For example, an examiner reviewing an application related to wire fabrics and structure may be allotted about 14 hours for examination. For an examiner at the same experience level, such as a database and file management examiner, the allotted time would be about 32 hours for that application. The allotted time includes the time needed to review the application, perform the examination, and other tasks. a search for prior art, and complete all office actions. Examiners have minimum production goals, based on the time allotted, for the number of office actions they must complete. USPTO uses several different information technology systems to assist examiners in conducting prior art searches. For example, to search U.S. patent literature, examiners use two systems, the Examiner’s Automated Search Tool (EAST) and the Web-Based Examiner search Tool (WEST) USPTO’s Scientific and Technical Information Center (STIC) operates systems that can search U.S. patent literature and that store some nonpatent literature. Examiners may access additional foreign patent documents through other web-based tools. According to a USPTO document, the agency had subscriptions to 119 different journals or external databases in 2014.from 1920 through 1970. These systems also include abstracts of some foreign patents. The agency has no immediate access to computer-generated translations, known as machine translations. As of May 2015, USPTO had nearly 8,300 patent examiners across the eight technology centers we reviewed. Examiners at the GS-14 level or above are generally primary examiners. Primary examiners may accept or reject a patent application without additional review.machine translation services from STIC and three contracted translation vendors that currently cover 35 languages. The U.S. Patent and Trademark Office uses the General Schedule (GS) classification system for examiners, whose levels range from GS-5 to GS-15. junior examiners—most examiners below the GS-14 level—whose work must first be reviewed by a primary examiner before an office action can be sent to the applicant. Supervisory patent examiners are responsible for the day-to-day management of examiners. In addition to applying for a patent from USPTO, an inventor may also seek patent protection in other countries for the same invention by filing in multiple patent offices. Such interrelated patent applications are described as a patent family. World Intellectual Property Organization says 2.7 million patent applications were filed worldwide in 2014. 2.2 million applications filed with patent offices in the United States, China, Japan, South Korea, and Europe. EPO issues patents that cover 42 countries, most of which are member countries that are party to the European Patent Agreement (EPO) The organization estimates that approximately half of all applications worldwide are repetitive filings in a patent family, and the rest are initial filings. The IP5 offices, including EPO and JPO, each receive hundreds of thousands of applications each year. EPO and JPO have about one-half and one-fifth as many examiners as USPTO, respectively. There is a limit on the number of federal employees JPO can have; therefore, 494 of its 1,702 examiners are fixed-term. English (about 80 percent of applications), French (about 5 percent), and German (about 15 percent) are the official languages of the EPO, JPO and other patent offices. The EPO has three official languages, one of which is used for processing an application. rather than permanent employees, and JPO has begun outsourcing aspects of prior art search. USPTO examiners face a variety of challenges in identifying relevant prior art during patent examination. Experts we interviewed and examiners we surveyed cited challenges related to certain attributes of  prior art and patent applications andUSPTO examination. JPO officials stated that outsourcing some aspects ofPrior Art searches based on instructions from a government examiner frees up the examiners’ time and allows the office to review more applications. Examiners report difficulties with the amount and relevance of prior art references provided by applicants. Examiners find that excessive references make it somewhat or much more difficult to complete a thorough prior art search in the time allotted. Expert: Nonpatent literature and foreign-language prior art are difficult to find. Prior art from the mid-1970s is particularly challenging to find because it has not been digitized and is not fully digitized by the USPTO, the authors say. They say examiners do not have ready access to textbooks that are good source of good prior art. Clarity of applications can pose a challenge to finding relevant prior art. Inconsistent terminology can make it more difficult for examiners to findrelevant prior art because searching for one term using keyword searches will not identify documents that use a different term. USPTO’s practice that examiners should attempt to identify all applicable grounds for rejecting a claim or claims during their first review may discourage examiners from resolving any issues of clarity or ambiguity before conducting their initial searches. Time pressures may reduce examiners’ ability to conduct thorough prior art searches. EPO and JPO use several approaches that may help their examiners address challenges. These approaches include worksharing, creating internal databases of nonpatent literature, using patent classification systems, and adopting advanced search tools. Examiners may then look at other applications and find similar inventions within the same group to find more relevant results. The IP5, a multilateral forum of the five largest patent offices, identified worksh sharing as the main tool for addressing an increasing number of patent applications. is more difficult to find relevant prior art. As of March 2016, USPTO had not established a documented strategy to identify and assess new sources. The agency does not currently have specific plans to add additional nonpatent literature sources to its new system because of its initial focus on developing parity with the existing system, the authors say. The U.S. Patent and Trademark Office uses two methods to review examinations, which may help the agency monitor the effects of the challenges described above and the thoroughness of searches.