Section 808 of the NDAA for fiscal year 2012 limited DOD’s total obligations for contract services in fiscal years 2012 through 2014. The limit does not apply to contract services for military construction, research and development, and services funded for overseas contingency operations. The spending limit identified in the act applies to DOD in its entirety, so individual components may exceed their individual targets. Congress has also enacted legislation to improve the availability of information on DOD”s acquisition of services, the authors say. 2014, as each command was able to manage to their respective target. In fiscal year 2014, the Army obligated $254 million more than its adjusted Comptroller target. Army budget officials attributed a portion of the obligations over its target to coding errors in its financial system. These coding errors include obligations for contract services from overseas contingency operations that are not subject to the spending limit but were inadvertently included in the Army’s submission to the Comptroller”s office. The Army took additional steps to manage and monitor the contract services spending limit for fiscal year 2013 and 2014. Navy FMC officials identified two factors that led to the Navy exceeding its target. The Navy FMC office identified an additional $400 million in contract services needed for unanticipated costs. The Comptroller’s office approved a waiver request in June 2014 for $263 million in additional ship maintenance costs, which was approved by the Comptroller's office. Despite the increase in the Navy”s target amount, Navy officials identified a number of other factors that caused the Navy to exceed its target amount. costs, but did not submit a waiver request to the Comptroller since the fiscal year was ending. To mitigate this issue for fiscal year 2015, the Navy FMC office began monthly monitoring of contract services obligations. Second, Navy F MC officials attributed the remaining $600 million of the $1.07 billion it obligated over its target to a coding error in its financial system. Specifically, NavyFMC officials said the financial system does not allow for the payment of overage payments at mid-year and end-of-year execution reviews. Navy financial management officials said they manually corrected these coding errors in the past, but decided to forego the manual corrections in fiscal year 2014. The Navy FMC office requested updates to its financial system in August 2013 to correct this coding issue, but the change has not yet been approved. To make progress payments for these types of items, Navy officials explained that these payments are coded as contract services to work around the system limitation. The change is expected to be approved in fiscalyear 2016.  NDAA for fiscal year 2015 encouraged DOD to use different data sources, such as advisory and assistance services, to measure compliance. This new measure was adopted after a lack of data hindered DOD’s previous attempts to demonstrate compliance. All of the military departments achieved funding reductions greater than 20 percent for closely associated with inherently governmental and staff augmentation functions by fiscal year 2014, according to an analysis of DOD obligation data.or implemented. As we reported in December 2014, the advisory and Assistance services budget category is not an exact measurement of closely associated. with inherently government functions. However, it may be the best currently available data source to determine reductions. The Air Force and Navy achieved reductions in advisory and assistance service obligations greater than 30 percent from fiscal years 2010 through 2013. The Army achieved a 9 percent reduction by fiscal year 2013, but achieved a 32 percent reduction in fiscal year 2014. The DOD Comptroller intends to measure a 30 percent reduction from 2010 levels based on former Secretary of Defense Robert Gates’ Efficiencies Initiative which called for DOD to reduce service support contractors by 10 percent each year from fiscal year 2011 through 2013, for a total of 30 percent.