The 105 th Congress held several hearings and introduced many bills to address this issue, but adjourned without passing legislation. No legislation addressing slamming was introduced in either the 107 th or 108 th Congress and none has been introduced in the 109 th Congress, to date. The potential for slamming is expected to increase as competition in the provision of intrastate long distance and local telecommunications services becomes more widespread. The FCC's slamming team, which is part of the Consumer and Governmental Affairs Bureau, in 2004 resolved approximately 3,500 slamming complaints involving over 300 telephone carriers. The FCC has taken slamming enforcement actions totaling nearly $30 million. The Telecommunications Act of 1996 expanded the scope of the FCC's authority to address the problem of unauthorized switches. The rules absolve slammed consumers of liability for charges incurred for the first 30 days after the switch. The FCC continues to take enforcement actions against violators of FCC rules.. Charges are set at 150 percent, split between the authorized carrier (100%) and the subscriber (50%). Carriers proven to be in violation of FCC Rules are subject to fines and penalties. The FCC has also applied verification procedures to the practice of implementing carrier freeze requests. The rules require that solicitations for such freezes be clear and that the consumer be informed as to how such a freeze may be lifted. Verification rules are also applied to changes in local as well as long distance carriers, but wireless carriers are exempt. The FCC also noted that these verification procedures do not preempt state law. These verification methods are to be used as a state minimum, the FCC said in a statement. AT&T v. FCC found that the FCC exceeded its statutory authority in enforcing certain of its slamming rules relating to customer verification. While not remanding the FCC's rules the court did vacate fines totaling $80,000 imposed on AT&T. But additional verification procedures may be adopted for intrastate carrier changes. The FCC had imposed a fine on AT & T for slamming when an unauthorized person, without the knowledge of the line subscriber, authorized to slam the phone. But the court found that this was not the case and vacated the fine. The court found that the requirement that the telecommunications carrier verify that the actual subscriber, and not just the person answering the line and claiming to have authority to authorize a carrier switch, authorize the switch exceeded the FCC's statutory authority. The court stated that the statue does not require actual authorization but only requires that the carrier get verification. Furthermore the court said that the FCC gives carriers "a virtually impossible task: guaranteeing that the person who answers the telephone is in fact authorized to make changes to that phone line" telephone line." On March 17, 2003, the FCC issued a second further notice of proposed rulemaking (CC Docket 94-129; FCC 03-42) strengthening requirements on third-party verification procedures. These rules became effective July 21, 2003. New initiatives are established to ease the filing of consumer complaints and speed their resolution. These include the establishment of a website to allow consumers to file complaints electronically and obtain on-line consumer protection information. The FCC also established a toll-free number at the FCC to enable consumers tofile complaints over the telephone. The FCC has also adopted rules that establish truth-in-billing and billing format principles. These rules establish requirements that are "intended to protect consumers against inaccurate and unfair billing practices" A number of issues not addressed in the April 13, 2000 reconsideration order were addressed in a subsequent FCC order adopted on July 21, 2000. These include permitting the use of Internet LOAs in compliance with provisions of the FCC rules. The rules went into effect on April 2, 2001, and are intended to improve the resolution of complaints. contained in the E-Sign Act ( P.L. 106-229 ), thereby allowing carrier changes to be made by consumers via the Internet. retaining the three-way call as a verification method but requiring the carrier's sales representative to drop off the call once the connection has been established between the subscriber and the third party verifier. New complaint reporting requirements for carriers which require carriers to submit semiannual reports to the FCC's Enforcement Bureau containing, among other information, the number of slamming complaints they have received. The Government Accountability Office (GAO), (known at that time as the General Accounting Office), undertook an investigation into the general issue of slamming. This report, Telephone Slamming and Its Harmful Effects , was released in conjunction with testimony given at Subcommittee hearings. The Fletcher Companies, a long distance provider that has come under regulatory scrutiny, and has since had its license revoked, for slamming complaints. By changing their names, the companies were able to avoid scrutiny. The GAO report was released at the request of Senator Collins, then Chairman of the Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations. GAO: FCC, states, and telecommunications industry have been effective in protecting the consumer from telephone slamming. GAO: Information provided by all long distance carriers in compliance with FCC-required tariff filing procedures, is not reviewed and is no deterrent to a slammer. The most effective action that consumers can take to eliminate the chance of intentional slamming is to have their local exchange carrier freeze their choice of long distance providers. The conclusions reached in the GAO report regarding FCC efforts to deter slamming were discussed during hearings held, on April 23, 1998, by the Senate Permanent Investigations Subcommittee. Slamming is the practice of placing unauthorized charges for services and products on a consumer's telephone bill. The 105 th Congress examined this issue, with each chamber passing its version of legislation to protect consumers against slamming. Legislation to strengthen existing slamming regulations was again introduced in the 106 th Congress but was not enacted. No slamming measures were introduced in either the 107 th or 108 th Congress nor in the 109 th Congress, to date. Whether the FCC's strengthened slamming rules and subsequent enforcement actions will be a sufficient deterrent to stop the practice is unclear. The "Consumer Anti-Slamming Act of 1998" ( S. 1618 ), passed the Senate (99-0) with amendment, on May 12, 1998. The bill prohibited long distance carriers and resellers from changing a subscriber's long distance provider without the subscriber's explicit permission. The use of negative option marketing, whereby a consumer must take some action to prevent a switch from occurring, was banned. The FCC was given the authority to prosecute those who refuse to pay their fines. FCC was required to review the code every two years to ensure that its requirements "adequately protect consumers" Each carrier was given 10 days within adoption of the code, or commencement of operation, to elect to comply with the voluntary code. Those telecommunications carriers, including resellers, that elected not to comply, were to be subject to presumably more stringent FCC regulations. H.R. 3888 also detailed specific, more stringent, minimum requirements to be incorporated into FCC-developed regulations for carriers not operating under the voluntaryCode. The FCC was also required to compile and publish a report, on a semiannual basis, ranking carriers by the percentage of verified complaints, excluding those generated by the carrier's unaffiliated resellers. Carriers listed among the five worst performers for three consecutive times were to be subject to FCC investigation. Carrier found in violation of the voluntary code or found willfully and repeatedly slamming were subject to a fine of up to $1 million. The FCC has not commented on the new rules, which are expected to be implemented in the coming months. H.R. 3888 was passed by the House Commerce Committee and ultimately the full House. It gives state attorneys general enforcement authority under the federal legislation. The bill also gives subscribers credit for charges incurred when using the slamming carrier's service. It directs the Commerce Department's National Telecommunications and Information Administration to report to Congress on "the feasibility and desirability" of establishing a neutral third party to administer a system to prevent slamming. It was significantly different from the subcommittee-passed version of the bill. H.R. 3888 contained a significantly different approach to combat slamming from its Senate counterpart, S. 1618. Negotiations between the House and Senate to reconcile differences between the two measures continued through the waning days of the session. Despite such efforts, however, H.R.-3888 was not brought to the Senate floor and legislation to address slamming was not enacted prior to the adjournment of the 105 th Congress. The telecommunications industry has acknowledged the existence of a slamming problem but is not necessarily in agreement. The Competitive Telecommunications Association (CompTel) issued a statement that called for "zero tolerance" of intentional slamming. CompTel urged carriers to agree to investigate all slamming allegations, repay consumers who have been the victims of slamming, and terminate any employees or agents who "knowingly and willfully engaged in such practices" The statement also advocated uniformity in state and federal slamming requirements, to lessen consumer confusion, and called for the levying of fines, but solely in cases where it has been proven necessary. proven that the carrier "has engaged in willful and intentional slamming...." Although virtually no one supports the practice of intentional slamming, some concerns have been expressed over the approaches being taken to curb this practice. One concern has focused on the necessity for, or concern over specific provisions contained in, legislative proposals. Two other concerns addressed in legislation have also generated controversy: the implementation of primary interexchange carrier (PIC) freeze programs; and the methodology used by the FCC to develop slamming statistics. FCC: PIC freeze is a viable option to prevent slamming in the long distance market. Concerns have been expressed over the potential for misuse of this option. FCC established safe harbors of $1.25 for electronically-processed PIC changes and $5.50 for manually processed P IC changes. Local exchange carriers can charge more if they can document higher costs and less than the safe harbor rate if they choose. Some feel that potential for abuse of the PIC Freeze will become greater. from carrier to carrier and that many of the potential and perceived abuses, such as high charges or difficultly in switching, do not apply to most programs. Many local exchange carriers claim that they do not actively market the PIC freeze option but only offer it in response to customers who complain about slamming or who specifically inquire about it. The methodology used by the FCC to develop slamming statistics has also been brought under question. The GAO criticized the methodology used to determine the list of top slamming offenders. The FCC compares slamming offenders by citing the ratio of the number of complaints per million dollars of company revenue. That methodology, according to the GAO, is flawed because it can lead to a severe understatement of the revenue-to-complaint ratio for the smaller companies, or resellers. This occurs because resellers are not required to, and generally do not, report their revenue to the FCC unless the revenue exceeds $109 million. To enable the FCC to make comparisons, to list the top slamming offenders, the FCC assumes that those resellers that have not provided revenue data, had revenues of $109 million. LCI International Inc., a long distance carrier in the United States, has also expressed concern over the manner in which the FCC calculates yearly slamming rates. Unlike the GAO, LCI claims that the FCC's current practice of dividing the number of slamming complaints by a company's annual telecommunications revenue favors larger carriers. This occurs,LCI states, because the larger the company, the more complaints it receives. a company's revenue the more consumers it can slam without appearing to be a major offender. LCI recommends that the FCC calculate its slamming rate ratio by dividing the number of slamming complaints by theNumber of new long distance customers. H.R. 2112 (Franks) A measure to amend the Communications Act of 1934 to increase the forfeiture penalty for telephone service slamming and to require providers of such service to report slamming incidents, and for other purposes. Introduced July 8, 1997; referred to Committee on Commerce. A measure to strengthen and expand the procedures for preventing the slamming of interstate telephone service subscribers. Introduced July 9, 1997; referred to Committee on Commerce. H.R. 3050 (Dingell) A measure to establish procedures and remedies for the prevention of fraudulent and deceptive practices in the solicitation of telephone service subscriber, and for other purposes. Introduced November 13, 1997, referred to House Committee on commerce. HR. 3749 (Bass) AMeasure to amend the Communications Act of 1934 to improve the protection of consumers against slamming by telecommunications carriers. H.R. 3888 (Tauzin) A measure to amend the Communications Act of 1934 to improve the protection of consumers against slamming by telecommunications carriers. S. 1051 (Campbell) A. measure to enhance protections against unauthorized changes of telephone service subscribers from one. telecommunications carrier to another. Introduced April 29, 1998; referred to Committee on Commerce. Referred to Subcommittee on Telecommunications, Trade and Consumer Protection May 8, 1998. Passed Telecommunications Subcommittee, as amended, by voice vote, August 6,1998. An amendment in the nature of a substitute offered by Representative Tauzin was adopted by voiceVote by the Commerce Committee, on September 24, 1997.