The 1986 amendments to RCRA established the LUST Trust Fund to finance the cleanup of petroleum releases from underground storage tanks. Until recently, states could use these funds only for cleanup and related administrative and enforcement activities. Within this restriction, trust fund money could be used for the following general categories of activities: testing tanks for leaks when one is suspected; investigating a site to evaluate the source and extent of petroleum; assessing the number of individuals that may have been exposed to petroleum contaminants and the seriousness of exposure. contaminated soil and water; providing safe drinking water to residents at the site of a tank leak; providing for temporary or permanent relocation of residents; and providing reasonable and necessary administrative and planning expenses directly related to these activities. The Energy Policy Act of 2005 (the 2005 Act), enacted in August 2005, expanded the permitted uses of the LUST Trust Fund. It authorizes states to use a portion of their LUST Fund money for inspections and other leak prevention purposes. The 2005 Act authorizes appropriations from the Lust Trust Fund through fiscal year 2011 of $555 million per year. year for a variety of activities. $200 million for cleanups of releases from leaking underground storage tanks. $100 million for activities including onsite inspections, groundwater protection, and enforcement. $55 million for delivery prohibition, operator training, and release prevention and compliance. An additional $50 million per year is authorized from the general fund to cover administrative expenses and other activities. Net revenue to the LUST Trust Fund from taxes on petroleum products totaled $1.2 billion in 2013. The Trust Fund was established in 1998. approximately $190 million in fiscal year 2005. The 2005 Act also included several other provisions regarding inspections, operator training, and financial responsibility, among other things. Some of these provisions impose ongoing requirements on states. For example, the inspection provision requires each state receiving federal funding to inspect all of its regulated underground storage tanks at least once every 3 years, beginning after the state has inspected tanks that have not been inspected since December 1998. Effective February 2007, the 2005 Act directs EPA to require that each state receive federal funds either (1) require additional, or secondary, structures that would be required to be inspected, or (2) require inspections of existing structures. help contain a release (secondary containment) for new and replaced underground storage tanks located near sources of drinking water. (2) require evidence of financial responsibility for tank manufacturers’ and installers’ certification. This coverage would provide for the costs of cleanup directly related to releases caused by improper tank manufacture or installation. The 2005 Act also extended until 2011 the tax on petroleum products that capitalizes the federal LUST Trust Fund. Under EPA policy, except in rare circumstances and in Indian Country, states will address underground storage tank releases that are financed by the LUST Fund. cooperative agreement with EPA. EPA will undertake a cleanup only when there is a major public health or environmental emergency. In these circumstances, EPA’s involvement is to be limited to stabilizing the immediate situation, with the expectation that further cleanup will be conducted by the state. States are responsible for overseeing cleanup work performed by the party responsible for the contamination and for performing the cleanup at sites where sites where it has been found to be contaminated. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. Federal money from EPA’s Brownfields program can be used to clean up sites contaminated by petroleum under certain circumstances. Only certain governmental organizations, nonprofit organizations, and nonprofit educational institutions are eligible for Brownfields cleanup grants. In fiscal year 2005, EPA provided eligible entities with about $22.3 million in Brownfields grants for cleaning up Sites contaminated with petroleum. No responsible party can be found for the LUST Trust Fund, which was established in the 1970s to help clean up contaminated sites. EPA and states have made progress in cleaning up releases from underground storage tanks. Of the almost 450,000 releases confirmed as of fiscal year-end 2005, cleanups had been initiated for about 93 percent and completed for about 74 percent. About $4.0 million of these grants were awarded for direct cleanup work, $13.3 million for site assessments, and $5.0million for revolving loan fund programs. Table 1 shows key tank- related data elements reported by EPA as of September 30, 2005. Methyl tertiary-butyl ether (MTBE) is a gasoline additive designed to reduce emissions and raise octane. In some cases, MTBE was added to gasoline to fulfill requirements set in the 1990 Clean Air Act Amendments to reduce certain types of emissions. Because MTBE dissolves easily in water and does not cling to soil very well, it migrates faster and farther through the ground than other gasoline components. This makes it more likely to contaminate public water systems and private drinking water wells. effects have not been conclusively established, but the federal government has determined it to be a potential human carcinogen. The effects of exposure to MTBE include headaches; eye, nose, and throat irritation; coughs; nausea; dizziness; and disorientation. Low levels of MTBE can make drinking water supplies undrinkable due to its offensive taste and odor. Because of uncertainties about MTBE’s health effects, EPA has not set a national standard for MTBE in drinking water. Congress also took action through the 2005 Act to reduce the use of MTBE in gasoline. Cleanup of 54,000 known releases from leaking underground storage tanks would likely require substantial amounts of public funds from state and federal resources. States were unable to estimate the cost of cleaning up more than another 8,000 releases whose cleanup will require at least some public funds. EPA estimates that a release costs about $125,000 on average to clean up, but the cost can vary based on several factors. cleaned up using at least some public money. Nearly all states reported to us in our survey that they use public funding to clean up releases from tanks without a viable owner. Six states reported that they had a state fund dedicated to tanks with no owner. Other states without such dedicated funds primarily reported using resources from other types of state funds or from the federal LUST Trust Fund. Four states said they may wait until the property on which the leaking tank was located was cleaned up before using public funds. is located is purchased and rely on the new owner to clean the site up. States may have releases from tanks without a viable owner in their backlog. Maintaining adequate financial responsibility coverage ensures that money will be available to clean up releases from underground storage tanks. This money, in turn, contributes to timely completion of cleanup and thus reduces the risk to human health and the environment posed by releases that are not cleaned up in a timely manner. We asked states about their backlog of releases and clean-ups. Twenty-three states reported cases of inadequate coverage in the past 5 years. States used somewhat different definitions of what constituted inadequate financial responsibility coverage. In general, states said they counted cases as having inadequate coverage when an owner or operator either (1) had not maintained coverage or (2) had maintained coverage but did not have proof of coverage at the time the state requested it. The federal government says it has no plans to require tank owners to prove they have adequate financial responsibility insurance in the next five years. years, while only 7 states and the District of Columbia reported no cases. The number of cases involving inadequate financial responsibility coverage may indicate that at least some public funds will be used to clean up a release that otherwise would have been paid for by a responsible party. For example, according to Florida officials, the state has cleaned up about 350 sites annually in past years using public funding. Of these sites, approximately three to four sites per year involved responsible parties that would have paid for the release. did not maintain adequate financial responsibility coverage. In our survey, Florida estimated an average cost of $380,000 in public funds to fully address each release requiring public funds. Florida may have spent more than $1 million per year on such sites in the past. Officials in three additional states—New Jersey, Texas, and Utah—also told us that public funds could be used in cases involving inadequate financial responsibility Coverage. They did not say if they would use such funds, but they did say they could. not know the number of times public funds had been used in these types of situations in the past. Checking financial responsibility coverage helps to ensure that owners or operators maintain adequate coverage as required by federal law. Some options that owners and operators can choose for coverage either require annual updates or are often renewed annually. Owners or operators that self-insure, or choose to demonstrate that they have sufficient assets to cover costs resulting from a release, must prepare an insurance application. For more information, visit the Federal Insurance Commission's website. annual letter with financial information supporting their ability to pay. Owners or operators that choose private insurance for financial responsibility coverage must pay annual premiums to maintain coverage. EPA does not provide states specific guidance on whether or how frequently states should engage in routine verification of financial responsibility Coverage. Most states reported to us that they attempted to checkFinancial responsibility coverage on a regular basis. Only about one-third of the states reported that they required annual proof that tank owners or operators were maintaining coverage. The remaining states generally report that they checked this coverage.  states that do not check financial responsibility coverage on an annual basis may not know if owners or operators are maintaining required coverage. Forty-seven states and the District of Columbia reported that they anticipate identifying about 37,000 releases over the next 5 years. Nearly half of the states did not know the number of cases of inadequate coverage that had occurred in their state in the past five years. Of these 48 respondents, 43 reported that their state had not checked financial responsibility insurance coverage in the last 5 years, and seven said they did not check it at all. that they expect to spend public funds to clean up a total of about 16,700 of these releases, 2 reported no expected use of public funds, and 3 were uncertain. Using these estimates, we determined that the total cost toClean up releases projected to be identified in the next five years in these states could be around $2.5 billion. States also reported that, overall, the proportion of releases was lower than the overall proportion of clean-up releases in the U.S. cleaned up using public funds is likely to decline in the future. Some states that do not use their financial assurance funds to provide financial responsibility coverage for newly identified releases, such as Florida and Arizona, expect particularly sizable declines. These states expect that owners or operators will use private sources of financial responsibility Coverage to pay for the cleanup of most releases identified in their backlogs. The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers expects to clean up a higher percentage of releases in their current backlog than of releases they expect to identify in the next 5 years (see fig. 5). Most states use financial assurance funds to pay for cleaning up releases from underground storage tanks. EPA officials are responsible for determining whether a financial assurance fund is financially sound. Lack of timely cleanup is a concern because the longer pollution from releases is left in place, the greater the potential for it to spread. Tank owners and operators in these states demonstrate financial responsibility coverage primarily through private insurance and self-insurance, according to state officials.. At fiscal year 2005, 39 states held unexpended funds of approximately $1.3 billion. Nine states reported that their funds limit the amount of cleanup work they finance. North Carolina was only authorizing cleanup work that the fund could pay for within 90 days. Florida’s financial assurance fund stopped providing financial responsibility coverage for new releases in 1998. EPA: A state assurance fund is financially sound if it provides reasonable assurance that money is available to pay for cleanup costs and other liabilities. The longer contamination from these releases is left in place, the greater the potential becomes for the contamination to spread. The LUST Trust Fund is funded by a $0.001/gallon excise tax on gasoline and other motor fuels. Since 1987, the fund balance has been growing at an average rate of about $129 million per year. About 80 percent of the money is distributed to the states to support their cleanup programs. LUST Fund money generally represents a small portion of the individual states’ cleanup program budgets. The 2005 Act also included language providing that EPA may withdraw approval of a state fund without withdrawing approval of the overall state underground storage tank program. EPA develops information on states’ needs and performance from semiannual activity reports. Survey disclosed several concerns regarding the accuracy of these reports. EPA recommends that the regions review each state’s data submission for reasonableness. The data the state reports is generated by canvassing their regional staff, and the state has found errors in the data reported in the past, the report says.. The report also says that the state tracks contaminated sites rather than releases, and Wyoming provides its best estimate of release data. corrected data. EPA regional officials indicated that they were generally following this headquarters guidance. In some cases regional officials were not aware of reporting problems with the states in their regions that our survey disclosed. To ensure that states properly understand EPA’s definition of the data reporting elements, at least one EPA region reminds its states of the EPA definitions each time a semiannual activity report is due. Other regions were less proactive, essentially relying on informal discussions, the experience of the state officials, or the posting of the definitions on the EPA Web. EPA also aggregates elements of the states’ semiannual activity reports to measure program performance against the national goals. For fiscal year 2005, EPA’s goals for the underground storage tank program included (1) completing 14,500 cleanups, (2) completing 30 cleanups in Indian Country, and (3) decreasing newly reported confirmed releases to fewer than 10,000. Money from the LUST Trust Fund is meant, in part, to address releases from tanks without tanks. EPA should collect information from states about abandoned underground storage tanks. This information would improve EPA’s ability to determine how to most efficiently and effectively distribute LUST Trust Fund dollars to the states. 37 states and the District of Columbia reported numbers of releases that came from tanks without a viable owner in our survey. As of December 2006, EPA Office of Underground Storage Tanks officials stated that EPA had not found a viable owners for any of the abandoned tanks in their area. The EPA has not found any viable owners. Under cooperative agreements with EPA, states receive distributions from the LUST Trust Fund to help cover the cost of administering their LUST cleanup programs. According to EPA regional officials, the states’ programs are all set up differently and the states can decide how they will best use the money to fit their particular program. Over the past 10 years, on average, states have used roughly one-third of their Lust Trust Fund money.yet required states to report this information because of concerns regarding the burden this might place on some states. for each of the following categories: (1) administrative activities, including LUST Trust Fund program management, general management and administrative support, program guidance and implementation, and training. (2) enforcement activities including all actions necessary to identify a leaking underground storage tank site’s potentially responsible party; issuance of letters, notices, and orders to the responsible parties; oversight of the cleanups. (3) cleanup activities consisting largely of emergency responses, site investigations, exposure assessments, and corrective actions. In fiscal year 2005, most of the states reported spending at least some of their Lust Trust Fund money in all three categories. EPA says some states are using federal money for salaries rather than cleanups. EPA says it is up to states to decide how to use LUST Trust Fund money for cleanup. Agency says it relies on states to ensure that tank owners and operators comply with federal financial responsibility regulations. EPA: Only about one-third of states check coverage on an annual basis, while the remaining states generally reported they check less frequently or not at all. The agency says it would be worthwhile to continue to collect data from states regarding the sites without viable owners. GAO: EPA should ensure that tank owners and operators maintain adequate financial responsibility coverage. Agency should also improve oversight of the solvency of state assurance funds, GAO says. Report will be available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staff have any questions about this report, please contact me at (202) 512-3841 or stephensonj@gaO.gov, we will send copies to EPA Administrator and other interested parties. The objectives of this review were to provide information on the cost in public funding from state and federal sources to clean up known releases from underground storage tanks. For the purposes of the review, we defined public funding as including any money controlled by the federal government. Key contributors to this report are listed in appendix V. of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of this report. The full report can be found at: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/23/science/science-and-environment/features/top-10-reports-on-clean-up-from-underground-storage-tanks. and/or provided by state and federal agencies. Money from the federal Leaking Underground Storage Tank (LUST) Trust Fund, state financial assurance funds, other state funds that have not been approved by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to provide financial responsibility coverage. Money appropriated by the state to pay for cleanup that would not otherwise occur. Our definition excluded money spent by federal, state, and local government agencies to clean up releases from tanks they either own or operate. This money would be considered to be provided by the responsible party. survey to state officials responsible for underground storage tank programs or, where applicable, for state cleanup funds, in the 50 states and the District of Columbia. The practical difficulties of conducting any survey may introduce nonsampling error. For example, differences in how a particular question is interpreted, the sources of information available to respondents, or the types of people who do not answer the question. The number of tanks, releases, and cleanups, and financial responsibility and funding sources for cleanups. respond can introduce unwanted variability into the survey results. We included steps in both the data collection and data analysis stages to minimize such nonsampling errors. For example, in the research design and data collection stages, we took the following steps: We obtained from EPA its list of state contacts. We then attempted to contact all listed state officials via e-mail and asked them to tell us whether they or someone else in their state would be the most appropriate contact. In states where we were not able, we asked officials to identify more appropriate survey respondents. to contact the officials on EPA’s list via e-mail. Officials named on lists of state contacts from two other professional organizations. Officials listed on states’ underground storage tank-related Web sites. We pretested the survey with officials from four states between October 28, 2005, and December 21, 2005. We used their feedback to refine the survey. States were selected for the survey, which was conducted from October 28 to December 21 of 2005 in four states, including New Hampshire, New Jersey, Massachusetts and Rhode Island. pretests to ensure variation in size of workload and status of the state financial assurance fund. As a result of our pretests, we made changes to some of the survey questions. We sent an announcement on November 18, 2005, of the upcoming survey to state contacts (including state officials). We then interviewed the officials to ensure that the (1) questions were clear and unambiguous; (2) terms used were precise; and (3) data needed to respond to the questions was available to the state officials. Survey included a series of data reliability questions to assess the accuracy of the information provided to us by the respondents. For selected survey questions, where we were able to, we independently corroborated survey data by comparing these data with EPA data. As expected, there was wide variability in the level of oversight of the databases states use to track underground storage tank information. Given the limitations in the information reported from some states, we determined that the survey data are not comparable by state, nor should they be reported using such terms as “actual” sums, budgets, or outlays. discuss each topic of interest. We then calculated a score for each state based on the number of relevant topics they could discuss, as indicated by their survey responses. We interviewed all states that had scores at or above a threshold score that we determined, based on how many states we would need to discuss the relevant topics with to obtain sufficient information for the purposes of this report. We also conducted interviews with regional program officials from EPA’s Underground Storage Tank Program in six EPA regions to gather additional information. releases from leaking underground storage tanks, (2) these sources’ future viability, and (3) the federal funding available to address these releases. We selected these regions primarily because survey responses from one or more states in these regions raised questions about similar data they had reported to EPA. We spoke with regional officials about these apparent discrepancies, as well as about the regions’ processes for distributing money from the LUST Trust Fund. We also asked about the solvency of states’ financial assurance funds. Department of the Treasury officials interviewed EPA headquarters and regional officials to determine the process by which EPA distributes LUST Trust Fund money. They gathered documentation regarding appropriations of money from the fund to EPA, states’ expenditure of fund money, and the balance of the fund and its annual revenues. The documentation we gathered included (1) annual apportionment letters, (2) EPA Spending Reports, and (3) Treasury’s Lust Trust Fund. The document was used to track appropriations of LUST trust fund money to EPA. Fund Financial Statements, which we used to track the fund balance and revenues collected into the fund. We selected these sources based on EPA officials’ indications that they were the most appropriate sources for the purposes of this report. We obtained and reviewed relevant documentation on their reliability, including copies of audits of Treasury’s financial statements and internal controls. These audits were conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. We also discussed the reliability of Treasury's LUST Trust Fund data with knowledgeable EPA and Treasury officials. that we used in this report from Treasury’s financial statements sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this review. We conducted our work from June 2005 to December 2006 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. As described in appendix I, our assessment of the reliability of the data provided by states in their surveys found wide variability in the level of oversight of the databases that states use to track underground storage tank information, and similar variability in how state officials described how they arrived at responses to certain questions. divided states into three relative categories, according to our assessment of the reliability of their survey responses. 17 states generally reported having fairly recent data quality reviews, several internal controls on the data, no significant data quality problems, and provided fairly precise and mathematically grounded explanations for their calculations. 26 states and the District of Columbia generally reporting having some internal controls, and/or some data quality issues. 6 states generally report having few, if any internal controls; and 6 states reported having no internal controls at all. and/or significant data quality problems, and/or didn’t provide explanations for their calculations or reported that they were guesses. Overall, given the limitations in the information reported from some states, data reported by states and presented in this appendix should not be used to compare state programs. The GAO is an agency of the legislative branch that reviews federal programs on behalf of the U.S. Congress. To see the full report, go to: http://www.gao.gov/report/50-states. We are currently surveying the 50 states as part of a study of how states finance the cleanup of leaking underground storage tank (LUST) sites. We will use the information gathered in this survey to provide the Congress with information about the magnitude of LUST cleanup costs across all 50 states. We are aware of similar survey efforts conducted in the past year by the Vermont Department of Environmental Conservation and by EPA’s Office of Surface Water Policy and Enforcement. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency is responsible for the LUST program. of Underground Storage Tanks. Your prompt response to this survey is very important. Without your state’s response, we will not be able to accurately report to the Congress on the magnitude of LUST cleanup costs across all 50 states. To answer some of our questions, you may need to coordinate your responses with other state agencies responsible for certain aspects of the LUST cleanups. We have discussed our survey with these parties and eliminated overlap where feasible. Your Prompt participation will help us avoid costly follow-ups. This questionnaire can be filled out using MS-Word and returned via e-mail to USTSurvey@gao.gov. If you prefer, you may print copies of the questionnaire and complete them by hand. Please use your mouse to navigate by clicking on the field or check box you wish to answer. To select a check box or button, simply click on the center of the box. To change or deselect a checkbox response, simplyclick on the the response field. check box and the ‘X’ will disappear. To answer a question that requires that you write a comment, click on the answer box ____ and begin typing. The box will expand to accommodate your answer. We provide definitions for terms in this survey at or near the point at which the term appears. Please consider these definitions when responding to survey questions. Have there been any reviews of the recent review? [Enter quality of the data? UST management? 4 digit year.] a. Yes....... No ........ b. Yes......... No ........ c. Yes...... No ........ d. Yes..... No ........ 2. Which of the following types of information does each of the databases you listed above contain? (e.g. location) a. .......................................................... b. ........................... c. ................................................................... d.  ................................. 4. What are the known limitations of the current data ( e.g., data elements that are known to be incomplete, incorrect, or out-of-date)? a.... ........................... None b. .. ........................ ... None c. ............................ None d. ................................... None 5. Is there any additional information about the way your states’ data for UST management is collected, entered, stored, and quality reviewed that would help inform our interpretation of these data? We are concerned with federally regulated USTs, as defined by EPA. These tanks include “any one or combination of tanks (including underground pipes connected thereto) that is used to contain an accumulation of regulated substances” This term does not include any farm or residential tank of 1,100 gallons or less capacity used for storing motor fuel for noncommercial purposes. The term also includes a septic tank, storm- water or wastewater collection system, flow-through process tank, or liquid trap or associated gathering lines directly related to oil or gas production and gathering operations. A tank situated in an underground area is defined as a tank situated 1.percent or more beneath the surface of the ground. For more information, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/30/energy/energy-storage-tanks/index.html. if the storage tank is situated upon or above the surface of the floor. 6. What are the cumulative data for the number of federally regulated USTs for your state, first as of September 30, 2004, and then as of Sept. 30, 2005? Are these numbers exact or estimated? 7. How many new releases did your state confirm in each of the last five federal fiscal years? Is this exact or an estimate of how many releases there were in each fiscal year? If it is an estimate, please share it with us at CNN iReport. an exact number or an estimate? How did you calculate the number of new releases from USTs your state confirmed in each of the last five years? How many new releases do you estimate that your state will confirm over the next five years. How many releases from federally regulated USTs do you expect your state to confirm in the next 5 years? An estimate of how many releases your state is likely to confirm over that period of time. An estimated number of releases that you think your state could confirm in that time period. next five years? b. Estimated number of new releases over the next five years that will require at least some amount of public funding to clean up? c. How many of these new releases do you estimate will require some public funding? 9. EPA computes your state’s “cleanup backlog” by subtracting the cumulative number of cleanups completed from the total number of releases completed over the past five years. For more information, go to the EPA website or go to www.epa.gov/cleanup. Based on the numbers you provided above, your state’s cleanup backlog, as of September 30, 2005 is: 0. Is this number correct? Yes .................... No...................... a. What is the correct number? Please refer to this number when answering questions about your state's cleanup backlog in completing the remainder of this survey. 10. Considering the number of releases in your state.”, how many involve MtBE at levels requiring cleanup? Is this an exact number or an estimate? Number of releases with MtBE. releases in your state’s cleanup backlog that involve the release of MtBE at levels requiring cleanup? 11. How did you calculate the number of releases that have affected groundwater at levels needed for cleanup? 12. Is there any additional information about your state's data for UST management that would help inform our interpretation of your responses to questions about the scope of the cleanup? 13. How many releases have affected the groundwater at the levels required for cleanup, and is this an exact number or an estimate? and type of UST cleanups in your state? Sources of Funding for Cleanup Public funding: Includes any funding controlled and/or provided by state and federal agencies. Do not include funds spent by federal, state, and local governmental agencies to clean up releases from tanks they either own or operate. These funds would be considered to be provided by the EPA if they were used for cleanup that would not otherwise occur. For confidential support call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. by the responsible party. State financial assurance fund: Any state fund used to pay for cleanups of releases from federally regulated USTs. We do not make a distinction between funds that EPA has approved as a financial responsibility mechanism and those that EPA hasn't approved. In those cases where a state fund is dedicated solely to coverage of tanks without a viable responsible party, the survey provides a separate space to answer questions about such funds. We recognize that in some cases a state’s fund may cover tanksWithout a viableresponsible party as well as other types of tanks. EPA-defined site cleanup costs: “All costs associated with site response concerning prevention or mitigation of threats to public health, welfare, or the environment that may occur by a release (or suspected release) of petroleum from an underground storage tank.” These costs include emergency responses, site cleanup. Responsible party funding: Includes both direct expenditures by responsible parties (for example, a tank owner paying out-of-pocket for all or a portion of the costs of cleanup) and indirect expenditures. investigations, exposure assessments, the planning and design of corrective action, and the conduct, management and oversight of long-term remedial corrective actions. 13. Considering the number of releases in your state’s cleanup backlog as of September 30, 2005, what is your estimate of the number. of these releases for which EPA-defined site cleanup costs will be paid for exclusively by. responsible parties? 14. The number of Releases for which some amount of public funding will be required. 14. Among those releases in the current cleanup backlog that will require at least some amount of public funding after September 30, 2005, excluding funds already spent on these cleanups, how many would you estimate will require public funding amounts in the following ranges? a. $0 - $99,999 ............................................... b. $100,000 - $200,000 ...................................... c. $300,000 to $500,000 for cleanup costs that will be paid for exclusively by responsible parties. What do you estimate is the average cost in public funds to fully address each release that involves MtBE? How did you estimate the number of releases that fall into each category of funding? 15. Based on your experience with cleanups of leaking federally regulated USTs that require some amount of public funding, what do you estimates the cost to address each of these releases? 16. What do you think the cost would be in the event of another MtBE release in the near future? 17. What would the cost in the future be if MtBE were to be replaced with a new system? What do you estimate is the average cost in public funds to fully address each release that impacts groundwater at levels requiring cleanup? How did you estimate these average costs in public funding? 16. In the past year, what was the total amount spent (in actual outlays) to pay for the public funding portion of cleanups at federally regulated UST sites? [If possible, if possible, we would like to hear from you about how much you spent on cleanups in the last year] provide this amount for the latest federal fiscal year (10/1,04 to 9/30/05).] Is this an exact number or an estimate? Total outlays................................... a. Are these amounts for the Latest Federal Fiscal Year? Yes .................... No...................... b. On what date does the year for which you are reporting start? Yes ................................ .............................................. g. Is this amount from the Federal LUST Trust Fund or other federal sources? Yes or no. 9/30/05)? Yes .................... No...................... h. On what date does the year for which you are reporting start? 18. Is there any additional information about the amounts of public funding listed above that would help inform our interpretation of your responses to these questions? 19. What additional sources of public Funding for LUST cleanups, if any, do you believe have a high probability of becoming available in the next 5 years? a. What were the primary factors you considered in making an assessment of the probability that additional sources. of publicfunding for Lust cleanups will become available in. the next five years? Among the current sources of public funding for LUST cleanups, which sources, if any, do you believe have a high probability of no longer being available in the next 5 years? Tanks without a Viable Owner. Tanks among your state’s cleanup backlog without a viable owner to be those tanks where, for example, the owner has not been found for more than 20 years. tanks where the owner of the tank has been unable to find a new owner for at least the past five years. as of September 30, 2005, the responsible party was unknown, unwilling, or unable to perform the needed cleanup (for example, “orphaned” or abandoned tanks). How many releases in your state’s cleanup backlog, identified above, come from tanks without a viable owner? Is this an exact number or an estimate? Number of releases ......................... a. How did you calculate the number of releases in. your state's cleanup backlog that come from Tanks without a viability owner? able to perform the cleanup? Is this an exact number or an estimate? Number of releases .......................... a. How did you calculate the number of releases in your state’s cleanup backlog for which the state has not yet determined whether a responsible party is known, willing, and able to perform cleanup? 23. In the past year, how much public funding from all sources was spent (in actual outlays) on cleaning up releases from USTs, both WITH and WITHOUT a viable owner? If possible, provide these amounts for the latest federal fiscal year, 10/1/04. or an estimate? a. Public funding spent to clean up tanks WITH a viable owner ....... b. Publicfunding spent toClean up tanks without a viable owners........................................... c. Is this the total amount ($0) spent (in actual outlays) in the past year for the public funding portion of cleanups at federally regulated UST sites? Yes .................... No...................... d. Why is this amount different? e. On what date does your reporting year begin? Beginning date of reporting year g. How did you calculate the amount of public funding? spent to clean up releases from USTs with and without a viable owner. How much do you estimate it will cost to complete the remainder of the cleanups for all of these releases? None ................. Go to Q25. a. How did you estimate the cost to. complete the rest of theCleanups for the backlog of releases from. USTs without a. viable owner? Go toQ25.b. For the purposes of the following questions, please consider two questions. types of state cleanup funds: (1) state financial assurance funds that cover the cleanup of contamination from federally regulated USTs, and (2) funds that are devoted solely to the cleanup from tanks without a viable owner. In this survey we ask about both types of funds as applicable to your state. Has your state EVER had a statefinancial assurance fund, as defined in (1?) above? Yes ....................... No......................... Skip to Q37. What was the status of your state’s financial assurance fund as of September? Is your state fund limiting the number of claims it accepts based on the amount of funds it has available to pay for those claims? Yes ....................... No......................... c. Is your state’s financial assurance fund ONLY accepting claims for releases that occurred on or after Sept. 30, 2005? Not applicable, never had this type of fund. Skip to Q37. Fund is no longer active. Accepting and paying all valid claims without restriction without restriction. Go to Q27 and Q28. before or after a certain date (e.g., an eligibility sunset date)? No ....................... Yes...................... d. What are the eligibility dates for releases? [Fill in either or both dates as applicable.] [Enter mm/dd/yy.] e. Are there other restrictions on accepting and paying claims? 27. How much was deposited into your state’s financial assurance fund in the past year? Is this an exact number or an estimate? 28. Please describe the deductible amount(s) paid by responsible parties. this amount for the latest federal fiscal year (10/1/04 to 9/30/05)? Yes......................... No .......................... b. On what date does your reporting year begin? Beginning date of reporting year 29. How much of the amount deposited into your state’s financial assurance fund in the past year was from each of the following sources? Is this an exact number or an estimate? a. Flat rate fees assessed on tanks. b. Fees/taxes assessed on a per-unit basis on fuel(s) c. Interest ....................................... d. Cost recovery. fund over the next 5 years, compared with the annual revenues accrued to the fund in the past year? Large increase................ Moderate increase......... Stay about the same...... Moderate decrease........ Large decrease............... a. What was the overall balance of your state’s financial assurance fund as of September 30, 2005? Is this an exact number or an estimate? Obligated........................................ 32. What is the amount of the outstanding claims (claims received by the state program for which funds have not yet been obligated) on your state’s financial assurance fund as of September 30, 2005? Is this an exact number or an estimate? Outstanding claims ......................... $ 33. Reimbursed ................................. g. If applicable, for what purposes did your state divert UST financial assurance funds? 34. As of September30, 2005, had your state decided to stop accepting new UST claims? IsThis an exactnumber or an estimates? This number is an estimate of how much your state would have received if it had stopped accepting new claims. claims against the state financial assurance fund after a certain date? Date after which claims will no longer be accepted No decision made to stop accepting claims......... 35. How capable is your state’s financial assurance. fund of meeting future demands upon it? . Able to meet all......................................................................... Able to meeting most .................................................................... Able to met some ................................................................... Not able. 36. As of September 30, 2005, had your state decided to stop collecting revenues for the state. financial assurance Fund after acertain date? State Fund Dedicated to Tanks without a Viable Owner 37. What was the status of your state’s fund dedicated to tanks without a viable owner as of September 30, 2005? . Not applicable, never had this type of fund.......................... Skip to Q47. Fund is no longer active .......................................................... Go to Q38 Accepting and paying claims with some restrictions................................................................ a. Is your state fund limiting the number of claims it accepts based on the size of the tank? amount of funds it has available to pay for those claims? Yes ....................... No......................... b. Is your state fund setting priorities for paying claims to conserve funds? Yes.............................. No................................. c. Is the fund dedicated to tanks without a viable owner ONLY accepting claims for releases that occurred before or after a certain date (e.g., an eligibility sunset date)? No.............................. Yes .................... d. What are the eligibility dates for releases? [Fill in either or both dates as applicable.] state’s fund dedicated to tanks without a viable owner in the past year? Is this an exact number or an estimate? Amount deposited........................... a. Is this amount for the latest federal fiscal year (10/1/04 to 9/30/05)? Yes .................... No...................... b. On what date does your reporting year begin? Beginning date of reporting year 39. Approximately how much of the amount deposited into your state’S fund dedicated. to tanks with no viable owner was from each of the following sources? a. Flat rate fees assessed on tanks....... b. Fees/taxes assessed on a per-unit basis on fuel(s)................................ c. Interest ............................................ d. Cost recovery .................................. ...... ...... ...... 40. What do you anticipate will happen to revenues to your state's fund dedicated to tanks without a viable owner over the next 5 years, compared with the annual revenues accrued to the fund in the past year? 41. What was the amount of the outstanding claims (claims received by the state program for which funds have not yet been obligated) on the fund as of September 30, 2005? 42. How much of the total amount diverted over the past 5 years had been reimbursed? the state’s unobligated balance of federal LUST Trust Funds, if any? Is this an exact number or an estimate? State’S unobliged balance ofFederal LUST trust funds. How do responsible parties who have active federally regulated USTs in your state demonstrate financial responsibility? Please list the number of tanks covered by the various available financial responsibility mechanisms below. Is there any additional information about the LUST Fund amounts listed above that would help inform our interpretation of your responses to these questions? Financial test of self-insurance: c. Corporate guarantee: d. Insurance coverage: e. Surety bond: f. Letter of credit: g. Trust fund set up by owner or operator: h. Bond rating test: i. Financial test (local government only): j. Guarantee from another local government or the state: k. A dedicated fund: l. The number of tanks covered by the various financial responsibility mechanisms: 52. Is there any additional information about how you calculated the number of Tanks covered? How frequently, if at all, does your state check whether a tank owner’s financial responsibility is current? At least annually ................................................................................................ Every 1 to 2 years .............................................................................................. Every 3 years. As events warrant (e.g. upon tank installation or upgrade, upon a release).. d. State does not check financial responsibility ................................................ ....................................................................... 54. Of the 54 states surveyed, 54 said they check tank owners’ financial responsibility on a regular basis. Over the past 5 years, how many cases has your state encountered in which tank owners did not have adequate financial responsibility? Is this an exact number or an estimate? 56. Does your state ever impose penalties on responsible parties for multiple releases from federally regulated USTs? Yes ....................... No......................... Go to next question. a. Number of cases ............................ a. How did you calculate the number of cases that your state has encountered over the past five years? a. Is this a specific number? are the penalties and the circumstances under which they would be imposed? 57. Are there any issues that have not been covered in this survey that you anticipate affecting the availability of public finding for cleanups in the next 5 years? 58. Arethere any additional comments you wish to make regarding the issues in this Survey or other matters related to USTs? Thank you for completing the survey! Please save this file now and send an e-mail with your saved questionnaire file and supporting documentation as an attachment to: USTSurvey@gao.gov. CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery. Visit CNN.com/Travel each week for a new gallery of snapshots from around the world. Visit iReport.com each week to see which photos have been featured in the latest Travel Snapshot gallery. The gallery will feature a new photo each week until the end of the year, with a selection of the best chosen to share with the world at large. For more information, visit CNN.org/Travel.