The ability to fight and win two nearly simultaneous major theater wars is the cornerstone of U.S. defense strategy. For planning purposes, the military assumes that the two most likely places where these wars would take place are Korea and Southwest Asia. Mobilization of U.,S. forces for such conflicts requires a global system of integrated land, sea, and air resources, and supplies already stored overseas. The fleet of civilian and military passenger and cargo aircraft and the En Route System (ERS) airfields provide the critical air component. The ERS provides the capabilities needed to handle ongoing peacetime operations and requirements associated with smaller-scale contingency operations. For example, ERS bases were used extensively during recent operations in Kosovo. U.S. bases through ERS airfields and on to their eventual destinations at bases located in or near the war zones. The base must have the ramp space to park the aircraft and perform required maintenance, the equipment to load and unload cargo if needed, and the equipment needed to quickly refuel the aircraft. We discussed issues related to the basing of combat aircraft in our recent report on Kosovo operations, but not ERS operations. As shown in figure 1, the 13 ERS airfields are located mostly in Europe and throughout the Pacific. Each is planned to be within an area 3,500 nautical miles from the U.S. and from the war zones. This distance is based on the maximum efficient range, which is determined by climate and proximity to the anticipated war zones, among other factors. Operation of the ERS airfields is shared between the host nation, which owns the airfield, and a number of DOD organizations. Host nation responsibilities vary and are documented in the Status of Forces Agreement for each country. U.S. organizations with responsibility for the airfields include the Air Force, who provides day-to-day operations for all but two of the air fields. According to officials, while space is sometimes shared, it is not shared with the host country and is usually owned by the host. In the event of overlapping major theater wars in Korea and Southwest Asia, the 13 ERS airfields would not currently have enough capacity to move the required amounts of personnel and equipment. DOD expects the shortfall to be largely eliminated by 2005. But the assumptions and modeling approach DOD uses in its calculations raise some uncertainty about the precise size of the shortfall. Some study assumptions tend to underestimate the shortfall, while the modeling approach used could overestimate it, authors say. The net effect of these factors on estimates of ERS capacity in 2005 is unclear. airfields will still be short of requirements at the end of 2005. Capacity requirements for the ERS could be raised even higher if other ongoing missions (such as peacekeeping) were added, further increasing the shortfall. DOD needs to reanalyze ERS to determine whether there might be any extra capacity available to handle the additional missions or whether more capacity must be built. Officials were unsure when this issue would be tackled. U.S. presence overseas has shrunk to the shrinkage to the Cold War. Most (58 percent) of the costs are associated with bases in the Pacific region. Host nations and U.S. allies are expected to fund about 55 percent of the total. It is unclear whether all the projects will be completed as planned, as the projects must compete with each other and with other DOD projects for funding and face other uncertainties. Since the end of the.review in July 2000, the Pentagon has spent more than $1.2 trillion on military operations in the Middle East and Africa. Cold War, many U.S. military locations overseas have been closed and their personnel relocated to bases in the continental United States. Transportation Command officials state that with this drawdown in the 1990s, the ERS lost many of its facilities and much of its flexibility. Today, ERS has access to only 13 locations, compared with 45 in the early 1990s. As a result, the remaining bases have become much more important as the only airfield options available for en- route mobilization support. ERS capacity was about $1.2 billion for fiscal years 1997 through 2006. The estimate was changed to $2.0 billion shortly after that. No one is responsible for monitoring the overall cost to eliminate the shortfall, officials say. The $1-billion estimate was simply carried forward from an estimate developed in the mid-1990s in conjunction with a major review of overall mobility requirements. That estimate was based on a quick world tour by a team of engineers who covered what at the time were about 35 ERS bases. The estimated cost to eliminate the shortfall has grown to about $2 billion, officials say. The increase reflects changes in the bases making up the ERS since the mid-1990s. Most ERS airfields were built during or immediately after World War II, Transportation Command officials tell us. The Air Mobility Command agreed to query all of the various commands involved in the E RS to determine the current cost to eliminating the shortfall. The estimated cost has grown from $1.5 billion to $2billion. The $2 billion will fund repairs and improvements to fuel systems, runways, ramp space, and other base elements. The largest construction cost category is associated with fuel system repair and improvement. According to Transportation and Air Mobility Command officials, the standard fuel systems at current ERS bases were designed and built during the early 1950s and had an estimated life span of 30 to 40 years. At some bases refueling must be carried out by trucks, rather than airplanes. Some components were built by host nations even earlier. by more modern pipeline and hydrant systems. At other bases, hydrants are antiquated or have deteriorating lines that slow and sometimes interrupt fueling operations altogether. Bases in the Pacific region total about $1.14 billion (58 percent) compared to about $825 million (42 percent) for the European bases. Officials emphasize that the proposed projects are intended largely to replace capability lost due to deterioration or base closures. In fact, only 25 of the 516 projects provide additional capacity. About 55 percent of the $2 billion in ERS construction funding will come from the North Atlantic Treaty Organization. The remaining 45 percent is expected to come from a variety of U.S. programs. Japan has provided some $21 billion for projects under this program, which started in 1979. It is unclear whether all the construction projects will be completed as planned. projects. Remaining projects either upgrade existing capacity to current environmental, safety, or operational standards or replace/repair equipment due to obsolescence or failure. DOD infrastructure is grossly under funded, with facilities currently funded for replacement every 250 years. Projects planned in later years are more vulnerable to funding changes since they have not yet been spent. Officials also note that host nation involvement in funding can create some uncertainty in construction timetables. For example, DOD had to reassign fiscal year 2002 funding for construction projects at one ERS airfield in Europe to other DOD projects because of the host nation's involvement in the project. (See p. 18 for a discussion of DOD problems in infrastructure management.) of a 2- to 3-year delay in host government approval of funding requirements. According to officials, the host government was concerned about sovereignty issues involved in its membership in the North Atlantic Treaty Organization. Formal approval has now been received for these projects, and funding has been shifted by about 1 year. Most of the projects have not yet started construction. As of October 2000, about 4 percent ($75.0 million) of total funding had been spent on completed projects with another 10 percent ($194.6 million) spent on projects in progress. About 19 percent of funding under U.S. programs was associated with projects that had either begun or completed work, compared to about 10 percent of host nation and allied funding. Only recently has the ERS begun to receive high priority for funding, Transportation Command officials say. In the past, about $1.5 billion has been spent on ERS projects, but that figure is expected to rise. The ERS program is funded through 2006, but future funding is subject to future budgetary constraints and uncertainties. Air Mobility Command leaders realized how critical the airfields were. To publicize the problem and obtain higher priority, the Air Mobility Command proclaimed 1997 the “Year of the En Route System” However, even with the increased priority, officials told us that it still takes many years to move projects through the budget. The U.S. Air Force has more than 2,000 airfields across the world. The Air Force is home to more than 100,000 military personnel, including more than 1,000 Air Force families. Despite the strategic importance of the ERS, critical information on ERS plans and operations is not available. DOD has not carried out overall cost-benefit studies to document the rationale for its decisions. The ERS has no centralized oversight system to provide readily available, up-to-date data on the condition and readiness of the airfields. Sound strategic planning that clearly lays out missions and goals, needed resources, priorities, strategies, measures of performance, and assigned responsibilities is crucial to achieving program success. gaps in DOD’s overall strategic planning processes that have led to difficulties in assessing performance in a variety of areas. Management of the ERS is fragmented among at least four unified commands and six subcommands, three services, host nations, and other organizations such as the Defense Logistics Agency. A formal, written strategic plan that lays out missions and goals, guiding principles and priorities, performance measures, and monitoring mechanisms is also needed. Without such structure ERS operations are prone to a higher risk of inefficiency in the form of confusing and overlapping lines of authority.