VA pays monthly disability compensation benefits to veterans with service-connected disabilities. VA also pays compensation to some spouses, children, and parents of deceased veterans and service members. VA made progress in fiscal years 2002 and 2003 reducing the size and age of its pending claims inventory, but it has lost ground since then. Questions remain about consistency of VA’s decisions across regional offices and at the Board of Veterans’ Appeals, the report says. The report says VA continues to experience significant service delivery challenges including lengthy processing times and inaccurate and inconsistent decisions. Fiscal year 2008 request would fund 8,320 full-time equivalent employees working on compensation and pension. VA identified an increase in claims processing staff as essential to reducing the pending claims inventory and improving timeliness. According to VA, with a workforce that is sufficiently large and correctly balanced, it can successfully meet the veterans’ needs while ensuring good stewardship of taxpayer funds. The budget justification would represent an increase of about 6 percent over fiscal year 2006. In addition to the budget justification, the VA would also seek to increase the number of contractors. cites near-term initiatives to increase the number of claims completed, such as using retired VA employees to provide training. VA expects a temporary decline in productivity as new staff are trained and become more experienced, but expects productivity to increase in the longer term. VA’s budget justification provides information on actual and planned productivity, in terms of claims decided per full-time equivalent employee. Also, VA has identified additional initiatives to help improve productivity. For example, the use of overtime is being increased. VA plans to pilot paperless Benefits Delivery at Discharge, where service members’ disability claim applications, service medical records, and other evidence would be captured electronically prior to discharge. VA expects that this new process will reduce the time needed to obtain the evidence needed to decide claims. To resolve appeals faster, VA has been working to reduce the number of appeals sent back by the Board of Veterans’ Appeals for further work such as obtaining additional evidence and correcting procedural errors. VA has established joint training and information sharing between field staff and the Board. VA reports that it has improved the productivity of the Board’s judges. The Board attributes this improvement to training and mentoring programs. To improve decision consistency, VA has contracted for a study of the major influences. The board expects productivity to improve to 752 decisions in fiscal year 2008. It expects to reduce the percentage of decisions remanded from about 57 percent in fiscalyear 2004 to about 32 percent in Fiscal Year 2006. It also expects to decrease the number of appeals decided from 604 appeals decided in fiscal 2003 to 698 in fiscal 2006. on compensation payments, to develop baseline data for monitoring and managing decision variances. VA is in the process of testing templates for compensation and pension medical examinations for specific types of disabilities. Further, VA formed a workgroup to study variances in the rates of benefit grants and denials, and in assigned disability evaluations. Despite these efforts, VA may be limited in its ability to make and sustain significant claims processing performance improvements, according to the report. The report was published by the RAND Corporation. VA attributes some of the increase in the number of claims pending and the average days pending to a September 2003 court decision that required over 62,000 claims to be processed. Since 1999, several court decisions and laws related to VA’s responsibilities to assist veterans in developing their benefit claims have significantly affected VA's ability to process claims in a timely manner. The VA is currently working on a plan to reduce the number and complexity of claims that need to be adjudicated. The plan is expected to be completed by the end of the year. be deferred, many for 90 days or longer. Legislation and VA regulations have expanded benefit entitlement and added to the volume of claims. VA expects additional claims receipts based on the enactment of legislation allowing certain military retirees to receive both military retirement pay and VA disability compensation. In addition, rating-related claims continue to increase, from about 579,000 in fiscal year 2000 to about 806,000In fiscal year 2006, an increase of more than 20 percent from 2000 to 2006. The VA says it expects to receive more than $1.2 billion in claims in the next fiscal year. of about 39 percent. VA projects relatively flat claim receipts in fiscal years 2007 and 2008. ongoing hostilities in Iraq and Afghanistan, and the Global War on Terrorism in general, may increase the workload beyond current levels. VA has also noted that claims have increased in part because older veterans are filing disability claims for the first time. For example, some veterans are citing more disabilities in their claims than in the past. Because each disability needs to be evaluated separately, these claims can take longer to process. VA notes that they are receiving more disability claims, such as those related to mental health issues including post-traumatic stress disorder. Claims processing timeliness and decisional accuracy can be hampered if VA cannot obtain the evidence it needs in a timely manner. For example, to obtain information needed to fully develop some post- traumatic stress disorder claims, VBA must obtain records from the U.S. Army and Joint Services Records Research Center (JSRRC) This can significantly increase the time it takes to develop a claim. the time it takes to decide a claim. In December 2006, we recommended that VBA assess whether it could systematically utilize an electronic library of historical military records. VBA agreed to determine the feasibility of regional offices using an alternative resource prior to sending some requests to the JSRRC. We also reported that while VBA quality reviewers found few decision errors due to failure to obtain military service records, VBA does not know the extent to which the information that is provided to regional offices is reliable and accurate. rely on a VBA unit at the National Personnel Records Center to do thorough and reliable searches and analyses of records. Incomplete and inaccurate reports could affect decisional accuracy. VA is taking actions to address its claims processing challenges, but there are opportunities for more fundamental reform that could dramatically improve decision making and processing. These include reexamining program design, as well as the structure and division of labor. For more information, visit the VA's website or go to www.va.gov. among field offices. Research showed that the disability programs lagged behind the scientific advances and economic and social changes that have redefined the relationship between impairments and work. For example, advances in medicine and technology have reduced the severity of some medical conditions and have allowed individuals to live with greater independence and function in a more independent way. After more than a decade of research, we have determined that federal disability programs are in urgent need of attention and transformation and placed them on our high-risk list in January 2003. work settings. In August 2002, we recommended that VA use its annual performance plan to delineate strategies for and progress in periodically updating labor market data used in its disability determination. We found that these programs are poorly positioned to provide meaningful and timely support for Americans with disabilities. The nature of work has changed in recent decades as the national economy has moved away from manufacturing-based jobs to service- and knowledge- based employment. Yet VA’s and SSA's disability programs remain mired in concepts from the past. process. VA study and report to the Congress on the effects that a comprehensive consideration of medical treatment and assistive technologies would have on its disability programs’ eligibility criteria and benefits package. Study would include estimates of the effects on the size, cost, and management of VA’s disability programs and other relevant VA programs and would identify any legislative actions needed to initiate and fund such changes. Another area of program design that could be examined is the option of providing a lump sum payment in lieu of monthly disability compensation. Claims Adjudication Commission noted that most disability compensation claims are repeat claims. About 65 percent of veterans who began receiving disability compensation in fiscal year 2003 had disabilities rated 30 percent or less. The commission asked Congress to consider paying less severely disabled veterans compensation in a lump sum. According to the commission, the lump sum would be less than $1 million per veteran. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. option could have a number of benefits for VA as well as veterans. The lump sum option could reduce the number of claims submitted and allow VA to process claims more quickly. In December 2000, we reported that about one-third of newly compensated veterans could be interested in a lump-sum option. In addition to program design, VA’s regional office claims processing structure may be disadvantageous to efficient operations. VBA and VBA are part of the Government Accountability Office, which publishes The Federalist. VA has not changed its basic field structure for processing compensation and pension claims at 57 regional offices. Unless more comprehensive and strategic changes are made to its field structure, VBA is likely to miss opportunities to substantially improve productivity, accuracy, and consistency. The Congress established the Veterans’ Disability Benefits Commission to study the appropriateness of VA disability benefits. The commission is scheduled to report to the Congress by October 1, 2007. For further information, please contact Daniel Bertoni at (202) 512-7215 or Bertonid@gao.gov.