NASA and its international partners are building the space station to serve as an orbiting research facility. The space shuttle is the primary vehicle supporting the assembly and resupply of the station. Figure 1 shows the Space Shuttle Endeavour docked to the International Space Station. Following the Columbia accident in February 2003, the NASA Administrator grounded the space shuttle fleet pending an investigation into the cause of the accident. The administrator appointed the Columbia Accident Investigation Board to determine the cause and to make recommendations for improving the safety of the space Shuttle. NASA plans to return the shuttle to flight in July 2005. While the shuttle has been grounded, space station crew transfers and logistics resupply have depended on Russian Soyuz and Progress vehicles. Europe and Japan are also developing logistics cargo vehicles to support space station operations later this decade. These Russian, European, and Japanese vehicles are launched on expendable rockets. The European Automated Transfer Vehicle (ATV) is scheduled to be launched in 2010. It will be launched on an expendable rocket. available for missions to the space station in 2006. The ATV and HTV also carry less cargo than the shuttle. Because the Russian Soyuz and Progress are the only vehicles currently available and carry significantly less payload than the space shuttle, operations are generally limited to transporting crew. The Japanese H-II Transfer Vehicle (HTV) is scheduled to be available in 2008 and will fly within the proximity of the space space station to be caught by the station’s robotic arm before being berthed. Food, potable water, as well as propellant resupply for reboosting the space station to higher orbits. Launches of space station assembly elements and large orbital replacement items for maintenance have effectively ceased. NASA performed two studies that focused on the potential use of commercial launch vehicles to provide logistics services. In a 90-day study conducted in 2000, NASA determined that no commercial logistics service for the space space station was possible at that time. No launch vehicles possessed the critical capabilities necessary to providing logistics services, including automated rendezvous capabilities. The Alternate Access to Station (AAS) study contracts were awarded in July 2002, with 1-year contracts given to four contractors. In summer 2003, these contractors presented architectures that relied on existing domestic or international expendable launch vehicles. In the fall of 2003, the contracts were extended, and the contractors were asked to address larger cargo delivery capabilities and “downmass” (e.g. returning research materials to earth) requirements were added for the return of cargo. This led to a more detailed review of concepts to provide logistics services to the space station. study ended in January 2004 with the contractors briefing on their study results. NASA concluded that developing a domestic capability to meet most of the space station cargo service needs was possible within 3 to 5 years. In January 2004, the President announced a new Vision for Exploration that called for retiring the shuttle in 2010, requiring NASA to find an alternative to support space station operations through 2016 by the end of the decade. The President called for a shift in NASA’s long-term focus, envisioning that NASA will retire the space shuttle after nearly 30 years. of service as soon as assembly of the International Space Station is completed, planned for the end of the decade. In essence, NASA’s implementation plan holds aeronautics, science, and other activities at near constant levels and transitions funding currently dedicated to the space station and space shuttle programs to the new exploration strategy. The vision also changed the space stations’ on-board research focus. Originally, the space Station was to be used to conduct research on a variety of subjects. Under the new vision, the research will be focused on determining the effects of long duration space travel on humans and developing countermeasures. The space station research necessary to support human explorers on other worlds would be complete by 2016. According to program officials, NASA’s 2004 informal assessment concluded that alternative alternative plans were not viable. The new vision calls for the space station to be used for life sciences research on how humans adapt to long durations in space, biomedical research, and materials-processing research. launch vehicles would present operational risks, technical challenges, and long program delays and would cost more than returning the space shuttle to flight. According to previous studies and our discussions with commercial industry representatives, the time involved for developing an alternate capability would probably preclude assembly missions from consideration. NASA did not have sufficient knowledge to support its conclusion regarding logistic support missions, the authors say. The space shuttle is the best option for both assembly and logistics missions through the end of the decade, they say. They say. NASA is currently evaluating responses from commercial industry on different ways to provide logistics services to and from the space station. NASA did not have sufficient knowledge to conclude that the shuttle was the best option for logistics missions prior to its retirement of the shuttle in 2010. NASA officials stated that the technical challenges for developing an alternative vehicle could be overcome, but probably not before the 28 missions scheduled through 2010. We found no evidence of analyses performed by NASA to compare the cost and schedule impact of using alternate launch systems with scheduled space shuttle program costs. agency is examining configurations of the space station that meet the needs of the new vision and the international partners with as few space shuttle flights as necessary. Combining the information gathered from commercial industry and a better definition of space station requirements, NASA officials agreed there is an opportunity to perform a more comprehensive assessment of alternatives. Report: NASA should not limit documentation of this effort to the acquisition strategy meeting, but should also document the decision paths leading up to that event and throughout the evaluation of the transportation systems proposed by contractors. NASA conducted a detailed assessment of alternatives to the space shuttle for completing assembly and providing logistics support to the International Space Station. To accomplish our work, we visited and interviewed officials at NASA Headquarters, Washington, D.C.; Johnson Space Center, Texas; and Kennedy Space Center,. These centers were chosen because they maintain primary responsibility for conducting space shuttle and space station operations on a day-to-day basis. We interviewed contractors at Boeing Launch Services and Lockheed Martin Space Systems and reviewed pertinent documentation related to expendable launch vehicles. at Kennedy Space Center. We also visited the Boeing Launch Services, Inc., in Huntington Beach, California, and Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, Florida. Boeing Commercial Space Systems in Research Park, Huntsville, Alabama; and Lockheed Martin Space Systems Company in Littleton, Colorado. We conducted our work from August 2004 through April 2005 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. According to NASA officials involved in the 2004 assessment, accommodating a transition to other launch vehicles would create significant challenges that drive risk, schedule, and costs. designed and built to take advantage of the more benign launch environment in the space shuttle’s cargo bay. The following outlines the major challenges NASA identified. There would be a need to develop a new process to assemble the space station. Using another launch vehicle would require the redesign and retesting of space station elements already built due to the weight of the vehicle. The space station would be connected together by the space Shuttle crew during space walk activities. It would be assembled using only the space Station crew and without the benefit of the spaceshuttle remote manipulator arm. The space shuttle launch environment, with respect to vibration and g-force exerted on the payload, cannot be duplicated on an expendable launch vehicle. A new, unique transfer vehicle would need to be developed in order to rendezvous and dock assembly elements with the space station. Two transfer vehicles are currently being developed for logistics mission to support space station operations, the European Automated Transfer Vehicle (ATV) and the Japanese H-II Transfer Vehicles (HTV) These vehicles, much like the Russian Progress vehicle, have a limited cargo capability. The ATV is being designed to rendezvous and dock to the space station via the Russian Service Module. The HTV is scheduled to be available in 2008. A carrier to go inside the new transfer vehicle to replicate the space shuttle attach points would need to be developed. According to these officials, in order to meet volume requirements, a carrier would be needed to go into the HTV. The ATV will fly within the proximity of the. space station to be caught by the space. station’s robotic arm before being berthed. the payload fairings would have to be modified from the current 5-meter to a 6-meter version to accommodate the larger diameter payloads to the space station during assembly missions. Staff making key contributions to this report were Jim Morrison, James Beard, Rick Cederholm, Karen Sloan, and T.J Thomson. For more information on the ISS, visit the International Space Station's official website at: http://www.nasa.gov/shuttle/. For more about the ISS in the U.S., visit the National Aeronautics and Space Administration's website at www.nasaspace.gov.