The Constitution gives Congress the authority to impeach and remove the President, Vice President, and other federal "civil officers" The House has impeached 19 individuals: 15 federal judges, one Senator, one Cabinet member, and two Presidents. Of these, eight individuals—all federal judges—were convicted by the Senate. Conviction of an individual requires a two-thirds majority of the present Senators on one of the articles brought by the House. When conducting the trial, Senators must be "on oath or affirmation," and right to a jury trial does not extend to impeachment proceedings. restricted the power of the President to remove members of the Cabinet without Senate approval. Considering the statute unconstitutional, President Johnson removed Secretary of War Edwin M. Stanton. He was impeached shortly thereafter on nine articles relating to his actions. President Johnson was acquitted by a margin by the Supreme Court of the United States on November 14, 1864, after being found guilty by a vote of three to one. The case was the first to be decided by a court of law, rather than a jury, and was the last to be heard by the Senate. of one vote in the Senate. In 1974, the House Judiciary Committee recommended articles of impeachment against President Richard Nixon. The articles alleged that the President, "using the powers of his high office," attempted to obstruct the investigation of the Watergate Hotel break-in, conceal and protect the perpetrators, and conceal the existence of other illegal activity. Second, that he used the power of the office of the Presidency to violate citizens' constitutional rights, "impair[]" lawful investigations, and "contravene[]" laws applicable to executive branch agencies.  impeachment articles against President Clinton also alleged abuse of the powers of his office. One article alleged that the President refused to comply with certain congressional requests for information and provided false and misleading information in response to others. President Nixon resigned before the House voted on the articles. A number of individuals have also been accused of contempt for the legislative branch and impeded Congress's exercise of its Constitutional responsibility. The House rejected the articles against Clinton on a party-line vote on July 25, 1998. The vote was the first in the history of the House of Representatives to be held on a partisan basis. impeached for behavior incompatible with the nature of the office they hold. Judge Harry Claiborne was impeached for providing false information on federal income tax forms, an offense he had previously been convicted for in a criminal case. The first two articles of impeachment against JudgeClaiborne simply laid out the underlying behavior. The third article "rest[ed] entirely on the conviction itself" and stood for the principle that "by conviction alone he is guilty of 'high crimes' in office" Two judges were impeached for appearing on the bench in a state of intoxication. Judge Mark H. Delahay was impeached in 1873 for his "personal habits," including being intoxicated on and off the bench. The Senate voted to convict Judge Claiborne on the first, second, and fourth articles. Various other activities incompatible with.the integrity and impartiality of the administration of justice" amounted to a "misdemeanor," according to the Senate's impeachment bill of 1803. In 1862, Judge West H. Humphrey was impeached and convicted for neglecting his duties as a judge and joining the Confederacy. In 1926 Judge George English was impeaching for showing judicial favoritism which eroded the public's confidence in the court. And in 2009, Judge Samuel B. Kent was impeaches for allegedly sexually assaulting two court employees, obstructing the judicial investigation of this behavior, and making false and misleading statements to agents of the Federal Bureau of Investigation about the activity. Judge Kent resigned before the Senate trial was completed. Some articles of impeachment brought against President Clinton were grounded on alleged behavior considered incompatible with the nature of the office of the Presidency. One article was for allegedly lying to a grand jury, and the second, for allegedly obstructing justice by concealing evidence in a federal civil rights action brought against him. The articles noted that by doing this, "William Jefferson Clinton has undermined the integrity of his office, has brought disrepute on the Presidency, has betrayed his trust as President, and has acted in a manner subversive of the rule of law and justice" the manifest injury of the people of the United States." A number of individuals have been impeached for official conduct for an improper purpose. The first type of behavior involves vindictive use of the office. For example, in 1826, Judge James Peck was impeachment for charging a lawyer with contempt, imprisoning him, and ordering his disbarment for criticizing one of the judge's decisions. In 1904, Judge Charles Swayne was impeached by the House and acquitted by the Senate. Among the articles of impeachment was the allegation that he had unlawfully imprisoned several people. individuals on false charges of contempt. The second type of behavior involves misuse of the office for personal gain. Secretary of War William W. Belknap was impeached in 1876 for allegedly receiving payments in return for appointing an individual to maintain a trading post in Indian Territory. In 1912, Judge Robert W. Archbald was impeaching and convicted for using the office to acquire business favors from both litigants in his court. And the impeachments of Judges and the impeachment of Cabinet members. English, Louderback, and Ritter all involved "misusing their power to appoint and set the fees of bankruptcy receivers for personal profit" Judge Alcee L. Hastings was impeached by the House on 16 articles, including involvement in a conspiracy to accept bribes in return for lenient sentences for defendants. Judge Hastings was convicted by the Senate on eight articles. In addition, Judge Walter L. Nixon Jr. was convicted in a criminal case on two counts of perjury to Judge Hastings. a grand jury concerning his relationship with a man whose son was being prosecuted. In 2010, Judge G. Thomas Porteous Jr. was impeached for participating in a corrupt financial relationship with attorneys in a case before him. The articles of impeachment brought against him alleged misconduct in those positions as well as in his previous position as U.S. District Court Judge of the Middle District of Pennsylvania. On December 8, 2010, he was convicted on all four articles, removed from office, and disqualified from holding future federal offices. in the office held at the time of the impeachment investigation, although the House has, on occasion, investigated such allegations. Secretary of War William W. Belknap resigned two hours before the House impeached him, but the Senate nevertheless conducted a trial in which BelKnap was acquitted. Resolutions regarding impeachment may be of two types. A resolution impeaching a particular individual, who is within the category of impeachable officers under Article II, Section 4 of the Constitution, is usually referred directly to the House Committee on the Judiciary. The focus of the impeachment inquiry is to determine whether the person involved has engaged in treason, bribery, or other high crimes and misdemeanors. If a subcommittee or task force is charged with investigating a possible impeachment, the Members can vote to recommend articles of impeachment to the full committee. In impeachment trials, the full Senate may receive evidence and take testimony, or may order the Presiding Officer to appoint a committee of Senators to serve this purpose. Under Article I, Section 3, clause 6 of the Constitution, the Chief Justice presides over the Senate impeachment trial if the President is being tried. In Nixon v. United States, a judge challenged the Senate's use of a trial committee to take evidence. The Supreme Court noted that the Constitution grants "the sole Power" to try impeachments "in the Senate and nowhere else" The Court was careful to distinguish the situation from Powell v. McC ormack , a case where the Court declined to apply the political question doctrine. The Court concluded that the House's claim that it possessed unreviewable authority to determine the qualifications of its Members "was defeated"