Obesity rates have risen substantially in recent decades. 32% of Americans' calorie intake from 2005-2008 came from foods consumed outside the home. Calorie labeling on menus has been shown to change consumer behavior. New research on nutrition labeling of menus and menu boards may be successful in helping consumers lower their overall calorie intake, the authors say. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention have deemed menu labeling a "winnable battle," they say. They say the approach is supported by the American Heart Association, the American Medical Association and others. Before passage of the ACA, restaurant-type food and food from vending machines were exempt from nutrition labeling authorities in the FFDCA. Infant formula and medical foods, which are subject to other labeling requirements, are exempt from the nutrition labeling requirements. Foods with insignificant amounts of more than one-half the required nutrients may use a simplified labeling format. The law also requires restaurants and SRFE to provide calorie information adjacent to self-service food (i.e., salad bars, buffet lines, and cafeteria lines) At issue is the scope of covered establishments. Some have argued that Option 1 is too broad and that grocery and convenience stores should not be covered by the rule. Some Members of Congress have proposed legislation directing the FDA to narrowly interpret the law by excluding primarily retail entities, because the perceived burden of including those entities outweighs the perceived potential benefits. The proposed legislation has not yet been voted on by the House of Representatives or the Senate, but it is expected to be voted on in the coming months. as movie theaters, bowling alleys, bookstore cafes, and all establishments that sell restaurant-like food to consumers. Some Members of Congress, with support from the grocery industry, have expressed concern over Option 1. Some have introduced legislation that would define SRFE as establishments that derive more than 50% of their revenue from restaurant-type food, similar to the proposed Option 2 in Table 1. Members ofCongress who advocate for a broader definition of SRFE note that Congress intended the law to apply to "restaurants as well as other retail food establishments" of floor space devoted to food and regardless of whether food sales constitute a large or small portion of the establishments' total business. This would include food outlets such as movie theaters, bowling alleys, and other entertainment venues, as well as grocery and convenience stores. Those who argue for the narrower version, including industry groups such as the Food Marketing Institute, feel that the FDA has overstepped its statutory authority. They feel that grocery stores should not be included in the rule for a number of reasons, including disproportionate burden on grocery stores. the scope of the agency's authority to regulate supermarkets. They have argued for a narrower definition of the term that does not include supermarkets as SRFE, which the FDA has acknowledged as less burdensome. The state and local menu labeling regulations that have been enacted in the United States generally do not apply to grocery stores. Some have argued that congressional intent in drafting the provision that was eventually enacted as part of the ACA was not to broaden the scope of those laws. The original sponsors of the bill disagree. increased their share of the market in sales of restaurant-type food. One question for policymakers is whether the inclusion of supermarkets and convenience stores is instrumental to the effectiveness of the menu labeling law. In anticipation of the final rule, some establishments have moved forward with menu labeling. McDonald's, the largest fast food company in the United States, announced in September 2012 that it would list calorie information on its menu. The law is expected to take effect in the fall of this year or early next year. on all restaurant and drive-thru menu boards. Under the ACA, covered establishments are required to provide calorie and nutrition information for "food that is a standard menu item" These items include combination meals, variable menu items, self-service food, and food on display. Under ACA Section 4205, now FFDCA Section 403(q)(5)(H), foods that do not require labeling in restaurants and SRFE are custom orders, which are prepared in a specific manner at the customer's request. per calendar year; part of a customary market test; and condiments available for general use, such as salt, pepper, and ketchup, that every customer has access to. The proposed rule further specifies the foods that would require labeling and food that would be exempt under the proposed rule are listed in Table 2. It proposed definitions for restaurant food and restaurant-type food, standard menu items, and combination meals. Under its proposed rule, the FDA also tentatively concluded that the new menu labeling requirements do not apply. The proposed definition of restaurant-type food would mean that grab-and-go items would also be regulated. Grocers argue that the FDA's estimate would be accurate if the rule only applied to restaurant food. The FDA estimates the cost of a menu board at $550. Industry estimates range as high as $1,500 per menu board. The proposed rule includes clarification of several concepts that were noted but not defined in the ACA, including the medium (i.e., menu, table tent, place mat) and placement. The restaurant or SRFE must also provide a statement concerning daily recommended caloric intake, presented in a manner that enables the public to understand the significance of each item in the context of a total daily diet. A 2,000 calorie diet daily diet is used as the basis for general nutrition advice; however, individual calorie needs may vary. The proposed rule would require covered entities to post a succinct statement about daily recommended calorie intake on menus and menu boards. The proposal would also require that additional nutrition information is available upon request. require that covered establishments declare calories on menus and menu boards to the nearest 5-calorie increment up to and including 50 calories. The FDA proposes use of the "80-120 rule" that is currently the standard for prepackaged food. In the proposed rule, the FDA requested comment and consumer research on five different options for disclosing the calorie and nutrient content for standard menu items that come in different flavors, varieties, or combinations. Using an average or median value; using an average and range; using slashes to separate calorie. disclosure when there are only two varieties; and either a range or an average if there are more varieties. The law requires that all nutrient content disclosures must have a reasonable basis. Some Members of Congress and the restaurant industry have asserted that the FDA has misinterpreted the "reasonable basis" that restaurants and SRFE must have for nutrient disclosures in the proposed rule. According to the law, the required nutritional information could be determined using nutrient databases, cookbooks, laboratory analyses, labels on packaged foods. The FDA is proposing a rule that would allow some deviation from calorie counts. The rule would apply to pre-packaged food, where preparation is largely mechanized. Some note that restaurant food preparation is generally done by human hands, and thereby subject to greater variation in calorie content. The FDA estimates a cost of $269 per item to determine this information, while some industry groups have determined it will cost as much as $500 to $1,000 per item. The proposed rule is expected to be voted on later this year. preparation, making it more challenging to adhere to the 80-120 rule. Critics note that wide variation due to individual order preparation was one of the reasons the FDA exempted restaurant food from the NLEA regulations in 1993. The restaurant industry has argued that adhering to a stricter standard of "reasonable basis" may discourage smaller independent operators from participating voluntarily. Calorie counts may also be difficult to determine due to varying portion sizes. In grocery stores, foods that are "packaged and prepared for immediate consumption" are exempt. not always pre-portioned (e.g., deli items), which means that these items will not be served in standardized portions. Some feel that these should be labeled as per portion, rather than whole item. Pizza companies have argued against "whole pie" labeling, because they feel it is not an accurate representation of what an individual would typically eat in one sitting. FDA does not have mandatory recall authority for food that is deemed misbranded due to nutrition labeling. Although the FDA does. was allowed to enforce certain provisions in Section 4205 upon enactment of the ACA, it has proposed to refrain from enforcement until it has completed rulemaking. The FDA generally does not have the authority to order a recall of a misbranded food, unless it is deemed misbranded under allergen labeling regulations. Rather, the agency relies on food companies to voluntarily recall adulterated, misbranded, or otherwise unsafe products, either on their own or on the advice of the Food and Drug Administration. In the proposed rule, the FDA provides a six-month window for restaurants and SRFE to comply. Industry representatives have requested a longer timeline of one year for full compliance. Failure to comply with the regulations, once finalized, will render the food misbranded. If the language regarding the 80-120 rule is included in the finalrule, the accuracy of restaurant calorie information would be determined using the same standards as packaged foods. The restaurant industry has argued that the six- months window for compliance is not enough time for their constituents. The FDA's final determination on these definitions and the timeline for compliance and enforcement activities will affect the regulation's scope and cost. Faced with the possibility of budget cuts, it is unclear if the FDA will have the funding to enforce a strict interpretation of the accuracy of calorie and other nutrition information. However, the eventual public health benefit to fully comply is likely to outweigh the cost of implementing this rule. The cost and burden imposed on businesses implementing the rule is also likely to be a concern. FDA estimates initial cost of compliance at $315 million and ongoing annual cost of the provision at $44 million. Industry estimates the cost will exceed $1 billion in the first year. FDA also notes that the.society may also be weighed; quantification of this benefit can be challenging. The FDA's PRIA points to three elements of cost for this rule: (1) collecting and managing nutritional analysis records; (2) revising or replacing existing menus and menu boards; and (3) employee training. FDA estimated that 27% of chain restaurants have already obtained nutrition information to comply with those state and local regulations. The Office of Management (OMB) is to review the regulations promulgated under the law to ensure, among other considerations, that they are consistent with Executive Orders 12866 and 13563, which require agencies to promulgate rules only after determining that the benefits of a regulation justify its costs, according to a report by the Center for Restaurant and Hospitality Innovation (CRH) require agencies to tailor their regulations to impose the least burden on society and to select approaches that maximize net benefits. Researchers have projected that more than half of Americans will be obese by 2030. Increases in weight are linked to increased risk of type 2 diabetes, cardiovascular diseases, osteoarthritis, and several forms of cancer. It has been documented that obesity leads to decreased productivity, in terms of increased absenteeism as well as what researchers deem "presenteeism" (decreased outputs while at work) Obesity accounts for approximately 1% to 10% of a country's total health care costs. Obese individuals have medical costs that are 30% higher than individuals of normal weight. A recent study estimated that the annual medical cost of obesity was as high as $78.5 billion in 1998. Of that amount, about 10% was spent on medical care for the obese, according to the study. The study was conducted by the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. roughly half of the cost was financed by Medicare and Medicaid. The authors estimated that cost may have risen to as much as $147 billion in 2008. The true cost and savings from any obesity prevention policy is challenging to determine. Researchers cannot isolate the effect of one specific policy relative to other interventions. In order to determine the effectiveness of an intervention such as menu labeling, researchers and policy makers may review the impact of these policies on individuals' behavior and monitor changes in the obesity rate over time. taking into account other factors that may also account for those changes, including the time needed for weight loss and obesity prevention programs to yield an effect, particularly on chronic disease costs. Taking into account the time it takes for weight-loss and obesity-prevention programs to pay off, such as the cost of those programs to start and maintain a healthy body mass index (BMI) and the amount of time needed to get to a healthy weight. The cost of obesity-related illnesses can also be influenced by a number of factors, including age, race and gender.