Best index: 24

The FSM, the Marshall Islands, and Palau are among the smallest countries in the world. In 2008, the three FAS had a combined resident population of approximately 179,000. In 1947, the United States entered into a trusteeship with the United Nations and became the administering authority of the three nations. The four states of the FSM voted in 1978 to become an independent nation. The Marshall Islands established a constitutional government and declared itself a republic in 1979. In 1994, Palau also entered a Compact of Free Association with the U.S. and became a nation. a sovereign state. Under the compacts, FAS citizens are exempt from meeting the visa and labor certification requirements of the Immigration and Nationality Act (INA) as amended. The compacts provide the United States with exclusive military use rights in these countries. A further compact-related agreement with the Marshall Islands secured the U.S. military facilities on Kwajalein Atoll, which are used for missile testing and space tracking activities. In the 1986 compacts’ enabling legislation, Congress stated that it had a responsibility for the defense of the FAS. was not its intent to cause any adverse consequences for United States territories and commonwealths and the state of Hawaii. Congress declared that it would act sympathetically and expeditiously to redress any adverse consequence. The legislation also required the President to report and make recommendations annually to the Congress regarding adverse consequences resulting from the compact and provide statistics on compact migration. In December 2003, Congress approved the amended compacts with the FSM and the Marshall Islands and took steps in the amendedcompacts’ enabling legislation to address compact migrant impact in U.S. areas. The legislation restated Congress’s intent not to cause any adverse consequences for the areas defined as affected jurisdictions—Guam, Hawaii, the CNMI, and American Samoa. The act authorized and appropriated $30 million for each fiscal year from 2004 to 2023 for grants to the affected jurisdictions. Grants are to be used only for health, educational, social, or public safety services, or infrastructure related to such services. Under the initial compacts with the FSM and the Marshall Islands, the United States provided $2.1 billion in economic assistance to these governments. The amended compacts require that the sector grants be targeted to sectors such as education, health care, the environment, public sector capacity building, private sector development, and public infrastructure. The U.S.-Federated States of Micronesia Joint Economic Management Committee and the U.s.-Republic of the Republic of the Pacific Economic Cooperation have been established. the Marshall Islands Joint Economic Management and Financial Accountability Committee. Census has gathered data through multiple efforts that can be used to describe aspects of the FAS migration to U.S. areas. Data are currently available through Census’s decennial censuses and its American Community Survey (ACS) In addition, under agreements with Interior, Census has conducted special enumerations of compact migrants in affected jurisdictions, such as the Marshall Islands and Puerto Rico. Figure 1 shows the locations of FAS and the affected jurisdictions. The 2010 decennial census in the 50 states is a 10-question survey that gathers limited demographic data such as sex, age, and race. Census does not collect respondents’ place of birth or year of entry, both of which are needed to identify compact migrants. Interior has conducted four sets of enumerations of compact migrants in affected jurisdictions. In 2008, the two-pronged approach cost approximately $1.3 million, including headquarters and field costs and the cost of final reporting. The government of Arkansas stated that it had serious doubts about the accuracy of the ACS estimate for Arkansas shown in figure 2. According to these estimates, although the FSM produced the highest number of migrants, Marshallese predominated in Arizona, Arkansas, California, and Washington. Census has also published the 2010 decennial census counts of Pacific Islanders, with respondents identifying themselves by race, for the 50 U.S. states. Decennial census data include published state-level information on the Marshallese population. The two-pronged 2008 enumeration had certain strengths and limitations. The data produced by block sampling in Guam and the CNMI and the ACS tabulations in Hawaii are not fully comparable among the affected jurisdictions. The shift in approaches from prior enumerations to 2008 limits Interior’s and affected jurisdictions’ ability to draw inferences from trends in the data. Hawaii expressed concern that the use of ACS data for the state from earlier years would not reflect recent migration and, in contrast to the special survey to be conducted in Guam, would eliminate Hawaii's local input into the survey. Officials in all three affected jurisdictions remained dissatisfied with the 2008 enumeration approach. Interior cited Census’s independence as an advantage of its conducting the enumerations. The preliminary approach would use data from April 1, 2010 for Guam and the CNMI and from multiple ACS monthly samples at different points in time for Hawaii. Detailed demographic data could be produced for compact migrants in Guam and CNMI, because the 2010 decennial census in those locations collected such data. However, as in 2008, demographic data from the ACS in Hawaii could lack statistical reliability. For 2004 through 2010, the affected jurisdictions’ reports to Interior show more than $1 billion in costs for services related to compact migrants. Education accounted for the largest share of reported expenses in all three jurisdictions. The CNMI’s reported costs decreased by approximately 53 percent, reflecting the decline in the CNMI compact migrant population. Compact migrant school children generally lag academically owing to poor-quality schools in the FAS and limited language skills and experience with a school environment. The affected jurisdictions reported impact costs for educational, health, public safety and social services. have high rates of obesity; diabetes; hypertension; cardiovascular disease; and communicable diseases such as tuberculosis, Hansen’s disease, and sexually transmitted diseases. In U.S. areas, compact migrants’ low household incomes may lead many migrants to rely on public health services. States and territories receive federal funding for specific programs that offsets a portion of the costs of providing services to compact migrants. Two of the three affected jurisdictions’ public school systems and health agencies did not account for these offsets in their impact reporting. Compact migrants participate in local economies through taxation, but reliable data quantifying their effect are not available. Compact migrants contribute to the local economy by consuming local goods and services and by spending remittances that they receive from their home islands. From fiscal years 2004 through 2010, the $30 million in annual compact impact grants have addressed a portion of each jurisdiction’s reported impact costs. Of the $210 million in impact grants, approximately $102 million was provided to Guam, $75 million to Hawaii, and $33 million to the CNMI (see fig. 6). In their compact impact reports to Interior, the governors of Guam and Hawaii have highlighted the gaps between their reported impact Costs and the amounts of the compact impact Grants. Migrants in Guam and Hawaii identified language and cultural issues as a source of difficulty in using government services. Guam officials noted the need for interpreters to assist patients and families. Hawaii officials identified lack of coordination of services as a challenge. Several compact migrants in Hawaii suggested the establishment of a community center to help people adjust to life in the U.S. Have a more effective long-term impact? Share your story with CNN iReport. Share your photos, videos, and other content. In 2001, we reported that targeting assistance to the health and education sectors in the FSM and the Marshall Islands might lessen compact migration. In 2011, the committees formally placed compact impact on their annual meeting agendas. As of September 2011 they had not allocated 2012 sector grant funding to directly address issues that concern the compact migrants or the affected jurisdictions. We found some examples of grants that directly address compact migrants’ needs in affected jurisdictions and thus respond to some of some of theaffected jurisdictions’ concerns. The compact migrant population represents a tiny fraction of migrants in the United States. The population can have significant impacts on the U.S. communities where they reside. To help defray costs of providing services to compact migrants, Congress has appropriated compact impact funds. We recommend that the Secretary of the Interior take the following four actions: work with the affected jurisdictions to evaluate the current use of grant funds and consider alternative uses of these grants to reduce compact impact. In order to help mitigate compact impact and. better assist FSM and Marshall Islands citizens who migrate to the United. States, work. with the U-FSM and U-S.-Marshall Islands joint management committees to consider uses of sector grants that would address FSM. and Marshallese migrants. Census did not comment on our report’s recommendations but offered a number of largely technical comments on our findings. Census disagreed with our assessment of the limitations of the 2008 enumeration methodologies. The government of Hawaii generally agreed with our recommendations and made several related observations. Guam agreed in principle to the four recommendations in our report. Our report notes the authorization of additional appropriations but does not address limits on migration. We added a note to the report to describe the debt relief provision but also note that it expired on February 28, 2005. our findings and recommendations and stated that Interior should consult with the CNMI on developing cost guidance based on Interior Inspector General, Office of Management and Budget, and GAO guidance. The government of Arkansas generally agreed with our findings but expressed serious reservations about the ACS data shown in figure 2 of our report. We agree that there are differences between the counts and list some of the reasons for the differences in appendix IV. We have added additional text to the report body to present Arkansas’s concerns and more thoroughly describe them. This report describes migration to U.S. areas from the Federated States of Micronesia (FSM), the Marshall Islands, and Palau under those countries’ compacts of free association with the United States. It reviews approaches to enumerating these compact migrants; evaluates reporting of these migrant’s impact on Guam, Hawaii, and the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands (CNMI) In addition, appendix II provides information on the growing Marshallese compact migrant population in Arkansas and its impact. If you or your staffs have any questions about this report, please contact me at (202) 512-3149. compile the compact impact costs reported by the governments of Guam, Hawaii, and the CNMI. We used the most recent data that they submitted to Interior for 1986 through 2010. We then categorized the reported costs using the categories that the amended compacts’ enabling legislation defines as eligible for compact impact funding. We reviewed the narrative of the reports submitted by affected jurisdictions and interviewed compact migrants and officials in affected jurisdictions.. To identify the eligibility of compact migrants for selected federal programs that may help address the compact. impact on affected jurisdictions, we reviewed existing legislation. Hawaii’s Department of Human Services, Department of Health, and Department of Education said that their reporting methodologies had generally not changed since their last report, which was submitted in 2008. However, the Department of education said that it excluded federal funds from its 2008 through 2011 compact impact costs and corrected its reporting error regarding the number of compact students for 2006 through 2008. In addition, the Tuberculosis Branch changed its methodology and the Family Health Services Division changed its presentation of the data. Guam and the CNMI for programs serving compact migrants. We analyzed single audit reports from 2005 through 2009 in CNMI and from 2004 through 2008 in Guam. To assess Interior’s guidelines on compact impact reporting, we reviewed the requirements contained in the amended compacts’ enabling legislation. To describe compact migrants’ participation in local economies, we generally used data from the Micronesian surveys in Micronesia.. We assessed the 2010 report to Congress against the specific elements required in the legislation. 1997 and 2003 as reported in the 2008 report of the 2003 survey, supplementing these data where possible with additional information from local and natio nal agencies and other literature. To determine whether additional data on the compact migrants’ role in the economy exist, we contacted agencies from affected jurisdictions that address labor and taxation. We analyzed data from the CNMI Department of Finance for 2001 through 2009, comparing the size of the compact migrant labor force to the overall CNMI labor force. We compared the income of compact migrants to that of the general population. We used data from the 2008 and 2009 Guam Annual Census of Establishments. We also compared the amount of taxes paid by compact migrants with the amount paid by the general population in Guam. The method we used to prepare this estimate drew on a method first outlined by an official in the Guam Bureau of Statistics and Plans. We analyzed data from Inter- American Dialogue, the fiscal year 2008 Economic Reviews of the FSM and the Marshall Islands, and data reported in the 2008 Guam Statistical Yearbook. report of the 2003 survey. To determine the number of FAS-born persons serving in the U.S. armed forces, we requested a special tabulation from the Department of Defense’s Active Duty Personnel Master and Reserve Components Common Personnel Data System. We assessed the management of the grants against the legislation and manual for Guam, Hawaii, and the CNMI for fiscal years 2004 through 2011. In each grant file, we reviewed grant narratives and correspondence and collected the grant name, number, amount, description, status, remaining balance, and purpose. as well as any funding redirections or deobligations. Arkansas’s compact migrant population is almost exclusively from the Marshall Islands and is concentrated in the rapidly growing northwest Arkansas counties of Benton and Washington. The 2010 decennial census reports that 4,324 persons in Arkansas responding to the race question on the 2010 form identified themselves as Marshallese. In 2009 and 2010, the Springdale School District reported that 1,323 and 1,579 students identified as Pacific Islanders when enrolling in Springdale schools. tutoring and employs two Marshallese translators. The Washington County Department of Health dedicates four staff to its Marshallese Outreach Team. The Jones Center for Families, a nonprofit community service organization, employs a Marshallese Community Outreach Coordinator. The Gaps in Services to Marshallese Task Force, a network of interested individuals headed by a retired Jones Center employee, has used grants from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the Arkansas Minority Health Commission to survey the health concerns of Marshallese. Arkansas does not collect data on a number of costs reported by Guam, Hawaii, and the CNMI. Arkansas estimated costs for health services to compact migrants by compiling costs for the population identified as of Pacific Islander ethnicity. Arkansas does not track the use of some state-funded services by ethnicity and therefore could not estimate the costs of providing these services to Compact migrants. Only FAS consulate in the continental U.S. only provides data on compact impact on the state of Arkansas. The estimated education service costs are for the Springdale School District, where most Marshallese school children live. stated that compact migrants are eligible for programs such as the state’s Division of Developmental Disabilities Services. Unlike affected jurisdictions, Arkansas does not provide Medicaid equivalent services to noncitizen compact migrants. Marshallese fill a significant niche in the local poultry industry. According to employers in northwest Arkansas, Marshallese represent between 14 and 37.9 percent of the total workforce at some plants of major poultry producers, such as Tyson, Cargill, and George's. Arkansas doesn't disaggregate tax revenue by ethnic categories or citizenship and there are no data on consumption and remittances. The 2010 decennial census identified 22,434 Native Hawaiian or Pacific Islanders who identified themselves specifically as Marshallese residing in the 50 U.S. states. The largest Marshallese populations were in Hawaii, Arkansas, and Washington. The 2010 census reported 7,412 Marshallese in Hawaii and 4,324 in Arkansas, while the ACS tabulation estimates 3,535 and 1,150 Marshallese compact migrants inHawaii and Arkansas, respectively. The census counts are not meant to be compared with ACS 5 year estimates of compact migrants. Best practices and guidance state that cost estimations should be characterized by accuracy, adequate documentation, and comprehensiveness. Estimates should contain few errors and reflect actual costs. Cost estimates should include a detailed description of the derivation of the reported costs, such as the source data used, the calculations performed and their results. We found a number of limitations affecting reported costs’ credibility and preventing a precise calculation of total compact impact on the affected jurisdictions, the authors said. The report was published by the International Institute of Fiscal Studies. Several local government reporting agencies that responded to our inquiries did not define compact migrants according to the criteria in the amended compacts’ enabling legislation. The legislation defines the population to be enumerated as persons, or those persons’ children under the age of 18, who pursuant to the compacts are admitted to, or resident in, an affected jurisdiction as of the date of the most recently published enumeration. By counting compact migrants based on their ethnicity or language, agencies may have overcounted. By identifying compact migrants by their citizenship, agencies might have undercounted, because they would have excluded compact migrants.  Guam, Hawaii, and the CNMI, among other U.S. states and territories, receive federal funding for programs that compact migrants use. Many local government agencies estimated impact costs based on average, rather than specific, costs of providing services to compact migrants. Guam received an annual average of $1,027,825 from HHS for the Consolidated Health Centers program, an amount based partly on the number of beneficiaries in Guam. For example, the Hawaii Department of Education included language training costs in its reported per pupil expenditures. The Department of the Interior did not agree with our recommendation that it work with affected jurisdictions to evaluate the current use of compact impact grant funds and consider alternative uses. Currently, limited FSM compact grant funds are being used to support worker training in Guam, addressing a concern of compact migrants in Guam as well as the Guam government. According to the Center for Micronesian Empowerment, approximately 45 percent of its trainees in Guam are compact migrants residing in Guam. We agree with Interior that the sector grants listed in the compacts are to support the governments of the FSM and the Marshall Islands. use of funds and consider alternatives uses. We found that government officials, service providers, and compact migrants in the affected jurisdictions identified a significant need for language and cultural assistance, job training, and improved access to basic services. This may also help reduce some of the negative impact from compact migration. Other alternative uses may also offer practical gains. For example, more translators could result in more effective health treatment. This adoption would address the need for preventive care among Micronesians and Marshallese in Hawaii. Department of the Interior believes compact sector grants are limited to use within the FAS. Interior agreed that some activities may be related both to sector grant priorities and to programs that would better prepare migrants to live and work in the United States. Interior does not intend to imply that funds should be shifted from providing assistance to FAS governments to assisting FAS citizens living in affected jurisdictions. We expect that compact sector grant awards will be provided consistent with the terms of the compacts and the amended compacts’ enabling legislation. shifted from the FAS governments to FAS migrants. The recommendation supports consideration of the use of sector grants in ways that respond to the concerns of FSM and Marshall Islands migrants and the affected jurisdictions. The U.S. Census emphasized that the migrant survey content was purposely chosen to enumerate compact migrants while minimizing costs and maximizing respondent participation. As our report notes, however, collecting only those data needed to enumerated migrants limited the collection of data that stakeholders such as affected jurisdictions would have found useful. report’s findings, the 2008 Guam and CNMI surveys were designed to produce estimates with a similar coefficient of variation to the ACS estimates for Hawaii. Census disagreed with our statement that the effect of using an earlier time frame of data in Hawaii relative to Guam and the CNMI results in an undercount of compact migrants in Hawaii. However, migration is ongoing, with approximately 7,000 persons estimated to have left the FSM and the Marshall Islands in 2007 and 2008. Other available data also indicate that the migrant population is growing. can lag behind the actual value for a growing small population at a given point in time. Census stated that the frequent changing of address by the compact migrant population, cited by Guam and CNMI officials as potentially leading to a miscount, would not produce bias in the surveys as designed. Researchers inside and outside the Census Bureau studying the foreign-born population agreed that an assumption of complete coverage of legal immigrants and temporary migrants in the 2000 Census was unreasonable indicating the potential for coverage error and bias of the estimates. participate in other surveys, indicating the potential for nonresponse bias. Census further stated that it gave both Guam and CNMI an opportunity to provide local information that might improve the accuracy but that neither produced this information before the design had to be finalized. We note that estimates across enumerations are not comparable due to changing methodology and the lack of use of a method that is not used in the enumeration. We also note that the estimates across jurisdictions, within an enumeration, is not comparable. statistically designed to measure change over time. We agree that the surveys have different bases for identification and have identified several reasons for these differences in appendix IV. We have also noted Arkansas’ concerns about the accuracy of the ACS data. We note that the Census Bureau did not determine the level of precision, or reliability, necessary for these estimates to be used for funding. While the ACS can be used to detect the presence of compact migrants, the smaller the population, the less reliable the estimates will be. documentation does not indicate that variance estimates properly accounted for the variability due to the nonresponse adjustment factor, such as through the use of replicate weight methodologies. The government of Hawaii stated that the report does not point out the inherent inadequacies of the American Community Survey. As our report notes, ACS data have limited statistical reliability for populations as small as compact migrants in Hawaii. We further note in appendix V that ACS estimates are not equivalent to point-in-time estimates and may be biased due to nonresponse and coverage error. discrepancies between the Census estimates in each affected jurisdiction and the utilization data for services provided by agencies in each jurisdiction. We did explore the use of school data in particular as a basis for evaluating the enumeration findings. However, we found that the schools identified compact migrant students by language (as in Hawaii) or ethnicity ( as in Guam and the CNMI) These definitions do not match that contained in the amended compacts' enabling legislation and could include the children of persons with FAS ethnicity who were present in Hawaii prior to the compacts. The government of Hawaii agrees that a portion of the sector grants given to the FAS might more effectively be used to provide services to compact citizens. The affected jurisdictions should provide input into the uses of the grants. The Federated States of Micronesia has used sector grant funds for activities in the affected jurisdiction of Guam. It seems compact migrants are treated as if they are citizens in that they have access to all federal and local resources. The FAS should highlight the nexus between sector grants and the issues that concern theFAS, compact migrants and affected jurisdictions. The Arkansas Department of Health expressed serious doubts about the count of Arkansas migrants based on American Community Survey data. The government of the FSM stated that our findings on compact migrant participation in local economies are not conclusive as to the net impact of migrants. The amended compacts' enabling legislation does not require the inclusion of such data in affected jurisdictions’ impact reports. We provided available information on labor market participation, taxes, consumption, and remittances. We believe that our recommendation that Interior prepare adequate cost guidance will help in determining compact impact costs. Local government agencies in affected jurisdictions do not use the definition of compact migrants in the amended compacts' enabling legislation. The Marshall Islands recommended that a methodology be developed that determines “net” compact costs. The government of the Marshall Islands noted that a number of Marshallese migrants attending public schools in the United States are U.S. citizens. The Census ACS tabulation we obtained for our estimates used Interior’s definition of a compact migrant. We provided available information on labor market participation, taxes, consumption, and remittances. and decision makers with comparative information on emigration, or migration rates from other Pacific Island nations. The government of the Marshall Islands stated that some of the data for enumerations for Marshallese in the state of Hawaii may be erroneous and overstated since some Marshallese only transit through Hawaii for a short period before moving to the U.S. mainland to accept employment. We do not have data to verify this assertion. We clarified our recommendation regarding compact sector grants to not imply that the use of sector grants should be in the affected jurisdictions. The amended compacts' enabling legislation does not require the inclusion of such data in affected jurisdictions’ impact reports. We provided available information on labor market participation, taxes, consumption, and remittances. The government of Palau stated that most agencies have included capital costs in their impact reporting, thus contributing to a gross overstatement of the costs associated with migrants. If Interior implements our recommendation to disseminate adequate guidance on compact impact reporting to affected jurisdictions, assessing impact by FAS country may be a topic for Interior to address. The government of Palau noted that ethnic Palauans in the United States may be U.S. citizens, permanent resident aliens (Green Card holders) or members of the Armed Forces and their dependents. Interior interprets the legislation’s definition of qualified nonimmigrant as including those migrants’ children under the age of 18 who are born in United States. However, we agree with Palau that some persons who entered the United states after the date of the compacts are included in the count of migrants. may be lawfully present in U.S. areas under authorities other than those of Section 141 of the compacts and have noted this in the report. In addition to the contact named above, Emil Friberg, Jr., Assistant Director; Keesha Egebrecht; Fang He; Reid Lowe; Mary Moutsos; Michael Simon; Sonya Vartivarian; Adam Vogt; Greg Wilmoth; and Monique Williams made key contributions to this report. Michael Derr, Bob Lunsford, and Jena Sinkfield provided additional technical assistance.