Professor: Can you explain the physical significance of the crystal momentum? Professor: The information about the momentum can be encoded in these spatial variation of the phase of the wave function. Professor: A central property from the Schrodinger equation is at the time variation d dt of p is equal to the expectation value of minus d the potential of x d x. The momentum expectation value is time independent, so it can be written in the form of e cubed, equal to e to the minus i upon h bar p l. we just give up on quantum mechanics and say it totally failed? And so this is a totally reasonable question, and I want to emphasize something important to you. That model led to a prediction, which is that if you put a capacitor plate across a perfect crystal, then you would get no current flowing across. And that is manifestly what happens with copper. But the experimentalist comes back to you and says look dude. That is a ridiculous model because the copper isn't in fact perfect. So how do you test the model? Well there are two ways to test-- to deal with the situation. The probability of finding the particle at point A is given by chi a squared. And similarly, the probability that we find the second particle at b is this thing norm squared. But we also studied the symmetric configuration, which was equal to 1 over root phi, root 2. This should be a correct description of many experiments, this should be totally awesome. But it's deeply disconcerting, because I could've taken these particles, put them in this entangled state, and sent one particle off to a distant planet. And my sister measures this second particle and determines what state it's in. Einstein created a thought experiment which we're going to study in detail next week called the EPR experiment. He left Germany in 1932 December, about three weeks before Hitler took power. And he did so with decisiveness and dispatch and a head of almost all of his. German-Jewish physicist colleagues and those German physicists for whom the Hitler regime was unacceptable. The three of them talk about it. They write the paper and they put it out. And I want to share with you, actually, a really lovely description of the way the problem was represented in a way by a book that I recommend to all of you.