Jake Xia: This is the second time we are having this class. The purpose of this course is really to give you a sampling menu to see how mathematics is applied in modern finance. We will be doing a bit more polling along the way, mainly to get feedback of how you feel about the class. And so hopefully, this will give you enough information to decide this is a field you would like to pursue in your future career. The class will be held every Tuesday and Thursday afternoon from 2:30 to 4:00. On his first day at Morgan Stanley he asked a question about volatility. His desk quant look at him, said-- this is supposed to be options trading desk, so he look at me puzzled. So instead of answering my question, he handed over a training manual for new employees and new analysts. He opened the training manual and looked it through. He actually found his answer. At Morgan Stanley this is not called vega, it's called kappa. So now, I remember to call it kappa, which is actually a Greek letter. I did that in the last 20 years. So the point I'm trying to tell you is, just bear in mind, this is a field developed in. the last mostly 30 years, or even shorter. So, financial products is really just one form of trading. There are many other ways of trading aside from exchanges. One of them is called OTC, meaning two counterparties agree to do a trade without really subject to the exchange rules, or the underlying trading agreement does not have to be a securitized product, or standardized. The "VaR" concept, or value at risk, is also, obviously, a very important concept. Arbitrage is really to find the relationships between prices, and try to profit from those relationship mispricing. Fundamental analysis, you're really trying to understand what's going on in the world. What is the trade balance of a country? What's the earning potential of a company? What is a policy change? What does it mean when the Federal Reserve announce they're going to taper the quantitative easing? VasILY STRELA: [INAUDIBLE] mentioned that, Apple trades, that now it's $494.4 Yeah, just a couple of [inaUDIBLE]. Well, first of all, no offense to people who were [INAudIBLE], but I just wanted to give an example of [INA UDIBLE]. AUDIENCE: [inaudIBLE]. VASILY STREELA: --because he was working in our group, and it just will give you a little bit of an idea what we will be talking about. what we had, we had the noisy observation of broker data and it was coming out at different non-uniform times. So, we decided to use Kalman filter and to study how it can predict. And that's one of the nice graphs [INAUDIBLE] produced, which again, we will use this strategy and the Kalman filters which he constructed in our e-trading platform in Moscow. Just to remind, the website is fully functional. We will be posting a lot of materials there. Probably most lectures will be published there.