David KAISER: Today, we're going to pick up where we were on the most recent classes. We'll look at the coalescence of what came to be called the Big Bang model. And then we'll see how cosmic inflation emerged from that particular moment to try to address some of the shortcomings while retaining some the successes. And the asterisks are to remind you there's a set of strictly optional lecture notes on the Canvas site which go into a little bit more detail of some of these parts from the lecture. 20 years later, two radial physicists working at Bell Labs, Robert Wilson and Arno Penzias, were using a new horn antenna sensitive to radial microwave and radial band frequencies. This should've been among the most precise instruments available on the planet for that band of the spectrum. And they couldn't get rid of a residual hum. This residual hum in your receiver consistent with an energy of about three degrees above zero, three degrees Kelvin, was really the leftover photons, that remnant hot radiation from the Big Bang. The universe should've been filled with light, originally a very high energy. The energy of that light should be falling as the container expands, so as the average energy inside that balloon goes down. So we're basically just moving through a bath of light. The photons aren't coming from that direction of sky the way we think of with point-like sources. There's a galaxy there, a quasar, a particular bright star in our neighborhood. And it's like sitting in a bathtub full of these photons. And all that's changing is their average temperature per photon. why the universe is so messy is actually because Alan's been generating the mess in his own office, and it's expanded to cosmic scales. So if you want to study that part of today's lecture, it's probably the most important lesson, you'll ever take away. And I'll be glad to stay a bit longer if people have questions. Again, I'm sorry for running late. Feel free to drop off if you need. Any questions on that? The photos in Alan's office are on Canvas.