David Kaiser: particle cosmology is a new subfield within physics. He says it studies the smallest units of matter, the fundamental forces and elementary constituents of matter. Kaiser: The field is doing pretty well these days by other measures. Its annual budget just within the U.S. is on the order of $1 billion a year, roughly, he says. It is really a booming, booming subject of study, Kaiser says. The field literally didn't even exist 45 years ago, he adds. M1 M2 over R squared-- that unit strength of gravity. Brans and Dicke modify Einstein's theory of general relativity in response to this challenge of Mach's principle. They add an extra dimensionless constant, a fudge factor, that they labeled by the Greek letter omega. As omega becomes larger and larger, the field is much less likely to vary either in a time or space way, they say. And so, in some sense, you're stiffening up the trampoline. In 1979, two separate theorists working independently of each other suggested that the two fields might be literally the same, not just comparable or considering side by side. So it's not that they're somehow intrinsically different from each other. Instead, their status, instead, is what people assess them on. That's what we'll pick up in the next part of our chat with Dr. Alex Tsiolkovsky, the director of the Centre for Theoretical Physics at the University of Toronto. asymptotic freedom. And actually, it's the reason why our friend and colleague here at MIT, Frank Wilczek, received the Nobel Prize. So this was work introduced by Frank and his then advisor David Gross, and independently by a different very young grad student at the time, David Politzer. And what they found was that the strength of the strong nuclear force, that QCD force that we talked about quite a bit at the end of last class session, that the force actually decreases with the energy scale. a continuous unitary symmetry, which is like saying you could rotate the electron field by any continuum amount, and the equations remain unchanged. The photon only has to mop up a relatively simple symmetry, the U1 gauge symmetry. SU2 was what I was pointing to when I was referring to the weak nuclear force. That's a discrete symmetry structure. SU3, that refers to three different color charges of quantum chromodynamics. And so therefore, the gluons have still a different set of properties, so that's right. Alan Guth: Few physicists today think Brans-Dicke theory of gravity best describes our Universe. He says interest in the field grew even as it was getting experimentally less and less favored. Guth: New generation of theorists trained to work at this interface. They had all kinds of potential roles to play in new work that we'll look at together next time on inflation, he says. "We'll have more opportunities to make fun of Alan Guth, which is what's in it for me" the hall from Alan's. And by a quirk of the old building 6, we had the same key. A single key would open the whole hallway. Couldn't get rid of it now. And one time, my parents were visiting. And I basically broke into Alan's office. They couldn't believe me when I described what it was like to try to work with this person. So I actually broke into his office to show them the safety violation, fire code violation, horror show that was the den of entropy. So that's a true story.