JACK HARE: Let's do a little recap on electron cyclotron emission. We expect to have multiple different peaks, even from a single particle. These peaks are going to be occurring at frequencies. And we can say this is m equals 1, m equals 2,. m equals 3. And they're evenly spaced. And so, we have these peaks here. But if we neglect that, the frequency depends only on the magnetic field. So, if you see some emission at some certain frequency, then you know that it's been emitted by a region of plasma which has this magnetic fields. The idea here is that there was some region over which, in the transverse direction perpendicular to your collection volume, you have a very narrow scale. You can actually collect from a very small region on the order of 100 microns. And if it collimated that beam, that would mean there'd be a focus point at some distance f away-- if this lens has a focal length f, then it will diverge afterwards. So, because of reciprocity, that means that, as opposed to launching rays this way and seeing where they focus, we have rays coming from this. The technique is incredibly powerful because it's enabled people to measure, again, delta on the order of 1%. Someone called it nominative determinism, and they've done it on 1%. And it's used in a variety of applications, but this is an example of what these angle brackets are doing. There are actually lots of different ways of doing this, but there are a few different ways to do correlations, and I'm not going to go into them, but I will give you a citation at the moment. Bremsstrahlung is an isotropic radiation. It emits photons as it's deflected from its trajectory. There are lots of different ways to deal with the radiation. All give the same answer with just a very slightly different coefficient. So it's not really a big difference if you design your reactor. But, from the point of view of this course, it makes no difference. So, again, if you want the full treatment, go have a look in Hutchinson. where we have a range of different discrete energy levels that the electrons can occupy. These energy levels are labeled by the principal quantum number n. And the energies of these levels are given by this unit, Ry, which is the Rydberg z squared of our ion over n squared. Up here, infinity, this is ionization. If your electron gets this much energy, it becomes free again. And so, what we're going to see in our spectrum is that this is only allowed if the electron energy fulfills this equation.