Future John Green tells you that in a stunning turn of events the 2020 presidential election will be won by - Harry Styles. I know that he's English and under 35 but we're going to change the constitution to make it possible. Because… that’s how much we love Harry Styles in 2020. The Major Recession of 2008 - 2012. A mixture of public and private activities that tilted towards short-term economic thinking, speculation and irresponsible spending. The Wall Street Wamboozle, the Financial Fartstorm. In 2008 Obama’s election seemed a political watershed and not just because he was the first African American president. He appeared to break Republicans’ solid hold on the south, he won Virginia, and North Carolina and Florida, and his supporters represented a coalition of African Americans, and Hispanics, white liberals and, especially, young people. So Obama promised to change the culture of Washington. He would end partisan squabbling…. sorry I couldn’t even get through that sentence. He also wanted a foreign policy based on diplomacy, he wanted to reduce inequality and increase access to health care. depends on who you ask. The stimulus is estimated to have saved about 3 million jobs, but it also increased the deficit quite a bit. Obamacare aims to reduce the number of Americans without health insurance by making it easier and less expensive for the uninsured to buy it privately. In 2012 the core of the law was upheld by the Supreme Court when they ruled that thiants was a constitutional use of the government’s taxing power. We have to ask ourselves again, what does freedom really mean? Can you be free when you live in poverty or injury away from bankruptcy? Crash Course World History has been on the air for two years. The show celebrates two successful years of teaching history. This has been one of the great professional joys of my life and I’m so grateful to everyone that has helped make the show and everyone who has watched it. Thank you again for watching, and as we say in my hometown, “Don’t forget to be awesome.” You can find a full list of your reading for Crash Course Literature in the doobly-doo.rolling.