Jake Xia: This is the second time we are having this class. The purpose of this course is really to give you a sampling menu to see how mathematics is applied in modern finance. We will be doing a bit more polling along the way, mainly to get feedback of how you feel about the class. And so hopefully, this will give you enough information to decide this is a field you would like to pursue in your future career. The class will be held every Tuesday and Thursday afternoon from 2:30 to 4:00. "VaR" concept is also, obviously, a very important concept. And we talk about the volatility exposure was vega. And on top of that, what are the tail risks? What are the events that can actually get you into big trouble? So people use value at risk. Then capital. How much capital are you using? It becomes a veryimportant issue nowadays. And balance sheet. You have asset, you have liability. How do you leverage? How much leverage you have? Before the crisis, for example, lot of the banks leverage up 40 times. Vasily Kuznetsov: Arbitrage is really to find the relationships between prices, and try to profit from those relationship mispricing. He says the systematic trader builds computer models. Kuznets: Math is very useful in risk management, which I will give you some quiz -- questions -- to test your knowledge of the market. He adds that math plays a very important role to quantify how much exposure you have to the risks you have in your bank account or in the stock market. facing two choices, choice A and a choice B. Choice A being you have 80 chance to lose $500. You have 20% chance to win $500, right? That's choice A. Or choice B, you basically just lock in you have 100% chance of losing $280. Let me ask you, for whoever likes to choose choice A, please raise your hand. One, two, three, four. About six out of say, let's call it 50. So, that's really the common behavior, which mathematically may not make sense. your bank account balance is-- let's say you are a freshman student. Your choice will be very different from someone who has $100,000 in his bank account. And also, your risk tolerance, how much you can tolerate. So learn the math, learn the finance first, but keep those questions along the way when you are learning during this class. So suggested homework, optional. Go to the course website, read what we have put up for the financial glossary. So if you still have things you don't understand, compile your own list of financial concepts. We still have about 15 minutes or 12 minutes left, so I'll pass it to Vasily, then maybe we can leave five minutes for some questions. VASILY STRELA: [INAUDIBLE] mentioned that, Apple trades, that now it's $494.4 Yeah, just a couple of [inaUDIBLE]. Well, first of all, no offense to people who were [INAudIBLE], but I just wanted to give an example of [INA UDIBLE]. optimal size, that would be your numerical derivative of this blue function. While if you use an optimal shift size, which [INAUDIBLE] computed, it would be much smoother and much better. So, that's one of example, and that's what he did. And we actually are implementing it in our systems and plan to use it in practice. Another project was actually quite different. And it was about electronic trading and basically how to better predict prices of currencies and exchange rate. We put syllabus there, a short list of literature. We will be posting a lot of materials there. Probably most lectures will be published there. Jake's slides are there already. So, any questions? We like to get your emails so we can put you on the website for further announcements. But it's probably easier if you put your email on the sign up sheet, so that we can [INAUDIBLE]. VASILY STRELA: Yeah, but please visit and sign up here, because there will be announcements to the class.