which we are to for next week and here and I'll talk about that actually week from today because it's callay on Monday so it will get behind but if we get any further behind I'll have to make it up sometime the but if you don't have that you be copies available upstairs is it c um come to my office okay to dany's office he doesn't have copies of it there that's six six upstairs in the first floor immediately after CL and then on the next Friday I will talk about the parts in the in the inquiry that were assigned and also a that essay of of the oral concept. The English Constitution was at that time widely regarded this a sort of accepted view on all sides it's a hex Constitution that this problem as I say arose during the exclusion crisis of 1679 and 81. The original part of the second CH was written it believe about 79 and 880 and then other chapters that were were added in 81 83 and two chapters added after. James was Theos James and Harry this room in I think February of 1689 so those parts were add it afterwards but really I men talks about the earlier crisis. means that is there's no legal framework within which that is within the Constitution for settling the conflict there is no way to do it at law. If there is a conflict of the sort then the people have the right to appeal to Heaven which is a euphemism for for go to war that is Civil War. The power then refs to them and they have theright of resistance I'll come for that the moment now I might mention that in our constitution there are devices that tend to prevent this sort of conflict from happening. changed his mind he thought perhaps it was not all together safe never knew in England the English were regarded in those days as very unstable people. Mark says nothing about the details of of this process that is how does he Enis that this constition power is actually to take place he doesn't give any institutional account of how he supposes actually might be done laon is also vague on this he says something has the idea that it would begin in the county courts and they organized there and would then they presented Des sent to a parliament. L's view was that James had just advocated or meod from bacon and the Parliament finding a bacon Throne had simply found an occupant for it and that act did not imply the parliament was Supreme that is a view that they prepered to maintain. Why did L refuse to alter his view I think we have to assume that he didn't change his mind and he persisted in the doctrine that he formed earlier in 79 and 880 I think partly because his views are more radical than the standard view of his college that would be one reason but also because he felt I think that it was inconsistent.