David KAISER: In the last few class sessions, we were looking at some changes in high energy particle theory. And then in our most recent class session, we looked at some of the shifts within the fields of study. And today, we're going to focus on a kind of example of that new subfield, a relatively new sub field that's known as inflationary cosmology or simply cosmic inflation. So it's a framework for trying to understand the evolution of our universe over a huge expanse of time, increasingly using tools at the interface. lecture notes on the Canvas site which go into a little bit more detail of some of these parts from the lecture. So oftentimes, astronomers will describe the most salient features of our universe in terms of what they call large scale structure. It turns out that ordinary gravity-- even Newtonian gravity, let alone Einstein's fancier version that we looked at in class, general theory of relativity-- that these gravitational frameworks are sufficient to help us make sense of this hierarchy of scales, of structure across large distance scales. Astronomers like Edwin Hubble in Southern California were able to collect information about the distribution of distant galaxies. Hubble found this remarkable trend that the further away from us a given galaxy was, the faster it tended to be moving away. Lemaitre was one of the first to start thinking about playing that filmstrip backwards to say if things are moving further apart from each other on average today, and if the universe in general is expanding today, then was it, in fact, smaller at earlier times? At early times in cosmic history, the universe should've been opaque. You literally wouldn't have been able to see anything because the mean free path of any given photon would be very, very short. At that moment, the average energy per photon or per elementary particle would fall so that you could actually begin to form stable atoms of hydrogen. After that time, when the temperature has fallen below about 10,000 Kelvin, photons are now free to travel large distances. They lose energy as the universe continues to expand. out I don't attend dance parties very often. This is what the internet tells me they look like. If you just Google "dance party" and throw away the bad pictures-- anyway. So at early times, the DJ's playing some raucous house music, and everyone's just jostling around. The average energy per dancer is very high. That's like the charged particles where the mean free path is effectively zero. No one could cross that dance floor. And then at a calculable moment, if the DJ knows what she's doing, she'll put on some slow music. And you start having couples form like in Harry Potter at the Yule Ball. In 1948, physicists predicted as early as 1948 that there should be this remnant glow from the Big Bang. The idea was the whole universe is filled in the early times with very high energy particles that are at early, early times too high energy to form stable, electrically neutral atoms. The photons aren't just sitting in a bathtub of light, they're just moving through the overall size of space. So the idea was that there would be a point-like source of light coming from that direction of the sky. This day or let's just say earnest disagreement over what's called the cosmic distance ladder. We can get the velocity from these very fancy spectroscopic-- I say we. The people who do it are actually astronomers. They kindly share their information. I don't know how to do it well. But one can do it very, very well. What's hard to do is to calibrate. How far away is that object right now, let alone how quickly is it continuing to move away? Astronomer Hubble measured a much quicker average rate of expansion than what we have mostly settled on today. The picture was enough to get a small number of people to pay attention to Georges Lemaitre's otherwise quite obscure mathematical solutions. This is actually called conformal time, which might remind you of our beloved friends, the 19th century Cambridge Wranglers. We're really doing a very similar thing here, to adopt coordinates for the rate at which time takes into account changing rates over time. the Big Bang model had some amazing successes but some pretty stubborn quandaries as well. So I'll pause there again and ask the questions about that. Any questions on the shortcomings of the Big Bang as people began articulating them throughout the '60s and '70s? Feel free to jump in or use the chat or either way. And again, there's more on the quantitative details of that in that optional primer you can find on the Canvas site. So Fisher asks, is it useful to think of the universe as spherical still? Yeah. Planck collaboration using a satellite is that this parameter in our actual universe today is 1 to better than a percent level accuracy. This is a remarkable shift even over the course of 20 to 25 years, let alone since the days of Lemaitre and Hubble. If inflation happened, there should've been a very brief period before what had previously been called the Big Bang. So then it would at least be plausible there's at least now a causally self-consistent mechanism by which the universe could have similar conditions everywhere.