The coherent state has a simple definition, simple but subtle. It's an eigenstate of the annihilation operator, and it has a complex eigenvalue alpha. The person who popularized those states was Glauber, and he got amply rewarded for that. We are now using the coherent states to look at any other quantum state of the electromagnetic field, any statistical operator which describes photons by forming the diagram matrix element of the statistical operator with alpha. And now we realize that coherent states are not as wonderful as I believe. In quantum mechanics, number and phase are complimentary. If the number of photons is fixed, you know nothing about the phase. The energy is sharp of a number state, since the energy is e squared. But what you get is also something blurred on the order of unity. And the time dependence is very easy. After all, we're dealing with an harmonic oscillator. In an harmonic. oscillator, if you have a plane of x and p, symmetric and anti-symmetric combination of a. and a dagger, the quantum state is just rotating circle, a rotation with omega. have a product which is fully symmetric i in the ordering of x p, which is anti-normal or normal. The reason why I picked for the course Q of alpha is that it's a real probability, it's always positive. The other guys, P of alpha, can be positive or negative. And also, W of alpha can be negative or positive. But the fact is all three have their advantages and disadvantages. So they all have pluses and minuses. And as a result, it can be written like this. the coherent state is now not this Gaussian. It doesn't have thisGaussian distribution as a course of probability. It's what you want-- what maybe some of you wanted to see-- oh, by the way, it's a delta function. And finally, W stands for Wigner distribution, which is something you actually find in most quantum mechanics textbooks. But of course it has a disadvantage that it has negative values. Some people actually see negative probabilities spring out the non-classical character. The fluctuations of the intensity are usually expressed by the second order temporal coherence function. We have learned about one way to characterize uncertainties-- the quantumness of the electromagnetic field-- by looking at the uncertainties in the x and p variable. And that led us to minimum uncertainty states. Now, I want to now introduce to you two other ways of characterizing the uncertainty of quantum states of light. Right now, we have asked, What are the fluctuations in the electric field? But the next question is, What is the fluctuation in the photon number? Professor: Measurement of light intensity really means absorbing photons. Professor: As long as we limit ourselves to a single mode of the electromagnetic field, things are independent of tau. He says if you have 1 mode of light, there is no time for time to get out of phase with the light. Prof. Cody: So you find everything you want to for time for light, which has a peak, which is a peak of g2. And if you would rotate your head at omega omega, nothing will happen. The Hanbury Brown Twiss experiment was the first experiment which really looked at g2 functions correlations. It was the beginning of quantum optics and modern experiments with light. The classical limit is always a limit of high intensity, so at any given time, you have a ton of photons. If you put a light bulb into a cavity or couple the light from a light bulbs into a fiber, the light becomes spatially a single mode. That's the only way how you can distinguish a lightbulb from a laser beam.