Protein three-dimensional structure and its implications for the binding of small molecules such as drugs. How can we use these basic motifs to recognize other macromolecules, other proteins and nucleic acids? We have these motifs that we could find, weight matrices for them by aligning lots of sequences. Now instead of aligning sequences, let's see what we can do by mutating both the protein part and the nucleic acid part. And then we know from the three dimensional structure that it interacts mainly with the middle nucleotides. minus 9th seconds. That's atomic motion. Transcription that we talked about, all of the regulatory mechanisms of transcription last time, the rate of the constant for that process is around 50 nucleotides per second. Not entirely coincidentally, that's about the rate at which it is translated into protein. That could be used as a timer in a circuit of these longer time frames, like cell cycle, circadian rhythm, very long time frames in ecological systems with bamboo and various pests. then development and aging, which can be on the order of hundreds of years, at least for humans, turtles, and whales. So what we think proteins are good for depends on the accuracy. And the accuracy depends upon the method. As you get to 1 Angstrom or better in your accuracy, as you can get from NMR and X-ray crystallography, you now are in a position to study catalytic mechanism and design and improve ligands, such as drugs. There may be a day where we can do this all from ab initio prediction or modeling at very great distances. HIV is one of the most sequenced molecules on Earth. The HIV gene encoding the reverse transcriptase polymerase. It's been sequenced many times because as a patient takes the drugs, their population of the AIDS virus changes. And that causes a drug resistance in the HIV, with unfortunate consequences for the patient. We can take-- now, making mutations in polymerases is not entirely of negative consequences. And I'm going to show you a really beautiful example where a DNA polymerase, you want to change it so that it can now handle what would normally be an inhibitor. The way we program in general proteins is either transgenics, where we might overproduce the protein, or homologous recombination, which is the ultimate where we go in and if the protein is already present. Another way is by modulating the activity of the proteins from the outside with drugs or drug-like molecules and chemical kinetics. In the case of the zinc finger, we made an altered specificity. We made new zinc fingers with bind to completely new trinucleotides. By changing one amino acid, we could make it now accept almost four logs better. The topic for the next few slides is how do we create chemical diversity? And I'm going to introduce this, the idea of chemical diversity, in a way I hope nicely connects to where we've been with RNA arrays. RNA arrays, and the double-stranded RNA array that we used earlier in class today, can be generated in a commentorial sense. You can think of it as an ultimate and flexible array, and you can move the beads around and put them in new arrays. And we'll talk about opportunities for making these analogs. on a solid phase, shown by these little hexagons on the far right side of the slide. And you add-- you remove the protecting group on the immobilized polymer, one protecting group. And then you bring in this reactive group, otherwise protected. And there's really one major product that you expect. You wash off all of the excess. You now have one longer. You deprotect. This DMT group is removed. There may be additional steps, such as oxidation, which will stabilize the new bond. I said there's an opportunity here for modifying the nucleotides or oligopeptides or other chemicals to make them so that they're related to, but not identical in every property, to normal constituents of your body or of a bacterial cell. And why would you want to make derivatives? Why not make the exact thing? And examples are, in the previous slide, you can make modified bases. And in slide 29 here you can change the backbone itself. And there are analogous processes to generate chemical diversity on smaller molecules.