John Stuart Mill is the principle expositor of neoclassical utilitarianism. The rights-utility synthesis signals that we're looking for an attempt to put together both a commitment to utilitarian efficiency that's grounded in science on the one hand, and respect for individual rights that's grounding in the workmanship ideal on the other hand. At the same time, more or less, there were very important developments in moral philosophy that I just want to alert you to. The doctrine that I'm mentioning here is the doctrine that would come to be called emotivism. as I said, when we get to the anti-Enlightenment and, in particular, Alasdair MacIntyre's book, After Virtue. But today we're going to focus for the rest of our time on the economics of the transition from classical to neoclassical utilitarianism. And I'm going to ask you to suspend disbelief for the whole of today's lecture and just trust me, because what I'mgoing to do is I'mGoing to go into this backwards. I'm Going to look at a very different problem that the neoclassicals economists were concerned with that had nothing to do with utilitarianism, or rights, or anything that we've been talking about. use, yeah, let's use J. If I put a point here, J, we would say that A's gone down and B's gone up. Now, to make this a bit more real imagine in here this is the sphere of market transactions. This is where A and B will go voluntarily, right? So A will say to B, "Well, I have all this wine, and you have all that bread, how about I swap you a bottle of wine for a loaf of bread?" And you say, "Okay." The Pareto principle out of which the whole of neoclassical economic theory was constructed depends on this idea of indifference curves. A is trying to get up on those indifference curves, and B is wanting to get along on them. When they get to a point at which no matter what swap A is willing to propose, B says no, then you know they've hit that frontier, what's called the Pare to possibility frontier. Once they wind up anywhere on this indifference curve they're not going to move of of improving one person's utility.