David KAISER: Today we're going to be talking about the kind of invention or the hybridization of a whole new subfield within physics that now is often called particle cosmology. It studies the smallest units of matter, the fundamental forces and elementary constituents of matter. It asks about what role they might have in shaping, really, the fate of the entire universe. The field is doing pretty well these days by other measures. Its annual budget just within the United States is on the order of $1 billion a year. This is a $1 billion area of study with devoted colleagues all over the world, not just here in the United States. There are on average two new physics papers, two new preprints posted to the central preprint server archive.org every hour of every day just in this subfield. So it is really a booming, booming subject of study. And I find that all the more astonishing since this field literally didn't even exist 45 years ago. And yet, it's a fairly recent vintage in terms of the kinds of time scales we've been looking at this whole semester. In 1979, two separate theorists working independently of each other suggested that the two fields might be literally the same, not just comparable or considering side by side. So it's not that they're somehow intrinsically different from each other. Instead, their status, instead, is what people assess them on. That's what we'll pick up in the next part of our chat with Dr. Alex Tsiolkovsky, the director of the Centre for Theoretical Physics at the University of Toronto. asymptotic freedom. And actually, it's the reason why our friend and colleague here at MIT, Frank Wilczek, received the Nobel Prize. So this was work introduced by Frank and his then advisor David Gross, and independently by a different very young grad student at the time, David Politzer. And what they found was that the strength of the strong nuclear force, that QCD force that we talked about quite a bit at the end of last class session, that the force actually decreases with the energy scale. for more than half of my life, to his great chagrin. He's won a number of awards, gold prizes and that big award-winning fella. But the award that I take most pleasure in is the fact that he won Boston's Messiest Office. So yes, we'll work on that. Let's see. Fisher says, on the chart of interactions with the field strengths, are those groups? Yes. Fisher, thank you. That's right. So I was avoiding the nomenclature, but you're quite right. a continuous unitary symmetry, which is like saying you could rotate the electron field by any continuum amount, and the equations remain unchanged. The photon only has to mop up a relatively simple symmetry, the U1 gauge symmetry. SU2 was what I was pointing to when I was referring to the weak nuclear force. That's a discrete symmetry structure. SU3, that refers to three different color charges of quantum chromodynamics. And so therefore, the gluons have still a different set of properties, so that's right. does exactly the kinds of things that Smolin and Zee had been doing, trying to unify the Brans-Dicke and Higgs field. And in turn, these new folks, especially people like Mike Turner and Rocky Kolb, went on to become real institution builders in their own right. Not only had they been trained to think carefully at this new interface, they helped really accelerate the trend. So it goes from who even thought of it to who wouldn't even try that? What counts as natural can shift in a pretty short time scale. the hall from Alan's. And by a quirk of the old building 6, we had the same key. A single key would open the whole hallway. Couldn't get rid of it now. And one time, my parents were visiting. And I basically broke into Alan's office. They couldn't believe me when I described what it was like to try to work with this person. So I actually broke into his office to show them the safety violation, fire code violation, horror show that was the den of entropy. So that's a true story. soon, everyone. Soon, everyone will be able to play together again. Soon. Everyone will be playing together.soon. Everyone. Will be. Playing together again soon.soon,everyone. Everyone, playing together againsoon.soon,. everyone. soon, everyone, will be. playing together once again. soon.everyone. will be Playing Together again.soon! everyone. will. be.playing together soon. soon! Everyone. will play together soon! everyone will.be. playing again soon! soon.