Prof. Clark: Middle class was a form of self-identity that was constructed in the way being a worker was constructed, or being a noble. When you see Daumier or you see Delacroix's famous, Liberty Leading the People, and you see the bourgeois, there with his top hat, he's dressed in a bourgeois uniform like this. That emerges out of the bourgeois century. The middle classes started dressing like this in the nineteenth century, dark with a little bit of color. Once we've got an increase in the wealth of the middle classes, then you wanted the political power. The French Revolution opened the way by removing legal blocks in very many places to the career open to talents. The bourgeoisie did anything but that. Work was part of how they believed to get ahead, and getting ahead is what they wanted to do. The middle class formed voluntary associations, and many of these were for extremely charitable purposes, particularly in Britain. The Society for the Protection of Cruelty to Animals is one of the classic examples of these sorts of organizations. They get together to hang out each other and sort of try to gauge who has more money than the other. In France after the Paris Commune of 1871 they start building churches in the working class districts perched on the edge of cities. Religion for the middle classes has a greater role in their lives than in working class cities. The old Hanseatic port cities of German, the German free cities that would become part of unified Germany in 1871--northern German cities in general, like Bremen, and Lübeck, and Hamburg above all. Barcelona is a really natural economy based on important economic relations between its hinterland and the world. In France in 1830, yet another one that you can read about, there's a revolution in France. It brings to power in France the big bourgeoisie, and they have the ear of the king, Louis-Philippe, who calls himself the Citizen King. Then at the bottom you have the petty bourgeoisie, but they too had a self-identity. Lots of these classically new nineteenth-century professions--schoolteachers, doctors, notaries. They were a way of social mobility for peasant families. as a jungle. In several hundred brushstrokes, Daumier captures the look of panic on his face because he's going to go home without his hat. He's got to buy one, and they've got to put the money together so he is not going to fall off the ladder in this jungle. Then you have to imagine this as a ladder, like this. In order to really give an image of what it was like, he's got this one magnificent print called the "Street of the Four Winds" Daumier is the greatest caricaturist in the nineteenth century. He captures the prevailing mood in much of Europe in that money, more than blood. The bourgeoisie didn't kiss and hug a lot, but he's got his hand draped rather daintily on the old guy's arm. He's not about to embrace him and give him a big kiss on each cheek. One day all of this stuff will be his, if he plays his cards right. Love could still be something, but economic relationships were still essentially, less so for the middle classes than ordinary relationships. Middle class helped create the notion of childhood, says author. The notion of the children's hour was inconceivable for the majority of Europeans. The French middle class, particularly in France, started reducing their number of children because they could get around it by primogeniture. The middle class wants privacy and they also developed something else, he says. The idea of a children's room, of having your own room or a room shared with a sibling, was something that was just inconceivable. birthday, papa." You didn't take time out to celebrate a birthday if you were an ordinary person having to get to the fields at 4:00 in the morning in the summer, or going to work during the day. There's a whole notion, and here again this would probably fit rather awkwardly into the birth control description, but there's this whole sense of being prepared that emerges with the middle class. It was the idea of protecting that one suit. We didn't carry umbrellas, because it rained all the time anyway and I'd just lose it. The bourgeoisie, the middle classes, and this is particularly true of Germany and France, and of England, too, and other places--they want the right to bear arms. They want to be in the national guard. The national guard might hypothetically be there in case there was an invasion of France or Germany by, I don't know, some distant place, the Fins or something most unlikely. But the main reason they wanted to join the national Guard was to be able to vote. You had to be defined as a property-owning citizen to have the right.