Learn how the solar cell device converts sunlight, the input energy, to some usable output energy, which is in the form of electricity, typically, from a solar panel. Learn how to minimize the amount of light reflected or not absorbed into maximizing amount of life that's actually absorbed. Learn about the duality of light, or how to think about light as a particle, or alternatively, as a quantified particle. Use the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on MIT OpenCourseWare. Most often, depending on the angle, you have what is called total internal reflection. The record efficiency solar cell that was announced this past year in gallium arsenide was achieved because of good light management. To engineer front and back surface reflectances, you really have to carefully select your refractive indices and your materials if you put on either side. If we go to a refractive index material of minus 1.3, will we change the reflectivity at all? It depends, but the answers here are shown, for this particular system. There is a limit to how much we can trap light simply by modifying or corrugating the surfaces. A gentleman by the name of Eli Yablonovitch, who's now a professor in Berkeley calculated these parameters I think back in 1982. He came up with an upper limit to the optical path length. That's a pretty good litmus test for the ability of a material to trap light. If you have silicon, for instance, with a refractive index of, let's say, in the infrared some around 3.6, your Yabonovitch limit is around 50. In most solar cells, we want to suppress reflection. We go to great lengths to make sure that this thickness as well as the refractive index of the material is optimized for a particular system. So calculate for me what is the optimal thickness of an anti-reflection coating of silicon nitride? And we'll give it a refractiveIndex of, say, 2.1. Let's call it 2, just make our lives simple. And the peak of the solar spectrum is 550 nanometers. on light trapping and light management. Mostly it's for photonic devices, but they can be transferred over into solar cells as well. And another example of the photon up/down converters, there's recent reports in SPIE, a lot of interest in the optics community. There was a TR35 award given to a person who studying this topic. So it is, as well, a very exciting and up and coming field. Again, the opportunities there of manipulating light are large, are vast.