RAMESH RASKAR: So this is a position, and this is superposition. And that concept of a position or superposition applies to all three types, shadows- or refraction- or reflection-based techniques. So we saw this last time, and we'll see how-- we already have some projects that are inspired by biological vision. You know, Matt is trying the chicken. And I think it's going to be-- [LAUGHTER] It is going to. In a typical film camera, or even it is digital camera, you take the picture, and that's basically the end of the story. Here, you're trying to do something clever about how the picture is taken. You can either take a really short exposure photo, but that's going to be very dark. Or you can just take a long-exposure photo by keeping the shutter open. But then you will get a blurry photo, which is well exposed, but a lot of the high-frequency details are lost. In communication theory, everything is [INAUDIBLE].. We think about carrier frequencies of radio stations in frequencies. It's the same thing that's going on here. And convolution, deconvolution-- much easier to think in frequency domain. Although all the analysis in the frequency domain, at the end, the solution is very easy-- just flutter the shutter or just put a coded aperture. The bokehs are-- it depends on your-- I mean, for your average consumer, I don't know whether this matters. In astronomy, you have circular convolution because they use either a mirror or one mirror. If you put two tiles, you'll get really horrible frequency response. So if you're tiling that up-- RAMESH RASKAR: It's impressive, that's saying [INAUDIBLE] It's not a brute-force search. It was an intelligent search. We came up with our own code called RAT code, R-A-T, which is after three quarters. It's a very clean and beautiful and smoother course work. Ramesh Raskar: Compressive sensing or compressed imaging is taking a picture with a hardware and compressing the software. He says the idea is to take a photo and compress it down to 10,000 bytes. RaskAR: The theory of compressive sensing is that that's the basis for compressive imaging, which can be exploited while I'm sensing, OK? He says if you have a map of your optics, this is your optics map if I have it on a slide 5. which is how to write a paper and wishlist for photography. Which isHow to Write a Paper and Wishlist for Photography: How to Write A Paper and Write A Wishlist For The Camera. For more information on writing a paper or wishlist, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/30/photography/how-to-write-a-paper-and-wishlist-for-photography-how- to- Write-A-Paper-And-Wishlist.html.