Ahern: I have never had an exam where I had fewer questions. There were maybe 10 questions I got on the exam and that was for a class of this side, really unusual. I find most students are honest. I've only had a handful of situations where in this class, where I've had dishonesty as an issue. The only students I've ever had with serious dishonesty issues actually were in smaller classes interestingly enough. But it has happened here and I do have taped evidence when it does happen. Ahern: How many zwitterions, how many amino acids can form zwittersion? None. They all can. That's not trick. You guys should know that, right? Is the answer "None" a trick? I'm sorry, I don't think so, folks. There are no amino acids, everything, so think about it. Ahern: What did you have in mind for the last question? The one about the Kcat. How can you have two apparent Kcats? It depends on how you calculate the concentration of the enzyme. where time is sometimes a factor, and so I was going to have 3 of the longer answer questions and I decided not to do that and I made them shorter. There's trade offs in all these as I've told other classes. Next term, the format of the exam changes in 451. Most people like 451 better because the maximum number of points on a question I think is 3. If you're going to spend a fair amount of time on something, it should be worth more points. Anybody hate the exam? You can say it. S1 proteases are a class of enzymes that are called serine proteases. They all have serine, histidine, and aspartic acid as a catalytic triad at the active site. It's very easy to alter the genetic code for any of these proteases and change which amino acid is presence at any given place. When they do that, and they compare the activity, so this is the log of Kcat. The wild type enzyme has an activity up here. One 10 millionth as active when that serine is changed to an alanine. of a sudden realizes, "Whoa! What's that?" He grabs it, you know. Wipes the dust off of it. Of course in the process polishes this thing. And out pops this magic genie. And he says, "oh master, thank you, I will grant you 3 wishes." and the guy says, 'oh, this is really great' he says,. "I guess I want a billion dollars "so that I can be a very rich man." and poof, a certificate appears in his hands and it says he has a billion. dollars in a Swiss bank account. Carbonic anhydrase can catalyze the conversion of a million molecules of substrate into product per second. Most enzymes have a fairly narrow pH range where they work that's ideal. At pH 9, the enzyme is far more active than it is at pH 7, indicating that a very, very important step is the removal of that proton. The rate of formation of the nucleophile is the critical step in the catalytic action of this enzyme like that of the proteases that you saw before. like we saw with the peptide bond and everybody's happy. I will very briefly go over that next time and I will see you on Friday. Thank you for listening to our show on CNN.com. We will be back on Friday at 10 a.m. ET for a new episode of CNN Live in the U.S. and 2 p.M. ET in the UK. For more, visit CNN.co.uk/live and follow us on Twitter @cnnlive and @CNNLive.