JACK HARE: Let's do a little recap on electron cyclotron emission. We expect to have multiple different peaks, even from a single particle. These peaks are going to be occurring at frequencies. And we can say this is m equals 1, m equals 2,. m equals 3. And they're evenly spaced. And so, we have these peaks here. But if we neglect that, the frequency depends only on the magnetic field. So, if you see some emission at some certain frequency, then you know that it's been emitted by a region of plasma which has this magnetic fields. can get very detailed. So in ASDEX Upgrade, we don't really have a circular cross-section plasma, but I'm just drawing it like that, be a nice D-shaped plasma, got our plasma inside here. And our system, at first glance, looks an awful lot like the system that we sketched out up here. We're not trying to measure the temperature profile throughout the entire plasma. We want to measure it inside some very small region. So the size of our turbulence of R turb, is on the order of 100 microns. That's the width of a human hair. many oscillations. And so, it will average out to-- well, because it's power, it'll average out out to 1 or something like that. So it's some DC offset that we can subtract off after. So all this is doing here is mixing the signal down so it gets to a regime that we could effectively digitize. Yeah, another question. [INAUDIBLE] JACK HARE: So if we were doing geometric optics, which we're not, then you would have a lens like this. That lens could collimate your beam. The idea here is that there was some region over which, in the transverse direction perpendicular to your collection volume, you have a very narrow scale. This means that you can actually collect from a very small region on the order of 100 microns. What they were actually doing with this system is all of these were very tunable. And so, if they wanted to look at turbulence in the edge or turbulence near the center, they could actually tune all their bandpass filters to do that. Watts: The technique is used in a variety of applications. He says it's used to extract temperature from the noise of plasma. Watts: The noise is uncorrelated at random, but these two signals will correlate together, and we'll be able to measure it. The temperature and the noise are correlated, he says, and that's what makes it useful in a lot of cases. The technique can also be used to detect cancerous cells in the human body, Watts says. This technique is incredibly powerful because it's enabled people to measure, again, delta Te upon Te on the order of 1%. And they've done this at 13-- on ASDEX Upgrade-- 13 radial locations. So 13 positions they can measure these temperature fluctuations. And they have done this with a time step of 100 kilohertz. So 100,000 times a second they've been able to measure theseTemperature fluctuations. So on very small scales, very fast time scales, we can now measure temperature fluctuations in a tokamak. situation where, at some point, your eddy has moved across, and these two are no longer correlated because the next two are correlated. So it-- yeah. I think we're reaching the limits of my knowledge. JACK HARE: I mean, there's no reason to believe that each of the fluctuations is the same size. So this is going to be a time-evolving system here.Yeah, exactly. Cool. Any other questions? Anything online? Now we're going to go to bremsstrahlung. here with the ions and electrons as point particles. There's a semi-classical approach where you start bringing in some quantum physics and treat, I think, the electron as a wave. And then there's a full quantum approach. What's remarkable about all of these approaches is they all give the same answer with just a very slightly different coefficient. So we get a small change in coefficient. The scalings are the same. So, in some sense, although it's important to get the exact coefficient, it doesn't matter exactly which one of these techniques you use. This is the spectrum coming out of a plasma that's emitting bremsstrahlung radiation. This, therefore, has units of watts per hertz per meter cubed. And then, there's a factor called G bar, the Gaunt factor, which we'll talk about in a moment, and lots of other constants. And so, this emissivity, as a function of photon energy, is a very simple function. It just decays exponentially with photon energy. And that is all you need to do Problem Set 3. at synchrotron, yes. Jack Hare: "I don't know if people are using it as a diagnostic. I've not heard of someone using it" "I think someone told me that maybe for a high field tokamaks synch rotron could start being significant" "But I actually have no idea how big a deal it is" "It depends mostly on the magnetic field and the radius. And those are two things in a toKamak you already know" "So worth thinking about" where we have a range of different discrete energy levels that the electrons can occupy. These energy levels are labeled by the principal quantum number n. And the energies of these levels are given by this unit, Ry, which is the Rydberg z squared of our ion over n squared. Up here, infinity, this is ionization. If your electron gets this much energy, it becomes free again. And so, what we're going to see in our spectrum is that this is only allowed if the electron energy fulfills this equation. JACK HARE: We're going to get to that and the idea of detailed balance and thermodynamic equilibrium and things of that ilk. One use of this is a diagnostic called bolometry. It cares not at all about the detailed spectrum of what the emission is. It just wants to know how much power is being radiated by the plasma. So, bolometry is focused on measuring the total power that's being emitted. And we'll talk more about how to do that in the next step. This is often made out of gold. Gold is chosen because it absorbs all wavelengths relatively evenly. This thin layer of gold has been deposited on top of a substrate. And it's on the back of the substrate that you have your resistor. And depending on whether it is M or R, you either have this open to the plasma or you have a thick block some distance in front of it so it can't see the plasma. It's the heat capacity of the absorber, c, that goes into our previous equation. difference between those. neutron damage leads us to use much thicker substrates, which gives us a longer time response and so, therefore, a worse bolometer. So, ironically, the bolometers that will be used on [INAUDIBLE] are significantly worse than the bolometer used on existing devices. And I'm sure that [? Spark ?] will have exactly the same problem. Almost everyone in the world uses this design of bolometer that they pioneered on ASDEX Upgrade in the '80s. No one has come up with a better system yet.