Professor: Can you explain the physical significance of the crystal momentum? Professor: The information about the momentum can be encoded in these spatial variation of the phase of the wave function. Professor: A central property from the Schrodinger equation is at the time variation d dt of p is equal to the expectation value of minus d the potential of x d x. The momentum expectation value is time independent, so it can be written in the form of e cubed, equal to e to the minus i upon h bar p l. Glossing over in the entire story here. Which of the following. So, is u of x a real function? Well, so when we started out asking what are the eigenfunctions of the transit by l operator, all we showed was that, and I'm going to do this on a separate board just to make it clearer. Tell me if this turns off, because it kept bumping. OK. So we've determined is that if we take q l is equal to alpha, then Phi sub q if eigenvalue label by its eigen value, q, can be written in the form e to the i q x u sub q of x. This diagram is telling you is which e's are allowed. If you put on a capacitor, played across your perfect lattice, you don't get any current. So the particle, the charged particle in your lattice just oscillates back and forth in a block oscillation. And that is manifestly what happens with copper. But the experimentalist comes back to you and says look dude. That is a ridiculous model because the copper isn't in fact perfect, it's messy. So how do you test the model? Well there are two ways to test the situation. One is you improve the model to incorporate properties that copper actually has. And see if you can actually get the same conductivity. Physicists can build a system that has exactly a periodic potential. They can do it with lattices not of atoms, but lattices of dielectric. This has been proved in a very small number of real honest quantum mechanical systems. The question is really a question of quantum computation, which we'll come to next week. But, the basic question is how robust is this answer is? And the answer is robust at all, because it has enough impurity that it conducts everything in the real world. In one dimension, the crystal structure, the shape of the lattice, is going to determine it. Different atoms are different wells, so they'll give you different band structure. Different materials for example, diamond versus copper, are going to give. you different bands allowed energies, because the potential is different. It has different shape. And so when you solve the problem for the energy eigenvalues is a function of now the three different components of the crystal momentum, you'll just get a different set of equations. Photonic crystals are periodic arrays of dielectrics. They have bands of allowed energy and gaps of disallowed energies where no waves propagate through. The structure of a photonic crystal on the surface of a butterfly wing makes it shiny and blue. It looks like it's a crystal reflecting in a specific frequency. At some sharp blue. And the reason is, it is exactly this form. If you look at it under a microscope, you see little rays of protein which have different dielectric than air. and metallic without actually being shiny and metallic. And it's not a pigment, so it doesn't absorb light and decay over time. It's like the best thing you could ever do if you wanted to be a shiny, fluttery, flying thing. OK. So that's it for band gaps. And I want to move on to the remainder, the last topic of our course. Which is going to be entanglement and quantum computation. And here I need to give you one quick observation. The probability of finding the particle at point A is given by chi a squared. This is normalized, so when we integrate against it, we get 1. And similarly, the probability that we find the second particle at b is this thing norm squared. But we also studied the symmetric configuration, which was equal to 1 over root phi, root 2. Chi of a. Phi of b. Symmetric, plus chi of b phi of a, right? And this tells us something totally awesome. Einstein created a thought experiment which we're going to study in detail next week called the EPR experiment. He left Germany in 1932 December, about three weeks before Hitler took power. And he did so with decisiveness and dispatch and a head of almost all of his. German-Jewish physicist colleagues and those German physicists for whom the Hitler regime was unacceptable. The three of them talk about it. They write the paper and they put it out. And I want to share with you, actually, a really lovely description of the way the problem was represented in a way by a book that I recommend to all of you.