In automotive design Dynamics plays a very important part because it's not rigid body Dynamics it's a bunch of rigid bodies with springs the Springs are called starts with an S suspens suspensions right and there's a trade-off between how comfortable the ride is and how tightly the car handles. In Dynamics there two sides to it one is how will its various degrees of freedom behave over time if you you know stretch it and let it go and it goes twang you know boing right and you want to figure out how it goes in time that that's analysis. 4 was due uh is due on Wednesday the 10th and the reason is there's no class next Monday and um we posted the solution to that problem from class uh just one last thing I won't have officers today only because you don't want to hear me Babel I'm really sick um but I'm also going to change my officers um several people suggest so the timing isn't right um so we'll talk about the end of class but I I might go to like a Monday off M um like later on a Monday or maybe Wednesday later or something like that. Just hang out like at 3:00 p.m. on a Saturday is that something that you you folks would find useful okay we'll do that okay um so here's what we going to look at what no okay we're going to see our first angular momentums and torqus today. So consider a frame consider a point fixed in frame and this is an inertial frame and a pointfixed in that frame o okay now let's consider a particle P by the way when I say particle a point mass or in context point I'm referring to the same thing essentially I'm refer to something with no Dimensions but with a finite Mass. A lot of MIT grads old friends work all over the world very important positions around the world for example the foreign minister of the new British government is an MIT grad. One of my friends Works in a congressional he she helps Congressional analyze things from a physics point of view so you know when Katrina occurred someone asked if it would be possible to change the temperature in the when when a hurricane approaches to dissipate the temperature. She did some analysis and showed that you need something like a nuclear weapon but like you know the most the largest the largest. nuclear weapon ever conceived to even you know impact it by like 2% because the energy in a in a hurricane all right I told you I'd Babble all right let's do a problem here's a problem so imagine a um a table right you notice I've drawn it in perspective you know what perspective is right it's very cool it wasn't intentional but looks good I see everything in perspective right now okay I have a hole on this table right so this is a table and and um it's frictionless hockey puck basically a point map attached by a string and the string comes through the hole. call this Theta the initial length is L one and the initial velocity is we'll call it a scalar because this is how I'm defining the problem of V1 when we actually solve it we might have to define a vector okay. As the thing's going around this person is going to pull the string down and as it kind of goes around it's going to spiral in and end up it's a new length L2 and the question is what is V2 going to be okay so I'll let you uh let resolve this for a second. that stuff let's let's examine it from a uh from a basic you know intuition point of view from what we studied so far first of all when is linear momentum conserved forget this in general linear momentum is conserved when what condition occurs no external Force right so let's study this guy this particle as it moves around does it feel an external Force let's do a free body diagram on this particle um o Point p as the particle moves around kind of intuitively which direction is it accelerating in kind of cental right. would have to do one of two things I would have had to either calculate this term or calculate or make you know make my frame attach it to the truck. I've just done it in a very precise way okay so in the end there's no surprise the whole point is to show you they could be surprises but be careful any questions about this all right snap quiz in the next 3 minutes I want you to calculate for me the final velocity literally 3 minutes because I have toDo the dumbbell problem. p and particle Q is that reasonable it's perfectly reasonable but do I have a kinematic constraint and what would the kinematics constraint be H yeah it's a they connected by a rigid body so they can do whatever they want as long as the length between the two of them remains constant right by the way if instead of a rigid bar if I had a string connecting them what would  the kinemic constraint be less than equal to to R right but in this case it's  a rigid bar so it's equal to R to R. we'll show is that the acceleration of the center of mass is uh related to the total force and the angular acceleration of. the whole rigid body is related to torque and we'll show it okay and then we'll generalize it. Define angular acceleration and moment of inertia and a more General sense okay so let's stop here because we are over time. We're going to take a break. We'll be back in a few minutes. We've got a lot to talk about.