Professor Amy Hungerford: Today it is my great privilege and pleasure to introduce Andrew Goldstone, a TF in this course. Andrew is a fourth-year student in the Ph.D. program in English, and he is writing a dissertation on the autonomy of the work of art in modernism. On Monday we had three main themes that were used to introduce this novel to you. And that's the question that I'm mostly going to focus on today. I'm going to bracket the ethical question, leave that for Monday's lecture. Nabokov's relationship to this modernist past is not just the burlesque that he visits on Eliot. An element of admiration is also present, and that's really part of his relationship to Joyce. I'm just going to name for you four features of Joyce's style that are important to Nabokov: stylistic virtuosity, the ability to imitate any style; at the same time, a scrupulous attention to the banality of everyday life and all its detail. Third characteristic, the constant use of a superimposed structure. Nabokov's Lolita is a kind of artificial, processed, bland, easily consumable version of fate. In other words, chance is already fated. The thing that stands for randomness in this book, the thing that looks like ordinary detail, has already been arranged to give you artistic pleasure. This kind of transformation of arbitrary, real fated events into conspicuously artificial tricks is a response to exile, in particular to Nabokov’s condition of exile. foreign country, lives in a kind of denaturalized world, a world where, instead of everything making instant sense everything has to be decoded. In that afterword to this book, Nabokov says he had to invent America. That's because he didn't know it already; it wasn't given to him. In a way this is a terrible state, a state of discontinuity with the world you exist in. But it has a payoff, kind of, a payoff which is the possibility precisely of inventing. because Humbert is a foreigner--into something you can laugh at. The foreigner's love for this kind of move is a response to this denaturalized world of the exile. The knight's move is nonetheless a kind of wound or damage. So, even as it's the prototype for originality, it's also something very disturbing and harmful. The book was written on road trips. Nabokov's wife, Vera, drove him on thousands of miles of trips around the country while he was writing this novel. evocation of the landscape: By a paradox of pictorial thought, the average lowland North American countryside had at first seemed to me something I accepted with a shock of amused recognition. "Inutile loveliness" is kind of the key word of Nabokov's technique, and he says the novel has as its only purpose to provide aesthetic bliss. So, a European artist actually appears again there, with Claude Lorrain, but kind of made strange: given that knight's move, given a new twist. Nabokov tried to become an American writer, as Nabokov says he's doing: trying to invent America, trying to bridge the gap between Russian and English. He translated Lolita back in to Russian later on, and he added a second afterword where he said: That wondrous Russian tongue that, it seemed to me, was waiting for me somewhere, was flowering like a faithful springtime behind a tightly locked gate whose key I had held in safekeeping for so many years, proved to be nonexistent.