s gawan and the Green Knight um I believe this is the last piece where we don't know who the author is where it's unknown um I find the background interesting and that through textual Clues they're able to figure out who wrote it. I think straight off we can say that that's probably gow or sir GA however you want to say it okay then you have the villain or the dams and all as we come through the story try to put these titles with certain characters. see a big difference uh Raper and this guy big difference okay and so he says I will do this and I will take the axe um where's the actual beheading there on line 182 or so uh they're kind of getting the groundwork going goes when I have taken the blow after you have duly dealt it then you may keep your Covenant and call on me and if I waft you no words then well may you prosper stay long in your own land and look for no further trial so if after the deal I'll tell you where you can find me I will give you my name there are no tricks here. bath he didn't know that he was going to have to marry that woman did he no would he have still done it well how much does he value his life you know probably um but here gow G is trying to figure out exactly what's going to happen and so they decide to uh to have the fight there at the bottom 176 and by fight I just mean contest um the the Green Knight graciously stood on the ground with his head slightly slanted he even got down exposed his neck the naked neck for the business. The Knight tells GNE you have a year to find me you can find me I the Knight of the green Chapel green Chapel no kidding Everything Green line 232 233 come or be called a coward. The Knight came here specifically to challenge the best that Earth has ever bred is what he was saying and so this is the moment and now GNE has a year and a day to think about his impending doom is he going to go do we think he's going to take the axe shot is this all a test is he Going to trick something I mean these are all thoughts that should be going through your mind. you receive the the hunter the owner of the house the husband says whatever you receive you must give to me that seems kind of weird what possibly could he receive while he's there well we find out that the wife really kind of starts to come on to him over time okay real flirty she's she's a temptress okay very seductive uh she gives him a kiss what does he do when the husband comes home that day cuz the husband's going to share his his food share his everything with him as long as GNE you share with me. you know of his pact uh with King Arthur to be a good individual um she eventually does give him a green girdle um a green corset a a sash some sort of clothing that he can wear under his stuff and she gives that to him and he accepts it okay which isn't necessarily so bad because she says you wear this and no harm will fall upon you that's about the best thing you can say to somebody who's getting ready to go get hit in the head with an axe. So he breaks his word okay he becomes a coward and so he does leave and he keeps that GLE for himself. Justin: The Green Knight is a coward and you were just proved to be a coward. The Knight knows about the girdle and so he knows all about the wife giving that to the Green Knight. Justin: If he never violated his oath the most he was ever going to do was scare him and probably wasn't even going to hurt him. He says do it again I will not flinch go on game on 185 187 excuse me um I shall stand your stroke not starting at all till your axe has hit me.