MIT OpenCourseWare continues to offer high-quality educational resources for free. To make a donation or to view additional materials from hundreds of MIT courses, visit MIT OpenCourse Ware at ocw.mit.edu. The following content is provided under a Creative Commons license. Your support will help MIT Open courseWare continue to offer free, high- quality educational resources in the U.S. and around the world. For more information on MIT Open CourseWare, visit opencourseware.org. We've got two lectures left discussing linear algebra before we move on to other topics. We looked at one type of transformation we could utilize for solving systems of equations. Today, we'll look at another one, the eigenvalue decomposition, and on Monday, we will look at the singular value decomposition. Before jumping right in, I want to take a minute and see if there are any questions that I can answer, anything that's been unclear so far. We want to make sure that we're answering those questions in a timely fashion. seen The Price Is Right? This is a game where you drop a chip into a board with pegs in it. It's a model of diffusion. The Plinko chip falls from level to level. It can go left or it can go right with equal probability. So the probability that I'm in a particular cell at level i is this Pi plus one. And there's some sparse matrix A which spreads that probability out. It splits it into my neighbors 50/50. And at the next level it all gets passed down by 50%. For a real N-by-N matrix, there will be eigenvectors and eigenvalues. They're special vectors that are stretched on multiplication by the matrix. The amount of stretch, however, is unique. It's associated with that direction. And that describes the eigenvector-eigenvalue pair. But because there's N equations for N plus 1 unknowns, that means they're not unique. We don't know what an eigen vector is uniquely. We can only prescribe its direction. But we'll find them in a second. triangular form for this matrix. We'll talk next time about the singular value decomposition, which is another sort of transformation one can do when we don't have these complete sets of eigenvectors. You'll get a chance to practice these things on your next two homework assignments, actually. So it'll come up in a couple of different circumstances. I would really encourage you to try to solve some of these example problems that were in here. Solving by hand can be useful.