well welcome back everybody to uh the last lecture 162. this is kind of a a special lecture um i did get some requests for more information about distributed storage and quantum computing and so i think we're going to do that. i want to make sure that we talk through the chord algorithm since that's a i think relatively simple thing to understand and is very cool and applied pretty much everywhere so if you remember one of the things we talked about last week was basically this cap theorem which was really a conjecture that eric brewer put forth back in the early 2000s. is a good way to understand global storage systems as a result now um at the very end of uh last lecture we were talking about key value stores. Key value stores are very simple in interface excuse me so basically uh you can have an arbitrary key although that's usually a hash over some value. You can have a value associated with it and if you do put a key comma value that goes somewhere into the ether and then when you do get of the key you get back the value that you started with. The cord algorithm has been turned into storage systems of many sorts including those used by amazon et cetera okay facebook. The chord algorithm lets you get by with only knowing essentially a logarithmic number of nodes in the total system and you can still do this well. We're going to associate each one of those storage nodes is going to get a unique id. We'll talk you through that in the next slide and then i'm going to show you how the chord algorithm is used to divide our space up. Security is basically computing in the presence of an adversary so i'm assuming several of you have all taken 161. Security is basically using those mechanisms to prevent misuse of resources so for instance virtual memory is a mechanism that can be used for protection. One of the questions that's important is do you know where your data came from that's a provenance question. Data integrity is making sure that the data read only by authorized users so that's an important thing. Non-repudiation is a surprisingly important thing that people don't often talk about. The data capsule infrastructure spans the globe and spans the top of ip g switches which are just on top of g switches. Data capsules are cryptographically hardened bundles of data and if somebody tries to put garbage in there a legitimate person who's trying to look at this can just throw the garbage out. The vision here really is of pretty much everybody using data capsules everywhere okay and um if you can get that to happen then you potentially have a very interesting scenario here now i just wanted to share another point here. unforgeable all right good so let me say a little bit about using quantum mechanics to compute. It's basically using weird but kind of useful properties of quantum mechanics two of them quantization and superposition. If you're willing to allow things to not be always a one or always a zero what you can do is you can just start doing quantum computing. There are many other algorithms out there now these days these days they've been slowly working on them but these are some pretty good ones that might be interesting. high probability some answer that was hard to find that's what we would like okay and so if you look here um you know if the two n inputs are equally probable there could be two to the n outputs that are equally possible and what we'd like is the probability of the outputs to be piled up high on the answer we want. If we can do a fourier transform on some input we can actually get an interesting output. So if we could somehow figure out what r makes this equiv equation satisfied then um we win.