RAFAEL JARAMILLO: Let's talk about intermediate phases and line compounds. He recalls intermediate phase in a three-phase system. He says the solution model becomes very narrowly shaped, like a pin. All possible common tangents are going to converge at the same point, he says. "I no longer need a solution model. I only need one point," Jaramillo says. 'I can't help myself. I got to draw the mouse-face plot' Magnesium nickel system has a number of different phases. At high temperature, this Laves phase develops some width. But when you drop down to low temperature, both of these intermediate phases appear as line compounds. These are very distinct structures, and they're only occurring at very distinct compositions. That's a hallmark of an intermediate phase. That is a line compound. Let's talk about the size of these vertical segments. And it's often written as delta form. So what is the compound formation energy? It is the free energy change for formation of 1 mole. of compound from the elements in their reference states. So, for example, I might have 2 moles of magnesium in. its alpha phase plus alpha-- let's say HTP-- plus a mole of nickel in its alpha FCC. phase. And these can react to form magnesium 2 nickel. And there's a normalization that you need to apply in order to use formation free energies in free-energy composition diagrams. So that is kind of a algebraically-simple point, but it's a conceptual point that it's easy to mess up. There's an infinity of examples of line compounds. Silicon tends to be a pretty useful additive for copper-based alloys. Doping semiconductors is why we're able to talk to each other over there. Without doping, there is no semiconductor devices, and no electronics revolution. So the fact that you can dope some metals into silicon is as important as the solubility limits can be in the parts per billion. It's a very famous line compound, so on the last P set, you're going to do some problems. Silicon carbide is a refractory-- some people will say it's a ceramic. Some people say no because it doesn't contain oxygen. It's of enormous industrial importance. It also is an emerging semiconductor material for high-power electronics. In 50 years from now, if the idea of a power substation is a thing of the past, it will be due to silicon carbide and similar high- power electronics that are being developed today, says Rafael JARAMILLO. The final thought of the lecture is the case of metal oxides, which are line compounds. What is the main component of a rock that you know? What's the main part of the rock that's reacting to form Mz2 OO2? What do I determine? Does anyone know some oxides? What is a common component of rock that is reacting to Mz 2 O2? Do you know any oxides that are reacting with Mz 1 O2 to form an oxygen-rich gas?