Professor Donald Kagan: We are living in the early years of a polis sometime in the eighth century B.C. The date that's typical for the general phenomenon of colonization coming out of the mother cities of Greece is 750 roughly. The earliest date according to Greek tradition, if my memory is correct, was something like 773 where the Greeks date the foundation of what they thought was the earliest colony they ever established -- a place that they called Pithaecusa, which is the island of Ischia. Delphi was thought by the Greeks to be the navel of the universe, the center in every way. There the god Apollo had established an oracle. Gases would escape through this gap in the earth and there were priests who worshipped Apollo there. They would place a young woman there who would sit as these gases came up. She would after a while begin to speak in tongues, which is to say she would rattle off a lot of language which nobody could understand what she was saying. will decide whether it's a good idea for him or not. Recruiting is tremendously important because you need to have a certain number of settlers to make the settlement viable. So however many that is, that is what you try to recruit and you recruit typically at a time when it's easy to get people together so you can tell them the story. There are festivals held in each city just for its own citizens and my guess is that when you could do that, when you felt that you could recruit a full colony from your fellow citizens in Corinth, let us say, that's what you did. were not enough Corinthians who were ready to go with you on your expedition. So, you would try to take your message to one of the Pan-Hellenic festivals which were getting organized about this time. So now you have everything in place, you've recruited your settlement, you get on your ships and sail, in this case out to the west central Mediterranean. You find your way to Sicily, work your way into the harbor at Syracuse and things work out, and now we have this apoikia called Syracuse. The city of Corinth sent out a lot of colonies, which is why we know something about their arrangements. When Potidaea got into trouble with Athens, and found itself besieged, Corinth sent a real army to go in there and fight. At the other end of the spectrum it's again Corinth and they have a colony up in the northwest called Corcyra. The first relationship between them is a navel battle, and thereafter we hear of them quarrelling and fighting with each other just about at least once a century right on down. Kagan: The overwhelming normal situation is the first one I described, friendly relations. colonies to send representatives back to the mother city for the religious observations that were common to them all, so that those create good feelings. Corinth always needs that kind of stuff, so we sell you our wheat, you sell us your pottery, we sell good wine that we can't grow yet and maybe never will be able to grow in our neighborhood, so on and so forth. So you can see why it would be very natural for all sorts of ties to unite these colony and mother city. The states who are doing most of the colonizing are located where most. of the trade was going on at this point in history. These places are the ones that have the trade, the industry, and also engage in colonization. As we will see, there will be internal trouble in the form of political quarreling, economic conflict, and finally warfare, civil wars occur in some of these cities. In the next topic I'll turn to, of the establishment of tyrannies, as the way of resolving for a time these terribly tumultuous conditions in those cities. especially, some scholars have pointed out, I think persuasively, also for some considerable time provided an answer to that problem in the form of an escape valve. People who were losers and angry and troubled, or people who had in any case were not happy with the way things were going in their mother city. Well, they didn't have to stay and fight it out. They could go away and they did, in very considerable numbers. So, that's part of the story of why America had the very lucky early history that it had.