Robotics is a really cool and important direction for the future. I really believe that in the future we will have AI assistance whether they are embodied or not to act as our guardian angels. These agents will help us with cognitive and physical work. With AI we will see such a wide breadth of applications for instance these technologies have the potential to reduce and eliminate car accidents. We have three types of learning and you have seen different aspects of these methodologies throughout the course we have supervised learning, unsupervised learning and reinforcement learning. to do given input reinforcement learning is causing a huge revolution in robotics and so um and and why is that. Reinforcement learning is concerned with how intelligent agents ought to take action in an environment in order to maximize the notion of a cumulative reward. In order to get the simulation to drive a real robot we actually need to think about the Dynamics of the robot and so in other words we have to take into account what the vehicle looks like what are its kinematics and its Dynamics and so here is a vehicle that is running the policy learned in simulation. Alexander: We have very effective and Deployable solutions for robot cars that move safely in Easy environments where there aren't many static nor moving obstacles. Many companies and research teams are deploying and developing self-driving cars. Many of these preconditions revolve around certainty in perception planning learning reasoning and execution before we can get to Robo taxi but we can have many other robot solutions that are much that that can happen today. Alexander: We can use deep learning and reinforcement learning to take us from images ofroads onto steering and throttle and what you can do with this is really great. that model to run on edge devices or on huge devices uh you have seen that many of our Solutions are Black Box Solutions and sometimes we have brittle function we have we have easily attackable models. There is so much opportunity for developing improved machine learning using existing models and inventing new models. If we can do this we can create an exciting work world where machines will really Empower us will really augment us and enhance us in our cognitive abilities and in our physical abilities so just imagine waking up enabled by your personal assistant that figures out the optimal time.