This lesson will first dive into some signal Theory and then move on into things that we're more familiar with things like deconvolutions and using Transformers for next note prediction. The first thing we want to talk about is how can we sample and quantize a continuous time signal. We'll then go into some geometric signal theory and with Transformers and finally how how we can kind of generate sounds using these. The lesson will end with a soft introduction to digital signals and then we'll move on to the next lesson. Not very easy for a computer to do given that every operation needs to be in on a continuous time signal. The way that we we can fix that is through the process of discretization or to to make a an analog signal a digital signal for us to be able to process. The two kind of main ways that we can make our signal easier to process is one by taking samples at certain time periods and two by quantizing our level so instead of dealing with A continuous scale we can quantize at certain levels. The aliasing phenomenon is incredibly interesting this happens both visually and um auditorily. aliasing is the byproduct of poor sampling. A lower wave resolution will result in a modified output signal as compared to the original input that we're trying to process. There's a lot of literature about um aliasing effects including spatial illnessing. The effect of aliasing on digital signal processing can be seen in a number of different ways including in the way that the image is compressed and the way it's displayed. The more information you have and the more generalizability you have in your Transformer the better it'll perform. The next thing to consider is positional beat encoding. We want to include some metadata to feed into our model to give it a better sense of musical timing. The last thing to talk about is teacher forcing. When training Transformers you want a way to mask information. You don't want to give the Transformer all the information because then it won't learn a very good representation of the data that you're providing. things a try yourself uh yeah thank you guys for tuning in have a good one. Things you might want to try yourself. Things that you may want to give a try. uh yeah. things you might be interested in trying yourself. things that you might like to give yourself. uhYeah. things a try yourselves. uh Yeah. Things a try themselves. Things your might like yourself.things you may like to do yourself. thanks you guys. for tuning into this week's episode of The Daily Discussion.