Judy Hoyt: We're going to discuss the accurate control and placement of active dopant regions through a process called dopant diffusion. The placement of those regions determines many of the so-called short channel characteristics of MOSFETs that we'll talk about. The doping of other materials, not just the silicon itself, but of the polysilicon gate affects things like gate depletion and limits how well the gate voltage controls the channel potential, Hoyt says. The equation numerically, essentially, for an arbitrary doping profile is 1 over the integral of the carrier concentration minus the background concentration. Dopant diffusion is described by Fick's first law, which describes how the flux or the flow of dopant depends upon the doping gradient. When the concentration gradient goes to 0, essentially, the dopant or the atoms are uniformly distributed, say, in the solid, and the flow would stop. Later on, we'll talk about the more atomistic diffusion mechanisms and effects of dopants in the silicon lattice. We're going to consider macroscopic first-- macroscopy models for diffusion. In semiconductor processing, linear scales for dopants are not all that useful. So we often care about how the dopant falls off over many, many orders of magnitude of concentration. In the second case, which is a fixed dose Q, just like we talk about, constant in time. But now we're diffusing near a surface. We can solve it by using, essentially, the prior solution, pretending that the medium is semi-infinite. And the third case is essentially an infinite source of dopant which is made up of small slices. of cases where there are analytic solutions. We talked about the diffusion of a Gaussian profile with a fixed dose. We apply this diffusion to a constant surface concentration. And finally -- we talk about the diffusion of a complementary error function, which we apply for a constant level of surface concentration. The diffusion of this error function can be applied to a fixed level of surface concentration, or a constant level of substance on the surface, for example.