Protein three-dimensional structure and its implications for the binding of small molecules such as drugs. How can we use these basic motifs to recognize other macromolecules, other proteins and nucleic acids? We have these motifs that we could find, weight matrices for them by aligning lots of sequences. Now instead of aligning sequences, let's see what we can do by mutating both the protein part and the nucleic acid part. And then we know from the three dimensional structure that it interacts mainly with the middle nucleotides. groove of the DNA. And the reason the textbook is wrong, first of all, it emphasizes the non-helical part of the zinc finger. And also the way it loops through the DNA, if you look at this carefully in your textbook, it actually interdigitates with a phosphodiester bond. So we now have a semi-empirical way of computing-- in a certain sense, predicting new regulatory protein DNA interactions with double-stranded DNA. Can we extend this to RNA? This is a much more complicated situation with RNA because you don't have these long perfect double helices anymore. You have these very short RNA helices. Programming is just the beginning of interacting with input and output from various devices. The topic today is proteins, and this really is the main contact between the exquisite regulatory mechanisms. Here, we need sensors to sense the environment. We need actuators to then deliver back into the environment what the cell wants to do or to interact with other cells. You have to have feedback, synchrony, so on, and that's the topic of some of our network analysis in the last three lectures. that you can basically program the almost digital nucleic acid world inside the cell but via clearly analog inputs and outputs. We also-- I've listed some of the scariest proteins that I could think of. And we're going to talk about three of them. One of them in the slide is the proteins that are actually involved in causing the symptoms that come from when you're worried about anthrax. And then we'll talk about HIV yet again, this time, polymerase mutants that cause drug resistance. The turnover of an enzyme is the time it takes to for a small molecule, say, to find and bind the enzyme, to possibly go through a catalytic step, and to dissociate as a product. The accuracy depends on the method. As you get to 1 Angstrom or better in your accuracy, as you can get from NMR and X-ray crystallography, you now are in a position to study catalytic mechanism and design and improve ligands, such as drugs. The way we program in general proteins is either transgenics, where we might overproduce the protein, or homologous recombination. Point mutants are not the only way to generate conditional mutants. But there are ways that you can program, and conditional, meaning thatyou can regulate under what conditions the protein is expressed or not. Another way is by modulating the activity of the proteins from the outside with drugs or drug-like molecules and chemical kinetics. And under the subheadings for that, you can make these by combinatorial synthesis. In the case of the zinc finger, we made an altered specificity. We made new zinc fingers with bind to completely new trinucleotides. With the DNA polymerase, by changing one amino acid, we could make it now accept almost four logs better an inhibitor is very useful. These are not that unusual. And those can be designed or naturally occurring. They can have a very important thing to do with conserved charge. They tend to be highly conserved. That's a general way of looking at the conservation of single-nucleotide polymorphisms. That might have impact on pharmacogenomics. The idea of chemical diversity, in a way I hope nicely connects to where we've been with RNA arrays. RNA arrays, and the double-stranded RNA array that we used earlier in class today, can be generated in a commentorial sense. Solid phase comes up again and again in arrays. It's very obvious why you have a solid phase. You want to be able to address it by its positions in x and y on the array. And those are the major concepts. Now, let's go through. This is-- the topic here is proteins.