The coherent state has a simple definition, simple but subtle. It's an eigenstate of the annihilation operator, and it has a complex eigenvalue alpha. The person who popularized those states was Glauber, and he got amply rewarded for that. We are now using the coherent states to look at any other quantum state of the electromagnetic field, any statistical operator which describes photons by forming the diagram matrix element of the statistical operator with alpha. And now we realize that coherent states are not as wonderful as I believe. In quantum mechanics, you cannot measure x and p simultaneously. The three different ways are Q, P, and W. Q of alpha is a real probability, it's always positive. The other guys, P of alpha, can be positive or negative. And also, W of alpha can be negative or positive. All three have their advantages and disadvantages. So they all have pluses and minuses. But the reason why I picked for the course Q ofalpha is that it's a real. probability, and this has to be positive. the coherent state is now not this Gaussian. It doesn't have thisGaussian distribution as a course of probability. It's what you want-- what maybe some of you wanted to see-- oh, by the way, it's a delta function. The probability of the coherent state alpha has a delta. function peak at alpha, which is sort of nice. And the number state is not a ring of a finite radius. You would naively expect the energy is sharp. The square root of the energy's electric field, shouldn't it be sharp? And indeed, it issharp. Professor: "If you want to really appreciate the quantum character, you have to know the classic description first" "So the fluctuations of the intensity are usually expressed by the second order temporal coherence function" "Quantum mechanically, we will see that the g2 function is not necessarily larger than 1, it can be smaller than 1" "It's only possible if you have a truly non-classical state. That's actually an interesting-- you can see-- litmus test for the quantumness" Vladan Vuletan: Coherent states, as I've just shown you, are very classical. They've always a g2 function of 1. And attenuation is not changing it. So a coherent state with an expectation value of 1 photon is not a single photon. But of course, there are ways how you can get single photons. And this is, well, you start with single atoms. Namely, if you have a single atom in the excited state, it can emit only one photon. So that's a way how we can create non-classical states of light. The Hanbury Brown Twiss experiment was the first experiment which really looked at g2 functions correlations. It was the beginning of quantum optics and modern experiments with light. The classical limit is always a limit of high intensity, so at any given time, you have a ton of photons. If you put a light bulb into a cavity or couple the light from a light bulbs into a fiber, the light becomes spatially a single mode. That's the only way how you can distinguish a lightbulb from a laser beam. course practically, if you take a thermal source and filter it down to a single mode, you will be left with only a few photons. You cannot create an intense enough single mode light source unless you use stimulated emission. And that's a laser. So anyway, what Colin says is there are actually more different light sources that just the laser and the thermal light source. There are LEDs or semiconductor devices, which provide photons with interesting statistical properties. OK. We have to stop. I'll see you on Wednesday.