Professor Amy Hungerford: Today it is my very great privilege and pleasure to introduce Andrew Goldstone, a TF in this course. Andrew is a fourth-year student in the Ph.D. program in English, and he is writing a dissertation on the autonomy of the work of art in modernism. In preparation for that, for next week I'd like you to finish the novel and then read his essay, "On a Novel Entitled Lolita" It should be bound at the back of your book. T.S. Eliot's "Gerontion" is a spoof of Nabokov's "Humbert" Eliot says poems should be autotelic, that means they should be an end unto themselves. Eliot in some ways comes very close to the kind of ideas about art that Nabokovsky holds. Eight of the eight features of literary modernism that are all important to Nabokova are: obsession with art's autonomy, the idea that art is its own law, that it has no other purpose than its own. Vladimir Nabokov's novel, The Metamorphosis, is based on Proust's "In Search of Lost Time" In the novel, Humbert and Lolita meet in a fairy tale, a crude pun on the term "fairy" tale. The author's relationship to the modernist past is not just the burlesque that he visits on Eliot, says David Frum. Frum: The danger for Nabokovsky is that he will fall too in love with something too like himself. A list of names leads up to this aesthetic sensation, the revelation of a poem. The ordinary materials of life become the basis for a kind of artistic achievement. Even the ordinary names are kind of plants, because almost every name on this list comes back elsewhere in the book. McFate is the icon of the difference between the realistic world of Joyce and the already artificial, already aestheticized world of this novel. No one was ever really named McFate. McFates are a parody of real. Nabokov took a narrative of real events and twisting it into something that makes a kind of sense, taking fate and making it McFate. The thing that stands for randomness in this book, the thing that looks like ordinary detail, has already been arranged to give you artistic pleasure. The artificial has taken the place of the real here, and this novel really reminds you of that all the time. The point is that this clichéd life of mowing the lawn and washing the car is that they're all wrong. the fear that it's too like what he wants to do. But the main point here to think about is that feeling of damage. On page 152, evocation of the landscape: By a paradox of pictorial thought, the average lowland North American countryside had at first seemed to me something I accepted with a shock of amused recognition. "Inutile loveliness" is kind of the key word of Nabokov's novel, and it's the source of the most appealing writing. technique, and he says the novel has as its only purpose to provide aesthetic bliss. So, a European artist actually appears again there, with Claude Lorrain, but kind of made strange: given that knight's move, given a new twist. So--instead of familiar, incorporated into this profoundly strange, vast landscape that gets Humbert's most appealing rhetoric--the rhetoric of an exile. But, I don't want you to think that this just means everything's okay. Of course, everything is not okay. Nabokov tried to become an American writer, as Nabokov says he's doing: trying to invent America, trying to bridge the gap between Russian and English. He translated Lolita back in to Russian later on, and he added a second afterword where he said: That wondrous Russian tongue that, it seemed to me, was waiting for me somewhere, was flowering like a faithful springtime behind a tightly locked gate whose key I had held in safekeeping for so many years, proved to be nonexistent.