In automotive design Dynamics plays a very important part because it's not rigid body Dynamics it's a bunch of rigid bodies with springs the Springs are called starts with an S suspens suspensions right and there's a trade-off between how comfortable the ride is and how tightly the car handles. In a car cruise control puts in this artificial foot essentially on the throttle and it tries to maintain the speed at a constant level right so we're doing Dynamics end of the course we're going to solve the dynamical equations dou4. In this lecture we're going to introduce to you the concept of angular moment and angle momentum. This is the stepping stone the link to rigid bodies then we'll do a problem. There's no class next Monday and we posted the solution to that problem from class. I won't have officers today only because you don't want to hear me Babel I'm really sick. I might go to like a Monday off M um like later on a Monday or maybe Wednesday later or something like that. Would you prefer it not be midday Wednesday? point right so let us say I could have done it around o but here's the deal when you do angular momenta it's very useful to pick some point that's convenient you'll see this a lot right if I'm trying to calculate the angular momentum of that door I prefer to do it about the axis for various reasons right forces vanish all sorts of cool stuff happens so I need to tell you which point I just want to to pick a random point and do it that that way so let's say it's Q so what's the angularmomentum of particle of Point p and by the way let's assume the mass is m  what's the angle of momentum quick say it h lvm yeah. A lot of MIT grads old friends work all over the world very important positions around the world for example the foreign minister of the new British government is an MIT grad okay milbrand Benjamin Netanyahu who might end up being the next president of Israel MIT grad kofan MIT grad right but one of my friends Works in a congressional he she helps Congressional analyze things from a physics point of view so you know when Katrina occurred someone asked if it would be possible to change the temperature in the when a hurricane approaches to dissipate the temperature. call this Theta the initial length is L one and the initial velocity is we'll call it a scalar because this is how I'm defining the problem of V1 when we actually solve it we might have to define a vector okay. As the thing's going around this person is going to pull the string down and as it kind of goes around it's going to spiral in and end up it's a new length L2 and the question is what is V2 going to be okay. There is no torque on this particle at any point in time it's just a very long way to say listen things going in circles and the only force is radial if we take a cross product it's going to vanish. In a lot of situations that pesky correction term doesn't make a difference you just need to be careful that it exists. The angular momentum is conserved because this goes to zero which means d by DT of ah p q is equal Z and what that tells you is understood. would have to do one of two things I would have had to either calculate this term or calculate or make you know make my frame attach it to the truck. I've just done it in a very precise way okay so in the end there's no surprise the whole point is to show you they could be surprises but be careful any questions about this all right snap quiz in the next 3 minutes I want you to calculate for me the final velocity literally 3 minutes because I have toDo the dumbbell problem. The question I ask now is how does this thing behave so let's examine this first of all how do I parameter or to use the more technical term what nonstandard coordinates do I need to describe the configuration of this dumbbell. If instead of a rigid bar if I had a string connecting them what would the kinematic constraint be less than equal to to R right but in this case it's a rigidbar so it's equal to R to R all right by the way just so you know if in rigid bodies you can make an equality constraint um in non- rigid in if it were a string it's an inequality constraints. different you'll find out later I would have picked the center of mass which would not have been the geometric Center Center okay but you don't know why so I can't tell you why. I just did some slate of hand and I made the masses equal all right a lot of terms cancel out that's the only difference I could still have by the way I could have picked a point on that line anywhere there would still be reasonable generaliz coordinates there wouldStill be three just the math is easier that's it okay. First we will do some free body diagrams then we'll figure out the accelerations of both particles. We'll write f is equal to Ma and we have differential equations we'll make sure we have as many equations as we have unknowns and we'll the do all right so from a free body diagram point of view I'm not going to do it right now but very simply there are each bar applies a force on the part on the particle I'll do it later on because I want to the kinematics first so I'm breaking my own rule. stick if I have something at the end of a stick can I apply like a you know does it only have to be a force inwards right. Next week we'll pick up on this and essentially what we'll do is I'll do the three body diagram. Define angular acceleration and moment of inertia and a more General sense okay so let's stop here because we are over time. CL you I mean you're getting that's right so there are a couple of ways to interpret this okay it's a massless rod and I'm invoking the strong form of Newton's third law.