David KAISER: In the last few class sessions, we were looking at some changes in high energy particle theory. And then in our most recent class session, we looked at some of the shifts within the fields of study. And today, we're going to focus on a kind of example of that new subfield, a relatively new sub field that's known as inflationary cosmology or simply cosmic inflation. So it's a framework for trying to understand the evolution of our universe over a huge expanse of time, increasingly using tools at the interface. lecture notes on the Canvas site which go into a little bit more detail of some of these parts from the lecture. So oftentimes, astronomers will describe the most salient features of our universe in terms of what they call large scale structure. It turns out that ordinary gravity-- even Newtonian gravity, let alone Einstein's fancier version that we looked at in class, general theory of relativity-- that these gravitational frameworks are sufficient to help us make sense of this hierarchy of scales, of structure across large distance scales. Astronomers like Edwin Hubble in Southern California were able to measure how rapidly distant galaxies were moving with respect to us. Hubble found this remarkable trend that the further away from us a given galaxy was, the faster it tended to be moving. The Hubble Space Telescope named in honor of Edwin Hubble, has been able to extend this to extraordinarily far distances, not just the ones that Hubble could access with his ground based telescope. And the basic trend holds. There's some interesting deviations. But the idea is nonetheless evidence consistent with our universe expanding. After the Second World War, new groups began coming back to these somewhat old questions. Some of the newer groups had experience with things like the Manhattan Project and in general were much better versed in things like nuclear physics than had been known even in Lemaitre's day. One of the most active groups soon after the war was based at the advanced-- excuse me-- the Applied Physics Laboratory. Here's a famous composite photograph. They're making a not so subtle gesture to the fact that Gamow was widely rumored to enjoy his drink. So his head is emerging from the vapors of Cointreau, of a liqueur. At early times in cosmic history, the universe should've been opaque. You literally wouldn't have been able to see anything because the mean free path of any given photon would be very, very short. At that moment, the average energy per photon or per elementary particle would fall so that you could actually begin to form stable atoms of hydrogen. After that time, when the temperature has fallen below about 10,000 Kelvin, photons are now free to travel large distances. They lose energy as the universe continues to expand. In 1948, physicists predicted as early as 1948 that there should be this remnant glow from the Big Bang. The idea was the whole universe is filled in the early times with very high energy particles that are at early, early times too high energy to form stable, electrically neutral atoms. The photons aren't just sitting in a bathtub of light, they're just moving through the overall size of space. So the idea was that there would be a point-like source of light coming from that direction of the sky. stuff per volume, the actual density of matter and energy per volume. If omega is larger than 1, you have more stuff for volume. You expect it's open or hyperbolic geometry. So far so good. Then Dicke plugged this quantity into Einstein's own equations. A universe should generically become more and more different from flat over time. And so this solution that looks like the Goldilocks solution, the spatially flat solution where you have just the right amount of stuff per volume is actually an unstable solution. Bob Dicke and James Peebles introduced the flatness problem in 1969. The universe started out being close to but not identically equal to flat at early times, they say. They say it should look nothing like spatially flat at later times. But it did look like a hyperbolic saddle or more and more like a closed sphere, they argue. The researchers say this is consistent with observations by the '60s, '70s and '80s. They also show that the universe was only 380,000 years old as opposed to nearly 14 billion. like circa 1980. He was not originally asking questions about the cosmos, but he was haphazardly encountering some of those questions, again, very much like Tony Zee around the same time. What Alan was interested in was in things like spontaneous symmetry breaking and the Higgs mechanism. He realized that this kind of feature could actually lead to a cosmologically distinct kind of evolution. If you have a time even briefly during which the energy density, the amount of stuff per volume gets stuck, then the energy could remain constant. That stretch of growth in the size of space will stretch exponentially. Planck collaboration using a satellite is that this parameter in our actual universe today is 1 to better than a percent level accuracy. This is a remarkable shift even over the course of 20 to 25 years, let alone since the days of Lemaitre and Hubble. If inflation happened, there should've been a very brief period before what had previously been called the Big Bang. So then it would at least be plausible there's at least now a causally self-consistent mechanism by which the universe could have similar conditions everywhere. why the universe is so messy is actually because Alan's been generating the mess in his own office, and it's expanded to cosmic scales. So if you want to study that part of today's lecture, it's probably the most important lesson, you'll ever take away. And I'll be glad to stay a bit longer if people have questions. Again, I'm sorry for running late. Feel free to drop off if you need. Any questions on that? The photos in Alan's office are on Canvas.