Bolek Wyslouch: How do you convert a given physical system with all the forces, et cetera, into some sort of fixed form, fixed type of notation? Bolek: We will work on two, again, simple physical systems, one that consists of two pendula driven by forces of gravity, each of them. And we will discuss various interesting-- even though the system is very simple, just two masses, a spring, a little bit of gravity on top of that. Complex notation is a mathematical answer, how to solve a mathematical equation. But the physics answer is to find fixed frequency modes us such that the system, the complete system, oscillates at one frequency. This is so-called normal mode. So I propose that-- so of course, we use the usual trick that anytime we have a solution in complex variables, we can always get back to real things by taking a real part. But what form of oscillation? OK, all kinds of complex numbers can write, but any particular-- There are two possible solutions to the equation g over l plus k over m minus omega squared. One solution, one oscillation, that does not depend on the spring constant. The other option is usually symmetrically. I move them away from each other. And this is the motion where the spring really comes in at full force. It's being stretched maximally. So very quickly, the spring is stretched. And the whole system oscillates at the same frequency. Because of this additional force of spring, the frequency is actually higher, it's larger. The magenta is normal mode number 2. And blue and the red are the actual pendula. And the motion of blue and red is simply a linear sum of the two. And this is exactly what-- this is the computer simulation that shows you that one of them is going up, the other one down, et cetera. This is for the certain combination of initial conditions. I could go change initial conditions in my program and have a different behavior. But whatever happens, I would be able to-- it will always be a combination of thetwo motions. BolesLAW WYSLOUCH: You can have all kinds of motions by simply adjusting initial conditions. So do you know-- so this is how we can have different shape of motion, depending on the initial condition. So let's say, in fact, do I have it in this one here? Yes. So now, let's take it to, for example, Jupiter. Jupiter, g, is much larger. So the frequency would be larger. Things will be faster, right? That's the higher frequency. But also the difference between two frequencies will be smaller. like this. OK? So there are in fact two-- when you look at this picture, you can see two frequencies. One which is clear the oscillation of the-- high-frequency oscillation. But there's also this kind of overarching frequency of much smaller frequency, and this is what corresponds to a difference of two things. So we see this here. We see it on the pendula. But now what we are going to do is we're going to try to hear it, right? So this is a demonstration which maybe it works, maybe not. sort of early on, to instead of, so far, when we talked about pendula, we describe their motion in terms of motion of number 1. It turns out we can rewrite the equation into some sort of new variables, where, so-called normal coordinates, where you'll simultaneously describe both of them and then kind of mix them together to have a new formula. So you do change of variables. So instead of keeping track of x1 and x2 independently, you define something which I called u1, which is simply x1 plus x2, and I define u2,which is x1 minus x2.