Learn how the solar cell device converts sunlight, the input energy, to some usable output energy, which is in the form of electricity, typically, from a solar panel. Learn how to minimize the amount of light reflected or not absorbed into maximizing amount of life that's actually absorbed. Learn about the duality of light, or how to think about light as a particle, or alternatively, as a quantified particle. Use the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on MIT OpenCourseWare. We need to understand how light gets absorbed inside of matter. Beer-Lambert's Law describes the interaction of light with the solar cell material. Light through the atmosphere, light the water, many other forms of optical absorption. We're going to learn what that is in a few lectures, of about 60%. And so first of all, we'll see what it's like, what the power of our--Yeah. So right now we're getting about 1.32 milliamps. Then as we keep increasing and put one layer of polyethylene, that drops to 0.75. by some sort of scattering intensity within the medium. We collapse the n and the sigma here into an alpha. That alpha is an absorption coefficient. If we increase the total thickness, we're going to decrease the total amount of light coming through via that exponential function. The alpha, obviously, is going to be very different for our atmosphere than it was for these little polyethylene sheets. Because the nature of the scattering and absorption processes are different for the atmosphere than they are for the material. We're going to look at two different materials, silicon and gallium arsenide. And we're Going to calculate the thickness necessary to absorb 90% of the incoming light at 550 nanometers. Did anybody manage to walk all the way through that calculation? TONIO BUONASSISI: I'm glad people are asking those questions. And then over the next few classes, we'reGoing to get to exactly what physical processes are going on. But I'm starting to get into the semester, so the energy level starts going down. There is a limit to how much we can trap light simply by modifying or corrugating the surfaces to enhance the optical path length. A gentleman by the name of Eli Yablonovitch, who's now a professor in Berkeley calculated these parameters I think back in 1982. He derived an expression for the maximum increase of the opticalPath length due to surface texturing, which was 4n squared. That might not sound like a whole lot, but if you're a $100 billion industry, 1% is a lot of money.