HONG LIU: This is a key relation between the bulk and the boundary theories. The more you go to the interior of the space time, then corresponding to the lower energy process when viewed form the field theory. So the duality is that once you realize there's such relation, since the two sides are completely different objects, so the game is that you really have to do lots of guess work. Essentially, you have two sides if you want to relate things on two sides. HONG LIU: We have N equals 4 super Yang-Mills theory. And then here, you have type IIB string in Ads5 times ds5. Here on this side, there is a conformal symmetry which we explained before because this is a four dimensional theory. But being the right hand side, we still have some SO 5, S5. So this is more like a space time symmetry. And the isometry of S5 precisely gives you SO6. And we will not be explicit. You can also map the supersymmetry between them. For each global symmetry in the field theory side, there's a corresponding local symmetry on the gravity side. The isometry is important for the following reason. Even though this is a subgroup, when we talk about quantum gravity, the AdS5 times S5 specifies the asymptotic geometry of the space time. So-called large transformations is that they don't go to the Identity at infinity. These large gauge transformations can be considered as the global part of the diffeomorphism. The gauge symmetry is just redundant freedom. You never see it on the other side. essentially the semi classical gravity limit because we still treat the matter fields essentially as quantum. HONG LIU: Yang-Mills theory lives on Minkowski space. And then you say you can imagine that this is the boundary, this relation is related to the bulk and the boundary. And this is a postulate based on that fact. Yes? AUDIENCE: I thought one of the motivations for thinking about the holographic duality was to try to escape [INAUDIBLE] And all of a sudden, it strikes me, so we're trying to get on the boundary of AdS. Then they will also exist in the massless particles. and the field theory. And that also tells you that if you have a theory which due into a higher dimensional theory, and then that theory has a stress tensor, then this bulk theory must have gravity. So you can say, if any field theory is due to a theory of one higher dimension, that theory must involve gravity-- nothing about quantum gravity. Let's stop here. We're not going to get into quantum gravity right now, we're just going to talk about the theory of gravity.