David Kaiser: particle cosmology is a new subfield within physics. He says it studies the smallest units of matter, the fundamental forces and elementary constituents of matter. Kaiser: The field is doing pretty well these days by other measures. Its annual budget just within the U.S. is on the order of $1 billion a year, roughly, he says. It is really a booming, booming subject of study, Kaiser says. The field literally didn't even exist 45 years ago, he adds. In the 1960s, a number of high-energy theorists were trying to put together these highly symmetric models to account for things like the nuclear forces. These nuclear forces are self-evidently of short range, unlike gravitation or electromagnetism, which, in principle, can extend arbitrarily long distances. The nuclear forces really exert themselves across nuclear dimensions, very tiny fraction of the size even of a single atom, let alone macroscopic scales. The question of mass turns out to have been on many specialists minds in the 1950s and '60s, but as embedded in quite different-sounding conversations. In Einstein's theory, the unit strength of gravity is set by some universal constant, the same constant G. So what Brans and Dicke do is say, well, let's replace G by 1 over phi. So now 1 over G becomes phi in the Lagrangian or in the action for gravitation. In principle phi, the local strength ofgravity could change across time and space. If this field phi could vary, if it, in principle, it could be changing eta over space or over time, then they also knew they had to take into account within this total energy budget. Jeffrey Goldstone was among the first to show that a certain kind of characteristic shape for a potential energy function could be used to break the symmetry of the nuclear forces. Goldstone introduced a new hypothetical form of matter, the Higgs field, which acts like it has a molasses-like mass. He says this new field stretches through all of space and time, and all the rest of matter interacts with it. If these other force-carrying particles get stuck at some non-zero value of their field, it actually is stuck at a non- zero value of its field. Geoffrey Goldstone: Brans-Dicke field phi was the first quantitative alternative to Einstein's general theory of relativity in nearly half a century. He says it offered a way to maintain the symmetries of the nuclear forces and keep them short-range. Goldstone says the Higgs field, the separate field Phi, was tremendously exciting for the reasons he was emphasizing a moment ago. The sets of ideas were published to very wide acclaim in their own separate fields as early as 1961, he says. In 1979, two separate theorists working independently of each other suggested that the two fields might be literally the same, not just comparable or worth considering side by side. So it's not that they're somehow intrinsically totally separate or different from each other. Instead, their status, really, is historical. How people assess them or what they thought they were good for was changing over time. And so what had changed? That's what we'll pick up in the next part of this three-part series. more than just the letter that they chose. There was a lot of what we might have considered similarities. And yet, the two sets of ideas really were treated so separately. By the end of the '70s, things did not look very good for Brans-Dicke gravity experimentally. In fact, Einstein's theory was not highly favored, and that's why everyone else started paying attention on the gravity side of the field. So we might wonder, well, was it changes in data? Did experiments force a new evaluation? Evidence for the Higgs-Boson wasn't found until July of 2012, or maybe December of 2011, the first hints experimentally-- well past the period we're talking about. The main story that's mostly given-- I alluded to this in the very beginning of today's class-- is actually hearkens to changes in ideas. Two of these sets of ideas, in particular, are usually pointed to-- and they came in rapid fire in 1973 and 1974. The first of them is called asymptotic freedom. That suggests the behavior of quarks and gluons might be really different at very high energies. vast majority of those came really in the later '70s, in the wake of these pedagogical reforms. So remember that big report comes out in 1972. You start seeing curricular changes as early as '73, '74. By '75, '76, '77, you start seeing, in some sense, the market respond with many textbooks being really rushed into print. Some of these textbooks were basically mimeographed lecture notes. Now there's very, very fancy books published in a more typical way. You see really a rush to get more books on that subfield in particular. a continuous unitary symmetry, which is like saying you could rotate the electron field by any continuum amount, and the equations remain unchanged. The photon only has to mop up a relatively simple symmetry, the U1 gauge symmetry. Whereas SU2 was what I was pointing to when I was referring to the weak nuclear force. That's a discrete symmetry. It's a more complicated symmetry structure. And that's the symmetry group that these force-carrying particles-- the W and the Z particles-- are invented to enforce. broken at lower energies, they take on different features. It's another example of spontaneous symmetry breaks. So gravity gets stuck being weak because its local strength is arising through the Brans-Dicke field getting in a symmetry-breaking phase. And only in the broken-symmetry phase do we experience a phenomena that we are used to. That's right. And that's super cool and fun and lots more to be said about that. But that is, indeed, where that nomenclature came from. physicist with whom he accidentally wound up swapping apartments happens to have been immersed in gravitation and cosmology. By the mid to late '70s, he's now asking questions at this interface between his formal training in high-energy particle theory and this new hobby interest. He writes his version of his broken-symmetric gravity to suggest very creatively but tentatively that the Brans-Dicke field and the Higgs field might be identical. It was actually that second version that becomes more and more common. Alan Guth: Few physicists today think Brans-Dicke theory of gravity best describes our Universe. He says interest in the field grew even as it was getting experimentally less and less favored. Guth: New generation of theorists trained to work at this interface. They had all kinds of potential roles to play in new work that we'll look at together next time on inflation, he says. "We'll have more opportunities to make fun of Alan Guth, which is what's in it for me" soon, everyone. Soon, everyone will be able to play together again. Soon. Everyone will be playing together.soon. Everyone. Will be. Playing together again soon.soon,everyone. Everyone, playing together againsoon.soon,. everyone. soon, everyone, will be. playing together once again. soon.everyone. will be Playing Together again.soon! everyone. will. be.playing together soon. soon! Everyone. will play together soon! everyone will.be. playing again soon! soon.