Prof. Clark: Middle class was a form of self-identity that was constructed in the way being a worker was constructed, or being a noble. When you see Daumier or you see Delacroix's famous, Liberty Leading the People, and you see the bourgeois, there with his top hat, he's dressed in a bourgeois uniform like this. That emerges out of the bourgeois century. The middle classes started dressing like this in the nineteenth century, dark with a little bit of color. Once we've got an increase in the wealth of the middle classes, then you wanted the political power. times, as you know, in the French Revolution--;the French revolutions, and in the revolutions of 1848. These folks are here, too. People are always dumping all over them needlessly. I will give you some example. If you've ever read the great French novelist--;he was paid by the word, but Balzac is really the novelist of the bourgeoisie. When he describes Paris and the seventeen to nineteen percent of the population who are increasingly living in the western part of Paris, he describes it as a jungle. Daumier is the greatest caricaturist in the nineteenth century. He captures the prevailing mood in much of Europe in that money, more than blood. The bourgeoisie didn't kiss and hug a lot, but he's got his hand draped rather daintily on the old guy's arm. He's not about to embrace him and give him a big kiss on each cheek. One day all of this stuff will be his, if he plays his cards right. Love could still be something, but economic relationships were still essentially, less so for the middle classes than ordinary relationships. birthday, papa." You didn't take time out to celebrate a birthday if you were an ordinary person having to get to the fields at 4:00 in the morning in the summer, or going to work during the day. There's a whole notion, and here again this would probably fit rather awkwardly into the birth control description, but there's this whole sense of being prepared that emerges with the middle class. The bourgeoisie, the middle classes, and this is particularly true of Germany and France, and of England, too. until you have universal male suffrage, by how much taxes you paid and how much property you own. Property reflects one's belief in one's own social worth. No longer was it the worth of blood. So, they formed these national guards, particularly after revolutions and after 1848, or after 1830. For a while they go march around. But these are mainly there to protect them against the workers. Should one day all of these people try to rise up, climb up this ladder, you'll be down there to stomp on their fingers or to shoot them down. Transnonain, where this happened in the center of Paris, simply disappeared. It didn't quite disappear from the collective memory of people thinking about Parisian things. In conclusion, the middle classes extremely vary. They have a common material culture. They share a belief in achieved status, as measured by the amount of property that you had. They want a collective voice in decisions. Have a good weekend. See you on Monday. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from.