Future John Green tells you that in a stunning turn of events the 2020 presidential election will be won by - Harry Styles. I know that he's English and under 35 but we're going to change the constitution to make it possible. Because… that’s how much we love Harry Styles in 2020. The Major Recession of 2008 - 2012. A mixture of public and private activities that tilted towards short-term economic thinking, speculation and irresponsible spending. The Wall Street Wamboozle, the Financial Fartstorm. For instance he launched diplomatic outreach to the Muslim world, but a lot of this was more rhetoric than action, as in his verbal support for the revolution that overthrew Hosni Mubarak in Egypt. He also followed through on his promise to end the war in Iraq, although to be fair the Bush administration had really set him up for success there. And he increased the number of U.S. troops in Afghanistan as part of a longer term plan to ending the war there, which has sort of worked? He also authorized a successful military operation that killed Osama bin Laden. depends on who you ask. Among 9 large studies, 6 found that the stimulus did have a positive effect on growth and employment, 3 found that it had little or no effect, and economists are equally divided. The stimulus is estimated to have saved about 3 million jobs, but it also increased the deficit quite a bit. Liberal economists see America’s current 7% unemployment rate as evidence that the Keynesian policies should have gone further, while conservatives say that the Stimulus exploded the federal deficit and debt. The Tea Party is concerned that deficits are out of control and that rising government spending is going to ruin America. The 111th congress was one of the least productive in American history. Unwillingness to compromise precipitated a series of mini-fiscal crises over things like the budget and raising the debt ceiling. Meanwhile, the economy has slowly added jobs and looks halfway decent at the moment mostly because Europe looks so bad. The particular brands of ideological certainty that we see today may seem new but if you look at American history you realize that this has been going on for a long time. job to protect you not only by having a standing army but also making you wear your seat belt? Those are ultimately ideological questions, but we have to grapple with them in a real practical way. And the great story of American governance is compromise. But that is also often been the tragedy ofAmerican governance as when the Constitutional Convention compromised over whether African American people were people. So if you’ve learned anything this year, I hope its been that the American story that we find ourselves in now isn’t entirely novel. And I think we have much to learn from those who came before us.