Grenade algorithm uses a minimal set of three-point correspondences to solve the camera pose estimation problem in the grenade formulation. The disadvantage of this particular formulation is that it ends up with a four degree polynomial which means that it could give up to a total of four possible solutions. The question becomes whether can we find the solution directly from any four point correspondences such that the solution is unique? The answer is yes and it was formulated by quan at all in a paper that was published in the 1990s. any of the unknowns in the the depth where we simply write it as s i square over here so this can be derived in in this way so here i wrote out all the six combinations of the polynomial equations f i j over here. Each one of this equation it's a just a function of two unknowns  in the four uh unknown depths s1 s2 s3 and s4 and any three of them it's going to give rise to a fourth order polyn coefficients equation. The epmp algorithm mitigates the problem of the linear endpoint algorithm that was shown earlier on by quan and lun that was published in the year 1999 which has cubic complexity in the order of the number of points. The objective is actually to find out the relative transformation between the camera frame and the world frame. We'll first look at the case where these four control points are non-coplanar control points this means that these four Control points will not lie on a plane. We will then use the same relation for the 3d points in the camera coordinates. for the camera pose using a set of control points using four control points in particular and we saw that this uh it's uh the complexity is a linear in terms of the number of points which is much easier to compute then we also saw the degeneracy cases for the camera post estimation problem in particular. If all the points plus the camera center forms a plane then this is also a degenerate case and that's the end of today's lecture thank you mx equals to zero. Mx equals zero.