Professor Donald Kagan: We are living in the early years of a polis sometime in the eighth century B.C. The date that's typical for the general phenomenon of colonization coming out of the mother cities of Greece is 750 roughly. The earliest date according to Greek tradition, if my memory is correct, was something like 773 where the Greeks date the foundation of what they thought was the earliest colony they ever established -- a place that they called Pithaecusa, which is the island of Ischia. will decide whether it's a good idea for him or not. Now, recruiting is tremendously important because you need to have a certain number of settlers to make the settlement viable. So however many that is, that is what you try to recruit and you recruit typically at a time when it's easy to get people together so you can tell them the story. The best time would be at some great festival. There are festivals held in each city just for its own citizens and my guess is that when you could do that, when you felt that you could recruit a full colony from your fellow citizens in Corinth, let us say, that's what you did. Syracuse is an independent polis, autonomous, self-governing, whatever regime it wants. It is not a subject of anybody, not Corinth or anybody else. The most typical, the usual, everything else is an exception is that there are friendly relations between the mother city and the apoikia. Corinth sent out a lot of colonies, which is why we know something about their arrangements. The first battle of the Peloponnesian War was a battle between Corinth and Corcyra. Kagan: The overwhelming normal situation is the first one I described, friendly relations. colonies to send representatives back to the mother city for the religious observations that were common to them all, so that those create good feelings. Corinth always needs that kind of stuff, so we sell you our wheat, you sell us your pottery, we sell good wine that we can't grow yet and maybe never will be able to grow in our neighborhood, so on and so forth. So you can see why it would be very natural for all sorts of ties to unite these colony and mother city. come to mean weights of silver or gold. So now you have a change in fundamental economic things. Well, all of this is tied up with this colonial story I've been telling you. Finally, I think, it works in both directions at the same time in terms of the impact all of these changes have on the political situation. On the one hand the changes, that is (A) the rise of the hoplite class; (B) the development of lots of commerce and industry and wealth in a new kind. that colonization provided something analogous to that for the Greek people. So now, here we are somewhere in the seventh century, most of these places I've been talking about have been settled, the currents that I have been describing are flowing and the kinds of problems they have give rise to what will be felt in most of the towns. That is the proper introduction to the next topic, which I'll discuss next year. No not--it seems like a year, but it's next Tuesday actually.