Coded imaging is a co-design between how you capture the image and how you process the image. The concept of a position or superposition applies to all three types, shadows- or refraction- or reflection-based techniques. We'll see how-- we already have some projects that are inspired by biological vision. And I believe Santiago-- where's Santiago? Oh, yeah, his triangle-- the piston, kind of-- so some really great ideas. It is going to be very popular. When you take a blurry photo, a lot of the high-frequency details are lost. If you try to apply some deblurring, you'll get a result that looks like this. The culprit here is really this box function, which is equivalent to opening the shutter, opening the-- release your shutter button-- opening it open for exposure duration and closing it. So what if you change that? What if you changed that? And instead of keeping the shutter open for the entire duration, you open and close it in a carefully chosen binary sequence. It's actually preserving all frequencies in the image. frequencies-- they're all preserved. Of course, they're attenuated. It's not as high as-- it's not 1.0.0, it's reduced. Maybe it's 0.1 or so. So there is still some hope to recover this photo back from this because, in the denominator, we will not have seen. This is a very simple idea. Instead of keeping the shutter open for the entire duration and getting a well-exposed photo, the shutter is open for only half of the time. And that's your 1010 inquiry. CNN's Ravi Agrawal is a senior producer at CNN.com. He is the founder and CEO of a company that uses artificial intelligence to improve camera technology. He says the technology can be used to blur images based on distance and speed of objects. He shows how the technology could be used in a mobile phone app to help people figure out license plate numbers of cars and cars on the street. The company is based in New York and has been around since the 1970s. System is based on an open-source code called 7-of-7. It was developed by a team of engineers at MG Edge. The code can be used to change the aperture of a camera. It can also be used as a way to change a camera's focus and image quality. It's going to look like a code that is like the RASKARASARAS system, which is a 7-by-7 mask with an aperture code of 7 by 7. In 1D, Fourier transform is flat; in 2D, it's a broadband code. Fourier transforms of a square aperture, a traditional one, and a square transform, it will look something like this. If we're placing a broadbandcode, certainly we have an opportunity to recover all the information. If all I wanted to do was create a photo from which I can deblur to get sharp photo, why do I need to think about all this theory? RAMESH RASKAR: It's just traditional signal processing. motion case, we had to know how much the motion is. The size of the blur is dependent on what? AUDIENCE: Belt. RAMESH RASKAR: The belt. But not just depth-- depth from the plane of focus, right? So that's an extra parameter you would estimate somehow. Maybe you can use a rangefinder or something like that, or just a software. There are methods you can employ. We said, OK, let me try to refocus. When it comes into sharp focus, my edges, that must be the right depth. I said, by the time I come tomorrow morning, I'll find a really good code. And I came back next morning. Nothing had happened. I waited all day. It was still running. And it never came out of that. So 2 the 52 is pretty challenging. But even if you use a cluster, it's still a pretty big number. So you can do some approximation. So [? harder ?] [? mark ?] code, which we learned about a few weeks ago or so-called broadband codes, they all have polynomial solutions. filter to the beginning of the signal. This particular filter is actually not circular, but it's linear. So when you apply the filter here, when you start applying the filter at the end of the image, you don't go back to the front. It turns out, for circular convolution, the match is very clean and beautiful and smoother course work. Or for linear convolution,. there is no good mechanism. So we came up with our own code called RAT code, R-A-T, which is after three quarters. Raskar: Compressed sensing or compressed imaging comes up when you want to take something that is much higher resolution but recover it in a compressed way. He says a group at Rice University has been able to measure the z-dimension down to about 10 nanometers. Raskar says the idea is to take one single photo and turn it on and off to get a million-pixel image, which can then be used to reconstruct neuronal structures in three-dimensional form. The concept is mathematically easy to explain, he says. which is how to write a paper and wishlist for photography. Which isHow to Write a Paper and Wishlist for Photography: How to Write A Paper and Write A Wishlist For The Camera. For more information on writing a paper or wishlist, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/30/photography/how-to-write-a-paper-and-wishlist-for-photography-how- to- Write-A-Paper-And-Wishlist.html.