James Swan: I hope everybody saw the correction to a typo in homework 1 that was posted on Stellar last night and sent out to you. We have four course staff that review all the problems. We try to look through it for any issues or ambiguities. Today, we'll look at another one, the eigenvalue decomposition. And on Monday, we will look at a different decomposition called the singular value decomposition, which is a different type of transformation than the one we looked at today. Reordering is essential for solving certain problems via Gaussian elimination. How do you do reordering? Well, we use a process called permutation. Permutation matrices are one class, maybe the simplest class, of unitary matrices. They're transposed. If I swap the rows and then I swap them back, I get back what I had before. And so if I have some reordering of the equations or rows of my system of equations, that's going to be indicated by a permutation matrix, P1. James W. Swan: We discussed sparse matrices and a little bit about reordering and now permutation. He says permutation is a form of preconditioning a system of equations. He shows a simulation that tells us how probable it is to find the Plinko chip in a particular column. Swan: We could construct an alternative model that didn't have that part of the picture that we wanted to have. He's happy to answer questions on.at and he'll be back in a few minutes. Eigenvectors are special vectors that are stretched on multiplication by the matrix. They're only transformed into a stretched form of whatever they were before. For a real N-by-N matrix, there will be eigenvector and eigenvalues, which are the amount of stretch. Eigenvalues are non-linear because they depend on both the value and the vector, the product of the two, for N plus 1 unknowns. We don't know how to solve non- linear equations yet. triangular form for this matrix. We'll talk next time about the singular value decomposition, which is another sort of transformation one can do when we don't have these complete sets of eigenvectors. You'll get a chance to practice these things on your next two homework assignments, actually. So it'll come up in a couple of different circumstances. I would really encourage you to try to solve some of these example problems that were in here. Solving by hand can be useful.