Robotics is a really cool and important direction for the future. I really believe that in the future we will have AI assistance whether they are embodied or not to act as our guardian angels. These agents will help us with cognitive and physical work. With AI we will see such a wide breadth of applications for instance these technologies have the potential to reduce and eliminate car accidents. We have three types of learning and you have seen different aspects of these methodologies throughout the course we have supervised learning, unsupervised learning and reinforcement learning. This work um computers needed about 10 minutes to analyze an image can you imagine okay so how do you go from that to enabling an autonomous vehicle to drive at 90 kilometers an hour well um what they did was they they developed some very fast solutions for paring down the image to only the the the aspects that they needed to look at. They assumed that there were no obstacles in the world which made the problem much easier because all the car had to do was to stay on on the road. This has been a game changer for autonomous cars and we're getting back to the connection between hardware and software. Alexander: We have very effective and Deployable solutions for robot cars that move safely in Easy environments where there aren't many static nor moving obstacles. Many companies and research teams are deploying and developing self-driving cars. Many of these preconditions revolve around certainty in perception planning learning reasoning and execution before we can get to Robo taxi but we can have many other robot solutions that are much that that can happen today. Alexander: We can use deep learning and reinforcement learning to take us from images ofroads onto steering and throttle and what you can do with this is really great. your dimensions and can create a bespoke shoe just for you. All the all the clothing all the items in our environment can kind of awaken our clothing could become robots. The temperature could get adjusted automatically by monitoring people's comfort and gesture. Just-in-time Holograms could be used to make the virtual world much more much more realistic much more connected and so here they're discussing the the design of a new flying car and let's say we have these flying cars and then we can integrate these cars with the it infrastructure.