HONG LIU: So if you want to compute, say, some scattering amplitude from alpha to beta-- so alpha's some initial state and beta's some final state. Say alpha consists of momentum p1 and PN-- or pm, and beta, say momentum p m plus 1 and pn. And then you can get this scattering amplitude just by taking your momentum-space correlation function, OK, for the n points. So this is obtained by doing a Fourier transform. So any questions on this? Yes? AUDIENCE: So can you explain again why this diagram, like, you have one branch and then there's a loop? HONG LIU: To derive that theorem, the time-order matters. So we mentioned that if you have a diagram like this, say minus P1, minus P2, to P3, P4, and then the square root and amplitude are just given by minus i lambda, because you need to throw away all the external propagators. OK, you just need to-- you have to truncate all the External propagators, so that means you also throw away diagrams like this. You can consider arbitrary, complicated diagram, OK, as far as that only happens-- yeah. HONG LIU: This is the self-interact-- yeah, just when the-- when you have an interacting theory. When the particle propagates, it actually can interact with the virtual particle. And so that, this kind of interaction, will affect the property of the propagation. It can have the most effect by prefactor, but actually can change the mass, too. But for the-- oh, it can correct for the mass-- and also, that's the subject of the QFT2. The Dirac equation is one of the most beautiful equations in mathematical physics. It's actually describing electrons, so it's not only beautiful, but it's actually useful. The most general way to write it is to try to write the first-order equation which is Lorentz invariant. When you go to a different frame, the equation looks the same. Just different observers in different laboratory, that's what we mean by the equation of the Lorez transformation transform to be Lorez covariant. the meaning of all these different solutions for alpha and beta or for gammas, OK? So as I mentioned, you can have infinite number of solutions. What's the meaning of them? So first, let's imagine when we look at this equation-- so as I said, this is a matrix equation. In this matrix equation, then you have this psi which is a four- component vector. OK, so imagine, just say, consider making a basis change in psi. So now, so psi prime satisfies essentially the same equation but a different gamma matrix. because one is going to change the basis. So you can show any matrices which satisfy that equation, they're all related by similarity transformation. They're just corresponding to a change of basis. Different forms of the gamma, they may be useful for different purposes. OK, so it depends on which regime, sometimes you use different gamma matrices. So now having introduced the Dirac equation and then the structure of theDirac equation, but still we haven't showed that the DirAC equation is covariant. Consider such a Lorentz transformation, OK, so and then phi transforms as following, phi prime x prime phiprime. New phi evaluated at the new position should be the same as phi evaluation at the old position. So the phi-- yeah, just equal to phi lambda minus 1 x. So now if you look at the Klein-Gordon equation, let's see how this is covariant. OK, it's the same in any frame. Now we want to show that the Dirac equation has the same property.