John Stuart Mill is the principle expositor of neoclassical utilitarianism. The rights-utility synthesis signals that we're looking for an attempt to put together both a commitment to utilitarian efficiency that's grounded in science on the one hand, and respect for individual rights that's grounding in the workmanship ideal on the other hand. At the same time, more or less, there were very important developments in moral philosophy that I just want to alert you to. The doctrine that I'm mentioning here is the doctrine that would come to be called emotivism.  neoclassical economists wanted to understand the behavior of markets. They wanted to be able to more precisely to predict what prices were going to be in markets. Pareto, Marshall, and Edgeworth, and others who were in their circle, thought you could do this just with ordinal utility. So moving from cardinal to Ordinal utility is going to turn out to have huge ideological consequences, which I'm going to unpack for you towards the end of today's lecture. All All Prof: These indifference curves cannot cross. Can anybody tell us why? Why can't they cross? Wait for the mic. Student: Because at the intersection they should have the same utility. Prof: So you've got a kind of contradiction on your hands, is that right? Student: Yeah. Professor: Okay, and just to spell out the contradiction more emphatically--I think you basically made the point. So we have a distribution here, okay? Now what Pareto said, he said, "Let's draw a line north-south through the status quo" which the radical fangs of classical utilitarianism have been ripped out and it is now a doctrine that is very friendly to whatever status quo happens to be generated in a market system. So it ceases to be this radically redistributive doctrine, and in the process imports into utilitarianism a very robust, some would say, hyper-robust doctrine of individual rights. We'll see how that played out in political theory when we come to look at John Stuart Mills' harm principle next Monday.