JACK HARE: Let's do a little recap on electron cyclotron emission. We expect to have multiple different peaks, even from a single particle. These peaks are going to be occurring at frequencies. These tend to be in an optically thick regime. We can go back and we can use these measurements to identify three specific points inside our plasma that we've been using as part of this example. But, in general, you can get it all through the way through the plasma. temperature as a function of frequency. Then we can say, well, that frequency corresponds to a certain magnetic field. And then we can says that magnetic field corresponds to an spatial coordinate. This is a technique which will give us, by looking at the spectrum for lowish frequencies, the first or maybe the second harmonics of this cyclotron emission. We can work out what the temperature is as afunction of space. So this is why this is a powerful and popular diagnostic in MTF. want to understand in plasmas so that we can build an economically viable fusion reactor. Now, the fact that the noise is too high does seem like a big limitation. But there are some clever tricks that we play where we use correlations. And I'll talk now about what exactly these correlations are and how they provide us with information that allows us to get a signal out despite the overwhelming [INAUDIBLE]. So our setup here is borrowed from ASDEX Upgrade. And, in effect, I referred to Alex Creely's PhD thesis, which you can find online if you want more information. Many oscillations. And so, it will average out to 1 or something like that. So it's some DC offset that we can subtract off after. So all this is doing here is mixing the signal down so it gets to a regime that we could effectively digitize. Yeah, another question. Anyone know how micro splitters work? Looking at you? STUDENT: RF. JACK HARE: The answer I got is that you can actually collect from a very small region on the order of 100 microns. was RF, which I don't think is much more satisfying than my answer. So, yeah, there are circuits which will split microwaves. What they were actually doing with this system is all of these were very tunable. And so, if they wanted to look at turbulence in the edge or turbulence near the center, they could actually tune all their bandpass filters to do that. But this is getting way beyond what I was hoping to talk about on this. So let's get on to correlation ECE see what that does. situation where, at some point, your eddy has moved across, and these two are no longer correlated because the next two are correlated. So it-- yeah. I think we're reaching the limits of my knowledge. JACK HARE: I mean, there's no reason to believe that each of the fluctuations is the same size. So this is going to be a time-evolving system here.Yeah, exactly. Cool. Any other questions? Anything online? Now we're going to go to bremsstrahlung. here with the ions and electrons as point particles. There's a semi-classical approach where you start bringing in some quantum physics and treat, I think, the electron as a wave. And then there's a full quantum approach. What's remarkable about all of these approaches is they all give the same answer with just a very slightly different coefficient. So we get a small change in coefficient. The scalings are the same. So in some sense, although it's important to get the exact coefficient, it doesn't matter exactly which one of these techniques you use. This, therefore, has units of watts per hertz per meter cubed. And these constants are things like e, the electron charge, and the electron mass, and epsilon 0, and h bar, and c, all arranged in some way to make all the dimensions work. And so, this emissivity, as a function of photon energy, is a very simple function because it just decays exponentially with photon energy. So that is the spectrum coming out of a plasma that's emitting bremsstrahlung radiation here. at all frequencies, like a black body kind of spectrum here. That goes down to very low frequencies and goes up to very high frequencies. We're going to talk about lots of other effects which produce emissivity which is higher than the bremsstrahlung. So, I guess, you always need to worry about this, even if you managed to clear out all the impurities, you don't have any electron cyclotron emission. This is still going to be there. at synchrotron, yes. So cyclotron is when the particles are spiraling around the magnetic field. Synchrotrons are used as a source of X-rays for diagnosing many other things. So it's interesting in its own right, but I don't know whether people use it as a diagnostic. It depends mostly on the magnetic fields and the radius in a tokamak. But maybe there's a really clever diagnostic you can do, like fast particles or something like that. We're going to switch to a slightly quantum model of the atom. We have a range of different discrete energy levels that the electrons can occupy. These energy levels are labeled by the principal quantum number n. And, up here, infinity, this is ionization. If your electron gets this much energy, it becomes free again. And the energies of these levels are given by this unit, Ry, which is the Rydberg z squared of our ion over n squared. And that equation is going to be the photon that is emitted. related to the overlap integral between those with a dipole operator, the dipole operators being the thing that emits the photon in between them. So, yeah, you're right, there are inverse processes for all of these that will affect the spectra that you get. One use of this is a diagnostic called bolometry. It cares not at all about the detailed spectrum of what the emission is. It just wants to know how much power is being radiated by the plasma. We'll go into some ways of actually making some use out of all this stuff in a moment. This is balanced by conduction losses and what we, at the time, we assumed were bremsstrahlung losses, but in general could be any sort of radiative losses here. So, bolometry is focused on measuring the total power that's being emitted. And so, we can say, OK, well, that part of the plasma is clearly radiating too much. What can we do about it? So this is what bolometers are trying to measure. And you can be digitizing this as a function of time. This is often made out of gold. Gold is chosen because it absorbs all wavelengths relatively evenly. This thin layer of gold has been deposited on top of a substrate. And it's on the back of the substrate that you have your resistor. And depending on whether it is M or R, you either have this open to the plasma or you have a thick block some distance in front of it so it can't see the plasma. It's the heat capacity of the absorber, c, that goes into our previous equation. difference between those. neutron damage leads us to use much thicker substrates, which gives us a longer time response and so, therefore, a worse bolometer. So, ironically, the bolometers that will be used on [INAUDIBLE] are significantly worse than the bolometer used on existing devices. And I'm sure that [? Spark ?] will have exactly the same problem. Almost everyone in the world uses this design of bolometer that they pioneered on ASDEX Upgrade in the '80s. No one has come up with a better system yet.