This lesson will first dive into some signal Theory and then move on into things that we're more familiar with things like deconvolutions and using Transformers for next note prediction. The first thing we want to talk about is how can we sample and quantize a continuous time signal. We then go into some geometric signal Theory with Transformers and finally how how we can kind of generate sounds using these. The next thing we're going to kind oftalk about is changing forms. We'll talk about the SARS ADC algorithm and how it's used to convert digital signals to analog. um this is is kind of uh and and add add-on um to this presentation it uh doesn't really contribute exactly to what we're talking about but I thought this was incredibly cool um with one line in C you're able to to generate Melodies um which is incredibly coolUm yeah so please check it out if you if you guys have a chance uh the next thing we're going to talk about briefly is geometric signal Theory. Um and specifically you know what a projection is how it can be used to reconstruct signals and finally how that can tie in to reconstructing signals. familiar with perhaps in terms of how we can use those to reconstruct signals and ultimately how we Can use Those to generate audio right predict the best uh kind of next node um so looking at the next the next step here we want to use deep learning for reconstruction right where we are are reconstructing a low quality audio to high resolution audio right um and this is this is the kind of uh model framework um that we can used for this um you might notice it really closely resembles a unit which is something that we talked about during image segmentation. Transformers can help increase our sample of training data and generalize key scales and beats throughout a data set. A single song can be transformed into 12 songs of different Keys. The more data you have the better your model will be and the more generalizability you have in your Transformer the better it'll perform. Transformers will far outperform classical methods of of both computer vision and natural language processing. It's easier for machines to predict keys without flats and Sharps which has you know similar to what humans do. things a try yourself uh yeah thank you guys for tuning in have a good one. Things you might want to try yourself. Things that you may want to give a try. uh yeah. things you might be interested in trying yourself. things that you might like to give yourself. uhYeah. things a try yourselves. uh Yeah. Things a try themselves. Things your might like yourself.things you may like to do yourself. thanks you guys. for tuning into this week's episode of The Daily Discussion.