The panelists included a law school professor, a radiology professor, and a professor of privacy and fairness. They discussed how AI could be used to make decisions about bail, parole, and sentencing. The panelists also discussed the role of judges and how they might use AI to help them make these decisions. They also discussed how the use of technology to determine whose liberty is deprived raises concerns about transparency and interpretability next week, but today's is really about fairness and transparency.tenor of the times. When he was an undergraduate at Caltech, the Caltech faculty decided that they wanted to include student members of all the faculty committees. One day, one of the professors said here's what we ought to do. We ought to take the 230 people that we've just offered admission to and we should reject them all and take the next 230 people, and then see whether the faculty notices.look like they're a better bet. So that's just an example. And more, Science Friday had a nice show that you can listen to about this issue. can't define a universal notion of what it means to discriminate because it's very much tied to these questions of what is practically and morally irrelevant in the decisions that you're making. And so it's going to be different in criminal law than it is in medicine. And it's feature-specific as well, so you have to take the individual features into account. The government has tried to regulate these domains, and so credit is regulated by the Equal Credit Opportunity Act, education by the Civil Rights Act and various amendments. fairness popping up at different universities. University of Pennsylvania has the science of Data ethics, and I've mentioned already this fairness in machine learning class at Berkeley. This is, in fact, one of the topics we've talked about. I'm on a committee that is planning the activities of the new Schwarzman College of Computing. The college obviously hasn't started yet, so we don't have anything other than this lecture and a few other things like that in the works, but the plan is there to expand more in this area. Peter Solovits: I got a call from a committee of the National Academy of Science, Engineering, and Medicine. The committee is chaired by David Baltimore, who used to be an MIT professor. Solovitsch: They convened a meeting to talk about the set of topics that I've listed here. He says the issue of using litigation to target scientists who have opinions that you don't like is a big one. The more general issue of how do you communicate advances in life sciences to a skeptical public is another.