The final exam is in this room on Monday at 9:30 a.m. so uh get here in plenty of time remember to position yourselves with seating as I said before so we SE sit in theice odd-numbered seats number one right here and number one on that row over there same thing is true if you sit up above okay um and uh you will get a full hour and 50 minutes to take the exam. If you did not get a note card on Wednesday when I passed them out you'll have to come to my office to get them from me. Glycogen phosphor is U an enzyme that's regulated in several ways. It exists in two forms it exists in the glycogenosphor a form which is the form that has the phosphate on that people describe as the more active and it has the form without the phosphate known as the glycogens phosphor B that people say is less active. Def phosphorilation involves a kise or phosphatase right the r&t involve allosteric affectors okay all right okay so that's where we start now. hear the bgs oh you heard the BS okay Night Fever Night Fever right okay so anyway and what succeeded the bGS was a really important group known as right the back street boy what a group huh and of course what succeeded them we know of course was um yeah low moment in music I think but if you thought you've seen low moments in music You Ain't Seen Nothing Yet let me introduce the next bees that are going to turn the music world upside down through the bio comical choir please come down. 5m I'll have my car pack with information so I don't have to memorize it and I'll feel like aart with my party just one to go and then ho I'll be all right I think you got it thank you. [Applause] oh yes thank you thank you [Music] sh if if if you're too crowded for the final and I don’t get a chance to say it I hope you have a great holiday and I will see you next time thank you indeed you too study hard. okay folks let's get started how's everybody doing pretty good Santa Claus has come to town and you know Santa does with naughty kids. I will autograph these for you you can sell them on eBay I you know how much you might make from your knowledge here okay so knowledge is power knowledge may be money. Heather started go for SES work almost identically Amino a TR tight changing their structure when they S1 then there are elect shs at the AC as theaction next [Applause]