marketing marketing that's capital n a you guys do it okay come on stay with me here no sleeping no facebooking who's facebooking now anybody no text messaging all right no periscoping marketing is about creating. Marketing is about four things creating communicating delivering and exchanging value that's in chapter one so who can tell me what marketing is somebody good what's your name genius chingus go ahead tell us what is marketing i don't know but i know it's about creating right excellent good job. chapter one target market is different from target audience target audience is who we want to buy our product or service. We're going to determine the need is through marketing research. We do focus groups where we have 12 people in a room and with a moderator we ask them a series of questions like what are some of the problems that they have when cooking or baking. We don't have anything statistically significant all we have is the input of 48 people that cost 50,000 dollars to have a lot of experience in marketing. is that going to cost a hundred and fifty thousand dollars to do more intercept in multiple cities and get approximately 1500 respondents now when we do focus groups we also do multiple rounds of focus groups because each round is iterative so we learn from the first round of focus group and then we incorporate that in the next round before we do the quantitative research. i recommend that do the focus groups then we're going to do quantitative research before that now both of those focus groups and questionnaires qualitative and quantitative research as i describe that. For something to be of a good value it doesn't need to be a low price it could be a high price but it's a very high quality and it has a lot of benefits. Value does not mean low price so that's a good example anybody have another example of where something might be very expensive but not the lowest price yes go ahead tell us your name theresa bad. You guys are not wrestling fans you don't know randy orton that's his thing no rko yes out of nowhere. You haven't been to madison square garden if you were there i would have seen you.