The dagger algorithm aims to provide a more principled solution to the imitational and distributional Shi problem. The idea in dagger is to actually run the policy in the real world see which states it visits and ask humans to label those States. The goal is to collect data in such a way that P Pi Theta can actually learn from the data it's trained on. The basic version of dagger works like this and that's the version that you will all be implementing in your homework. It's a very simple algorithm to implement if you can get those labels. It can actually get up to fly pretty reliably through a forest dodging trees. experience and they can continuously self-improve and get better and better in principle exceeding the performance of humans now in order to start thinking about that we have to introduce some terminology and notation. We have to actually Define what it is that we want if our goal is no longer just to imitate but we want to do something else. In general we can have arbitrary cost on States and actions and those can Define arbitrary control tasks like not being eaten by tigers or reaching a desired destination. thing you actually want like reaching your destination or avoiding a car accident and then use those with more the more powerful reinforcement learning algorithms. In future weeks, we'll cover more of the powerful algorithms that we'll be covering in the next few weeks. We'll also cover how to use these algorithms to help you get what you want in the real world. Back to the page you came from. Follow us on Twitter @CNNOpinion and @cnnOpinION. We'd like to hear from you. Humans need to provide data for imitation learning which is sometimes fine but deep learning works best when the data is very plentiful. If the if the algorithm can collect data autonomously then we can be in that regime where deep Nets really Thrive. The other thing is that humans are not good at providing some kinds of actions so humans might be pretty good at specifying whether you should go left or right on a hiking trail but not so good at controlling a quadcopter through a remote control. If you want to control a giant robotic spider well good luck finding a human who can operate that.