CASEY RODRIGUEZ: Theorems: A sequence converges to x if and only if the limit as n goes to infinity of the absolute value of xn minus x goes to 0. We're going to prove it by introducing limsup and liminf, because these are also two important objects that arise in analysis. So let's get to the definition of these guys. Theorem: Every bounded sequence does have a convergent subsequence. And we have to throw in this bounded part, because there are sequences that don't have any convergence. Binomial theorem says that [? for all ?] [? N, the ?] natural numbers, x, y in R, x plus y raised to the n is equal to the sum from k equals 0 to n of n choose k. We'll use a different inequality to get a little bit of a different limit. We want to prove limit as n goes to infinity of p to the 1 over n equals 1. And we'll use 3 for number that we'll show converges to 0. we've only defined what it means to take a real number to an integer power, but-- and n-th roots. So using that, we can then define how totake a real numbers to a rational power. You don't need the exponential and the logarithm to make sense of a positive real number. So in summary, the liminf of 1/n, which is the inf-- the limit as n goes to infinity of the inf of this set, is equal to 0. converges to 0, which implies that. 1/n is an element of the set that's bigger than or equal to everything else in the set. If you have a set that contains an element which is an upper bound for the set, then that has to be the supremum. So this supremum is equal to 1/N. So as n goes to infinity, the limit of the supremUM here, which equals the limit as n go to infinity of1/n, equals 0. The limit as n goes to infinity of 2 over n minus 1 is 0. Square root of that also converges to 0. So this sequence, which is bounded, has a convergent subsequence. Now, not other and are equal to the limit of the original sequence. But that's not just a one-way street. It's a two-ways street. If the limsup equals the liminf, then the original. sequence converges. And we saw here that in-- on display, that the lim Sup and the lim Inf don't equal each other. And that completes the proof. all sequences have convergent subsequences. For example, if you look at the sequence x sub n equals n, that will not have any convergent. subsequences, because any subsequence of that has to be unbounded. And we know that a convergent sequence is bounded. So this is for this direction-- namely, that convergence implies the limsup equals the liminf. And that will give us the proof of this Bolzano-Weierstrass theorem. And I think that's all of the remarks I want to say. are going to be certain limits, so it's not clear that they exist at all to begin with. But we'll show that they always do exist. We define limsup x sub n. And the liminf is similar, except it's now with infs. So I want to show that there's something converging to the limit as n goes to infinity of the a sub n's. And we show that by proving that these two sequences have these monotonicity. properties. on hold just for a second, and now prove a very simple theorem that, if A and B are subsets of real numbers, A, B, both not equal to the empty set, and is A subset of B-- so also need to be bounded. So if we take two non-empty subsets, such that [INAUDIBLE] bounded and A is a subset of A, and the conclusion is that the inf of B is less than or equal to A, then that increases the sup. So the sup of a smaller set is smaller than the Sup of the bigger set. And that inequality reverses for infs. The inf of the smaller. set is bigger than orequal to the Inf of the larger set. the n. Then, if I am looking at this set x sub n, n bigger than or equal to k, and writing-- instead of x sub N, let me just write what it is, minus 1 to the n. So what is this set? This is just a set consisting of two elements, 1 and minus 1. And therefore, the sup of this set is just 1. Now if I change all these sups to infs, then the inf of thisSet is going to be the inf, which is just minus 1, and therefore, we also get-- OK? So the limsup is 1. The liminf is minus 1 for this set. set, is just the limit as n goes to infinity of 0 equals 0, all right. So the limsup of 1/n equals 0. The liminf equals 0 as well. Now, what's the difference between these two sequences? What's the property that one holds, but the other doesn't? This is a convergent sequence and this one is not. And we'll see this is a general fact, that if we have a converge sequence, then the lim Sup and the liminf equal each. to these two numbers, which may or may not be the same. OK? So the reason this is so powerful and so strong is that it-- to get your hands on something, it doesn't require you to show something as strong as showing there is a sequence converging to that. So first, take a sequence approaching-- so that the values are approaching that-- the outputs are approaching the maximum. Then you could pass to a subsequence, which actually does converge to something by this theorem, and proceed in that way. to a sub n sub k minus 1 plus 1. OK? And here, if you like, we didn't define what n sub 0 is, so-- so really, we're only interested in the n sub 1, n sub 2. But for the sake of this whole thing making sense for all integers k, with n sub0 being defined to be 0-- OK? That's just the first case that we dealt with. So we obtain this subsequence x sub nSub k that's sandwiched in between this subsequences of a's and minus 1 over k.