This week we'll look at the super magic formula. The formula is a compaction of a lot of math. We'll use it to derive a general formula for something moving on something that's moving. The class will also work on the spider problem and the Frisbee problem. The course is free and open to the public. Use the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on MIT Open Courseware. For more information about MIT open courseware, visit MIT opencourseware at ocw.mit.edu. The Machinery I provided you is powerful enough to solve pretty much any kinematics problem because it's based purely on Geometry angular velocity is a kind of a madeup concept that just simplifies the math and it's kind of intuitive stuff is rotating Theta Dot multiplied by you know the Le lever arm right gives you a velocity. The velocity of the frame doesn't mean anything unless I give you a reference point so points have velocities frames have angular velocity good points of accelerations frames haveangular accelerations. This what is the English statement here it is the angular of velocity frame B with respect to frame a right okay so we saw that for the first time now a little bit on the low of angular velocity that you've seen in previous classes but we we Plunge in anymore. If a frame's rotating some point different points will have different velocities so yeah a frame can have a velocity but doesn't really mean much and you tell me which point in the frame you're referring to right look this thing is a frame. If I said look I'm standing at this right I'm going to rotate about my vertical axis and then do this my hands up here right but if I rotate my hand first and oh that did the same thing but you know what I mean angles don't add up right. But infinite decimal angles do add up you remember this you did this in physics. If I rotate about one axis a certain amount 30° and then rotate about another axis 30° then the sequences do actually add up. In the last class I revealed to you this magic formula I said if you have a vector let's call it n and you want to take its derivative with respect to the frame a now if you the way we did it was we would rewrite in in terms of the basis vectors of frame a right. We introduced the the velocity and then the next thing we did last last in the lastclass was I revealed the magic formula. We can rewrite this as what so um first of all L is a scalar so there are a couple of routes we can go here okay. but you need this correction term which is very beautiful done done okay so this was the magic formula that I introduced in the last class how would we go about proving this anybody yeah do the math how would I go about doing it. Here's what we'll do let's prove it let's consider a frame a by the way you notice I will always show frames with this little circle a saying that it's a frame and with a little wiggly line pointing to it. You can always assume if I have a capital A that little A1 and little A2 are the basis vectors in b. yeah let's Express exactly we're going to express B so here's what we're looking for we'reLooking for a d by DT of N and look n is expressed in terms of B1 and B2 that's really not nice we need expressed interms of A1 and A2 to do it old way the long way right. Theta do B3 cross product with u 1 + B1 U1 sorry B1 + U2 B2 sorry right and if you do the math does it come out to be these two terms yes or no yes. I'm not doing it because I want you guys to stay awake in class I don't want to just blindly copy down the notes here right. you're confused that is fantastic because that's a symptom of something else and I'd like to surface it and help you figure it out any confusion about this anything. So far I've used these words coris and all that I kind of called them out without telling you a lot more about them right so what we're going to do now is take a break in the following way I'm going to show you some videos showing you the coris force when I'm when you're done with these videos. let's do that so let's imagine I'm spinning a basketball on my finger I could never do that but let's just imagine I's doing it right. The room the world the Earth is a frame the basketball is another frame the kind of the U you know you guys need to be like Neo in Matrix have you seen that movie right it's very very important if you understand Matrix algebra you need to see Matrix all right so go see Matrix and you know how Neil kind of you know he when he's totally you know after Lawrence fishburns you know kind of trained him Etc. Yeah okay using um frames uh using angle of velocity so the problem was we have the ground and the spider. With those three parameters we're going to capture the blocation of the spider but we're using three parameters but in the end the SP spider is only going to have two degrees of freedom right but that's okay because when you get the velocity of theSpider it'll have only two components when get the acceleration only have two components so it'll work itself out what are the three param the three parameters are u v and L the way we're doing our geometry. can kind of do it that way but the simple way to do it is to simp well you know it doesn't matter we can just write this as B take the whole term d by DT of lb1 plus what quick hm I'm hearing a hesitant murmur not the yeah I was mumbling something a moment ago I'll tell you what I mean what I was trying to say uh cross lb1 what is a Omega B so we can rewrite a Omega b as Theta dot B3. What happens with things like hurricanes and we'll show you I'll show some videos later if we have time is. What is the force that the astronaut feels you know or what force must the astronaut exert in order to move in a straight line with respect to a spaceship or a space shuttle or something? That's the question we seek to answer and what we're going to do is basically generalize the Frisbee problem and the way we're gonna do it is by looking at the Coriolis effect. Water rotates in One Direction or not in the northern hemisphere another Direction on the southern hemisphere is that right is that valid yes or no why not yeah it's turns out that in that scale in fact there is a Coriolis effect but the slight deviation angle is so slight it's like a fractions of a degree per meter at that scale that it doesn't build up enough to really impact the direction in which the vortex takes place. The vortex is created far more by asymmetries in the sink or by rotation that was created earlier that can of remained right. Theta Dot and an l dot term get it then there is a deflection in the B2 Direction in the way we've written it now I'll give you the general formula and you know B2 what it is ETC it become more clear any questions about coris by the way in the last class I told you this anecdote I said that artilleries artillery guns right in the 1700s 1800s um they would have to compensate for directionality because of the coris effect it turns out that that is true. rpq so this is the velocity version of the magic formula and I'm sure you'll admit that I did nothing particularly profound in deriving this okay and then that handout the typed handout that you you hopefully downloaded and read from the web you will see this EXP expand it out for you okay so that means that if you have a frame a which is stationary and something's moving on frame B then the velocity of that thing on frame A is simply the Velocity of uh a point on frameB with respect to frame B. yeah sorry and plus this thing okay we'll end now because Professor Socrates needs to take over this is it this is correct acceleration of P acceleration of Q with respect to B Oiler coris centripedal and you know why it doesn't go to zero because I'm not taking a Omega B cross a omeg B. I'm taking a omega B cross this whole term which is at 90° to a OmegaB got it got it? Yeah sorry and Plus this thingOkay we'llend now because professor Socrates need to takeover.