Marketing is about four things creating communicating delivering and exchanging value. The first thing is to identify an unmet need that consumers have. The key message in our advertising is going to talk about quality. We have to provide proof in our commercials in our print ads on our website. We need to identify we need to determine a need that is not being met in the market so it's not like what are some of the problems that they have when cooking or baking and what do you think they're going to say food sticks to the pot. for something to be of a good value it doesn't need to be a low price it could be a high price but it's a very high quality and it has a lot of benefits do you agree who could explain that further good tell us your name theresa bad um i mean would you consider that clothing yes go ahead like so like i find people saying like buying a pair of jeans and zara is expensive because there's like 65 but they last longer than buying these at all maybe unless unless. marketing is about creating communicating delivering and exchanging value the way that we communicate the value is through the brand. The brand is what's wrapped around the product so all products in a given category have the same generic functionality which is transportation. What makes one car different from another is the brand so every car is wrapped in a brand and we're going to talk more about perceptual maps where our brand is positioned in the marketplace relative to our competitors. We could look at that through market research to understand the perceptions that consumers have for our brand importantly relative to other brands. You're not going to be able to have a commercial that's going to resonate with everybody in your target audience or more specifically with your target market so he said all men so when you're showing a commercial do you think that those men that are seeing the commercial between the ages of 18 and 29 want to see somebody in the commercial who's 60 or 65 that's probably not something that's gonna resonate with them. A thousand can be statistically significant a thousand to fifteen hundred but in most categories in the united states it doesn't need to be more than that. being met so what would be a good example how about shampoo i know right but an unmet need is a shampoo that is safe for hair that's what that's dry or that that's curly oily that's perm. The way we identify the need is how guess guess guess oh you're not they're not good at guessing that's not good for exam day you got to be good guessers supply and demand right the way we're going to determine the need  is through marketing research. complete that questionnaire now if 350 million people complete the questionnaire that's called the what census a census is when a hundred percent of the population participates in the research only the government does that they're really the only one that could afford to do that. What we're trying to do is get a representative random sample from that population so it doesn't need to be 350 million how many does it need toBe 349 million 300 million 200 million what do you think a quarter of what's the number how many is that?