The configuration of a particle is given by, or described by, a wave function. In 3D, the wave function would be a function of all three positions x, y and z. All reasonable, or non stupid, functions psi of x are equally reasonable as wave functions. There's no primacy in wave functions or in states. Some wave functions are more equal than others. Probability is basically 0. It's nice and smooth. It converges to 0 infinity. The superposition principle. If there are two possible configurations the system can be in, which in quantum mechanics means two different wave functions that could describe the system. In a quantum mechanical system, something with short wavelength is something that carries large momentum. This is a state which is equal to all others in the sense that it's a perfectly reasonable wave function, but it's more equal because it has a simple interpretation. The probability that I measure the momentum to be h is h is 0, correct? But I can always consider a superposition which is 1/10 over 2 eikikx plus the momentum. And these are going to turn out to contain all information about the probability of the system. Fourier: Any function can be expressed as a superposition of wave functions with a definite momentum. We know that given a wave, a plane wave e to the iks, how do I get h bar k out of it? If I take a state, x0, which is equal to the state of x, this is a state that has definite momentum h bar. And I can write this as p e to ikx. So first check the units off, what are the units of h bar? Here's the super easy to remember. a definite position? AUDIENCE: Delta. PROFESSOR: A delta function, exactly. So I claim that any function psi of x can be expanded a sum over all states with a definite position. So is this true? Is it true that I can take any function and expand it in a superposition of delta functions? Absolutely. In 2D, this is a perfectly good vector, right? Now here's a to the derivative being continuous. That's the optional problem 8 on problem set 2. question I want to ask you. Is that a superposition? Yeah. I mean every vector can be written as the sum of other vectors, right? And it can be done in an infinite number of ways. So in particular we often find it useful to pick a basis and say look, I know what I mean by the vector y, y hat. It's a unit vector in this direction. And now I can ask, given that these are my natural guys, the guys I. want to attend to, is this a. superposition of x and y? Or is it just x or y? Well, that's asuperposition. Whereas x hat itself is not. Professor: Which particle has a larger momentum? Think about it, but don't say it out loud. If it has higher momentum, what do you just intuitively expect to know about its energy? It's probably higher. So this is an important little lesson that you probably all know from optics and maybe from core mechanics. Shorter wavelength thing, higher energy. Usually higher energy as well. That's a very good question. The question here is look, there's two different things you can be talking about. of length l, 0 outside of that region. Which is closer to true? f has a single well defined wavelength for the most part. Or f is made up of a wide range of wavelengths? Think it to yourself. Ponder that one for a minute. OK, so learning happens. That was an empirical test. So does anyone want to defend this view? Sure, bring it. It's closer totrue. This doesn't have to be exact. And now and I want you to vote. of sines and cosines, do you ever get a discontinuity? No. Do you get something whose derivative is discontinuous? No, you don't. So it's going to take an infinite number of sine and cosine to reproduce that little kink at the edge. So how would you ever reproduce a thing with a discontinued thing? Well, you'd need some infinite sum of sines & cosines where there's some technicality about the infinite limit being singular. Quantum mechanics professor: Average age is the sum over all possible ages of the number of people with that age times the age divided by the total number. Professor: The average need not be an observable value. Average value of the square of ages is, well, I'm going to do exactly the same thing. It's just a squared, right? 14 squared, 15 squared, 16 square, 16 squares, 16 squared. And so that's all I've written here. But notice that I can write this in a nice way. That's just the probability that any given person has a particular age. Is a squared equal to the expected value of a squared? PROFESSOR: Right, in general no, not necessarily. For example, suppose we have a Gaussian centered at the origin. How do you pronounce the last notation that you wrote? Good, that's a good question. Now we have pure numbers and pure probabilities per unit of space and time. We can either write the probability of writing it as the standard deviation of the distribution, or we can write it in this notation. The uncertainty is the square root of the standard deviations squared. Different probability distributions are going to give me different delta a's. The average value of some x, given a probability distribution on x where x is a continuous variable, is going to be equal to the integral. If you see me dropping an exponent or a factor of 2, please, please tell me. All of that is just straight up classical probability theory. And I just want to write this in the notation of quantum mechanics. And this has a different flavor, and we'll see what that is later. couple of ways to improve this notation. One way is to write the expected value of x in the state psi, so you write psi as a subscript. Another notation that will come back-- you'll see why this is a useful notation later in the semester-- is this notation, psi. And we will give meaning to this notation later, but I just want to alert you that it's used throughout books, and it means the same thing as what we're talking about. OK? Yeah? of measuring momentum p. And that's the value p. We're summing over all p's. This is the probability, and that's actually p. So the Fourier transform is a function of the momentum in the same way that the wave function is afunction of the position, right? It's norm squared defines the probability. And then the p on the right is this p, because we're computing the expected value of p, or the averagevalue of p. That make sense? Cool. In quantum mechanics, p is represented by an operator, it's represented by the specific operator h bar upon I derivative with respect to x. And this is a declaration. OK? It is simply a fact. And when they say it's a fact, I'm simply going to declare it. And I've given you some reason to believe that this isn't totally insane. But I didn't derive anything. I gave you no derivation whatsoever of the relationship between d dx and the momentum. Noether's theorem underlies an enormous amount of classical mechanics, but also of quantum mechanics. To every symmetry is associated a conserved quantity. Noether, a mathematician, did all sorts of beautiful stuff in algebra, looked at the problem and was like I don't even know what it means in classical mechanics. So she went back to classical mechanics and, from first principles, came up with a good definition of momentum, which turns out to underlie the modern idea of conserved quantities and symmetries. The potential breaks that translational symmetry. Translations in x are generated by derivative with respect to x. But through Noether's theorem translations are associated to conservation of momentum. So you shouldn't be so worried about the potential breaking the symmetry. The potential breaks the translationally invariant symmetry of the [? system ?] The potential is not translationally invariant in the same way as the classical particle. It breaks the translational symmetry of the potential. It breaches the translational symmetry of the potential. Translate by L takes a function of x and translates it by L, but leaves it otherwise identical. F of x minus L can be written as a Taylor expansion around the point x. The point -- if you have some function like this, and it has a peak at 0, then after the translation, the peak is when x is equal to L. But this is a series that you should recognize, a particular Taylor series for a particular function. It's a Taylor Expansion for the AUDIENCE: Exponential. eyes, of foot, of eye, of brow. I see the antique pens do but express the beauty that you master now. So are all their praises but prophecies of this, our time. All you prefiguring. But though they had but diving eyes, they had not skill enough you're worth to sing. Your praise shall still find room, even in the eyes of all posterity. So no judgment arise till you yourself judgment arise. You live in this and dwell in lover's eyes.