Michael Short: How do you know what, let's say, your dose distance relationship is? And how do you calculate all this stuff? Short: In these sorts of experiments, if you want to know how much more radioactive is one place than another, you have to take a background count. Short: We're going to be measuring today, which is why I have my big bag of burnt bananas. These are the ashes of roughly 50 pounds of bananas charred to a crisp at about 250 Fahrenheit. dose and distance or measured activity and distance? Yeah, Luke. AUDIENCE: [INAUDIBLE] r cubed. MICHAEL SHORT: Close. It's, let's say, the measured activity would be proportional to 1 over r squared. Does anyone know why this formula would break down? What happens to our solid angle or our approximation for ourSolid angle is kind of the analog to regular old angle, except in 3D. So instead of looking at things in radians, this has the unit of what's called steradians. One banana contains a minuscule but measurable amount of radioactivity. To boost your confidence on any sort of radiation measurement, boost your signal strength or to boost your counting time. We've concentrated the ashes of 50 pounds of bananas in here to boost our signal strength. We'll take a look at the spectrum in a minute. We're not going to see anything while we're here. And we just hit the gammas anyway. We were playing around with cobalt 60 lines and a cesium 137 line. There's no better concentrated source of smoking radioactivity than a smoke shop. The background in the case of the smoke shop just the area right outside of it. In New Hampshire, the background count's quite a bit higher, because there's a lot of granite deposits. There's a little overlap on my shorts and longs. That helps me do QA on things. And if I run two standards, I'll check the concentrations from one standard to the other. That's another little QA thing. What else we got? know. Most of the Boston area is 21. But once you leave Boston-- MICHAEL SHORT: It varies. I don't think it is where I'm-- from Swampscott. But that's kind of up on the commuter rails. You don't want to go to Swampsc Scott. At any rate, I would think that, OK, it's 21. You can buy them. It's still late-stage. it's like town-to-town. But you have to be 18 to smoke. Michael Short: How long would you actually have to bring a detector in and count in order to be sure that there's any sort of measurable difference? Short: From Poisson statistics, you can say that the standard deviation of that count rate is actually just the square root of the count rate divided by time. The more error you allow, the shorter time you have to count for, he says. Short: As you increase the counting rate, it takes less time to distinguish your source. increase your counting time. By counting for longer you can decrease your standard deviation. Use this formula to estimate how much time you'd need to count for an extra 28 minutes to nail that net count rate with 95% confidence. Let's say what happens if you go in there and you get a 100% rate of 100 counts per minute? That would do that would surprise me. You'd only have to count. for an additional 28 minutes. That would only surprise me, but I believe the homework doesn't actually tell what we don't know. If you go plus or minus 1 sigma away from your true average right here, you've filled in 68% of the area under this normal distribution. 3 sigma is getting towards 99 point-- what was the number, again-- I think it's 6.5%. And then so on, and so on,. There's actually societies called 6 sigma societies. And the way that they get their name is we're so confident of things we can predict them to 6. sigma, which is some 99 point. Michael Short: We have numbers for C b and t b, but not C g and t g. Short: How do we relate t g and C g? Well, let's start with the easy stuff, right? What can we cancel, or square, or whatever? Just somebody yell it out. Cool. So we'll take that expression and substitute in everything we can. So 0.05 C n equals 2 sigma. And there's our sigma expression, which I'll rewrite right here. Cobalt 60 gives off two gamma rays per second. Activity is measured in disintegrations, not in number of gamma rays emitted. Tungsten 186 activates into tungsten 187, which has a half-life of 23.9 hours. The value of that actual surface integral gives you the real solid angle of a detector. It's the super simple one if you just know the area of something and you know that you're kind of far away. But again, whenever possible, use the exact formula. per disintegration. So you've got to know what material you're looking at in order to know how many gamma or how many betas or more that you're going to get. Who here has heard of this uncertainty in quadrature before? There's a couple folks. OK. The idea here is that, again, if you just add the errors up, you're probably overestimating the error and selling yourself short. In that case, if there's no questions, let's go do this. a couple thousand volts across it. When a gamma ray goes into it, it makes some electron hole pairs. So you collect the current from that, and you get a little pulse of current. The height of the pulse tells you how many hole pairs you had, and then back it up to what the energy or your gamma was. That works fine if you collect all of the gamma energy. You don't always quite do that. Anyway, so that's how-- You all can scooch up. There's not a whole lot to see in there. NAA is good for rare earth elements, which are hard to measure by other methods. By picking out various rare earths and the ratios, NAA can help identify where things are from in the world. NAA's Mike Short takes the audience on a tour of MIT's nuclear reactor. "I've got steel toast. If I miss the toe, I'd probably break my-- I don't want to think about it," he says. "We'll see what we got. We'll look at what comes in, and I might veto some things" how long has that been going? Half a day-- less than that. Anyway, so this is a sample of quartz that was irradiated next to the reactor. You guys are going to do shorts in like a month-- did you bring your samples? MICHAEL SHORT: We're getting them. I think this ran six hours. And it's just a little tiny piece. And count it, I'll also have whatever elements are in the vial on the thing. And so then I take a couple of samples, I throw them in a lead pig-- so I've got a whole bunch of these floating around. is these guys are going to calculate what's in their samples. Michael AMES: But that's not how I do NAA. MICHAEL SHORT: [INAUDIBLE] We're doing a simplified version. OK. So you've run a standard, which means a material that how much tungsten is in it or how much a whole mess of other things are. So I'll give you a background spectra. I will provide the efficiency for this geometry, which is pretty poorly defined. samples. But we'll figure out how many samples we'll run. MICHAEL SHORT: It's one per person. [INAUDIBLE] MICHAEL AMES: That's a lot of shorts. In pairs, right? MICHAEL ShORT: Yeah. So I'll show you how the shorts get run. So when we run your shorts, we'll running your samples and we'llrun standards, and then you can do the comparative method. Or, if you feel like it, you can doing the other method. lake sediments. Other analytical methods have gotten a lot better, and so they've kind of caught up to NAA, and you don't need a reactor to run those. The environmental side of this has kind of quieted down a lot. But it's still useful for a bunch of things. I also work in the NCORE group. So that's a lot of my time, rather than just this lab. Practical things-- let's go take a look at a couple other labs. that looks at zinc deficiencies, and fingernails and toenails will give you a good record of how much zinc you've had over the last week, or month, or whatever-- depend where you cut the nails. And so I was going to get a couple of hundred African children's toenail. That didn't happen. But I did analyze my own toen nails. Well, if you went to somebody who was a little suspicious of you, asking for toenailed is a lot easier than asking for a blood sample. Because people would give up toenailing-- it's not a big deal. This is some soil from Montana next to a mine, so it's nicely contaminated with some metals. This is my IAEA mercury and hair standard. And this is kind of what everybody uses for standards. And you just kind of have a whole collection of them. And depending on what elements you're looking for, you try to mix and match them so you cover what you want without having to run five or six of them, says Michael Ames. And so that's how I do the comparative method. The experiment we're doing is basically change reactor power by half a megawatt. To actually do this experiment, we need two licensed people in here, one at least has a senior reactor operator. The only way you can actually do these manipulations are if you're in a program that needs you to actually operate the reactor. We'll show you the proper way to make the entries as a trainee on console. And then we'll go ahead and then do the actual movement itself. If you don't feel comfortable doing something at any time, let us know. Two MIT students test neutrons not leading to fission in a nuclear reactor. The reactor is controlled by a shim blade controller and a regulating rod. The blades can only move at the exact same rate at all times. The regulating rod can drive outwards to increase the amount of neutrons making the reactor power go up. It's not a big factor as it normally would be after doing one of these lowering reactor power. The power would actually want to go down on it's own, so you would have to do a lot of re-shims. power level is based on a chart that we create. So it's not showing you megawatts, or kilowatts, or anything like that. And that current is then converted into megawatts and so forth. You're going to be bringing a record up to 1. Megawatt and since it's linear, it'll be double that-- so 17.1. Now, you want to be careful when you raise reactor power. So when you start to add power to the reactor by raising a regulating rod, you don't want to keep raising it until you reach your value. The reactor is on autocontrol. When we do these manipulations, the reactor operator is going to take manual control. That'll cause an alarm to come in. And this will only happen for the first time. And that should be the only time you hear this alarm, because we'll leave it on. The last person will make an announcement that we're done with power manipulations. We'll do that at the end-- is she'll take Manual control of the reactor, and she'll answer it. where it started, the 13.42 inches out of the bottom of the core. It might not make it all the way back up to [INAUDIBLE]. FRANK WARMSLEY: It'll be close. Compensate with the reg rod if you need to. 30.8. OK. And that's the end of the exercise. We'll be back in a few minutes with the results of the test. We hope to see you on "Larry King Live" next week.