HMG-CoA synthase is a key enzyme in central metabolism responsible for making the five carbon building blocks from which all sterols, such as cholesterol and steroid hormones are made. HMG- coa synthase catalyzes the following reaction: It takes acetyl-Coa, which we're going to encounter a lot in the central metabolism, and combines it with acetoacetyl- CoA, another thioester. In this process, the one molecule of CoA is lost, and we get the product hydroxymethylglutaryl CoA. The reaction will start by forming this thioester between the acetoacetyl-CoA carbons and the cysteine in the active site of the enzyme. The reaction first involves activation of the cy Steine, is deprotonated, and then cysteines can attack the thioesters and form a tetrahedral intermediate. The next step is to form a carbon-carbon bond between this methyl group here and this carbon of the carbonyl of the other substrate. Then the depotonate the methyl from the acetyl, moiety here, and generate an enolate. enolate is going to attack this carbonyl. Once the enolate is formed, it's going to attacks this carbonium. This oxygen is then going to start developing a negative charge, which needs to be compensated by a general acid. And it looks like this histidine 233 is close enough to donate a proton and generate a hydroxyl group here. All right. So let's try to write a mechanism based on what we just said. Here is the thioester between cysteine 111 and acetyl. And let's show the general base. It'sGoing to be glutamate 79. energy contributes to this reaction. Both of the substrates need to bind to the enzyme. In order to do that, they need to be desolvated, that is to remove all the water molecules that surround them. The binding energy also manifests when we're stabilizing, for example, the transition state of the reaction relative to the binding of the substrate. So if, for. example, for our tetrahedral intermediate that will form here, if that transition state or the tetra.hedral intermediate is stabilized more than the substrate, then the reaction is accelerated and. proceeds towards that pass. a same kind of chemistry in multiple steps over and over again. The advantage of having a coenzyme A thioester is that it may provide some additional binding energy. A much smaller thiol like the one we just saw will not have that kind of interaction available. The resonance that we observe in oxygen esters is almost completely absent in thioesters. And this fact makes the thiaesters less stable and therefore, more reactive. This sums up Problem 2 of Problem Set 4. I hope you now have a much better feel of how we can use crystal structured data to propose a reasonable mechanism for enzyme catalyzed reactions. experimental work and evidence. The study of the effects of drugs on the human body was conducted in the 1970s and 1980s. The results of the study were published in a book called "The Effects of Drugs on the Human Body" The book was published by Oxford University Press in 1989. It was the first of its kind to be published in the U.S. and is published by Simon & Schuster, a division of Simon and Schuster Inc. in New York. The book is available in hardback and paperback.