okay folks let's get started how's everybody doing pretty good Santa Claus has come to town and you know Santa does with naughty kids Hees them finals he gives them finals. He gives them very evil finals is what he does okay so look out for Santa Claus he's really a really a bad guy uh let's see let's think about a couple of things in terms of announcements and we have a couple surprises today one of which is standing in front of you with all this on and there's more surprises as well. The final exam is in this room on Monday at 9:30 a.m. so uh get here in plenty of time remember to position yourselves with seating as I said before. Heather started go for SES work almost identically Amino a TR tight changing their structure when they S1 then there are elect shs at the AC as theaction next [Applause] theide elak without ACH so one piece is bound to it the get set free has to act next toag where it started waiting for a pepti chain to go and start all again. Glycogen phosphor is U an enzyme that's regulated in several ways. It exists in two forms it exists in the glycogenosphor a form which is the form that has the phosphate on that people describe as the more active and it has the form without the phosphate known as the glycogens phosphor B that is less active. Def phosphorilation involves a kise or phosphatase right the r&t involve allosteric affectors okay all right okay so that's uh where we start now um. protein we've used the term G protein before to refer to proteins that bind to guanosine nucleotides this is not a g protein it's just holding on to phosphoprotein phosphatase phosph protein phosphat enzyme. Epinephrine is bound by the cell surface receptor all right so we've got an active pp1 and we're going to ultimately convert it over here on the other side to an inactive form this is the most active form all right well and again we're looking in muscle what happens is when we have epinephrine being synthesized we see that this protein GM gets phosphorilated. put them in the same tube I've got purified pure glycogen phosphor. I've also got Pure glycogen synthes I put them together in a tube and I want to see what happens I add glucose and something very odd happens. The first person that answers that gets a free metabolic Melodies calendar for 2012 are they different active sites in the the same nope what' you say def phosphorilation come by and get your a calendar okay this Santa Claus is here okay all right. There are a variety of what are called glycogen storage diseases and these diseases arise as a result of efficiency of certain enzymes either in that pathway or related to that pathway okay so um there are several of these voner disease uh this one lacks a glucose 6 phosphatase and affects liver and kidney and what happens to the glycogen. Pomp's disease it's lacking alpha1 14 glucosidase okay and my this is not going here um the one I think is the most interesting is actually mcardle's disease gunite. Liver has a normal enzyme right and so when the muscles start running out of energy what happens oh wow we need some glucose they can't get glucose from breaking down of glycogen but the liver sure as he can do that and the Cory cycle kicks in. Cory cycle is a a backwards thing to the lactate that you talked about but it's the fact that the phosphor in the liver is perfectly normal that makes sense. You don't know how much you might make from your knowledge here okay so knowledge is power knowledge may be money so you might meet some exciting people from having these things too. only the muscle cells are lacking the glycogen phosphor. A person lacking glycogenosphor in their muscle loses ability to do strenuous exercise. The person with McArdle disease sees ADP levels go high and then it falls meaning that the cells are catching up and making ATP now for that last chance at a CD my question to you is what's making this possible it's something we learn during the term something we learned a very important process that allows these people who have this disease to lead a fairly normal life.  heard before okay so um you guys know I like the Beatles I write a lot of stuff to Beatles music and you know the Beatles were like this but I really think they should have been like this. What succeeded The Beatles was this group called The Beggs anybody hear the bgs oh you heard the BS okay Night Fever Night Fever right okay so anyway and what succeeded the bGS was a really important group known as right the back street boy what a group huh and of course what succeeded them we know of course was um yeah low moment in music I think but if you thought you've seen low moments in music You Ain't Seen Nothing Yet. the first song that we think about is the fact that how many people in here are really sick and tired of that Sunshine there we go. The bar is very high very high okay are we going to Belt it out I can't hear you all right all right let's go with it it's called BB Wonderland Heather take us no we're all starting all right ready one Anna two mil Hall dirty and they gety he walks to and not louder [Music] started MP3's got added to my iPod some sometimes were and exams when the Cur turned out I don't think it's so my scores are too low sliding by finally there's examination on December.