Professor Donald Kagan: We were examining Sparta, the most important, I think, of the early poleis. In short, the average Spartan did not ever speak in the assembly, it appears. So it's not a democratic assembly, even though every single citizen is there, if he wants to be. Let me turn now to the ephors. These, according to Spartan tradition, were invented somewhat late in the development of the Spartan constitution. When we see them they are usually engaged in dealing with foreign policy. mentioning that that assembly--you want to distinguish that assembly from what I'll describe shortly about the Athenian Assembly. In this assembly, it is true that all adult male Spartans were participants, and let me also say that they came to the meeting dressed in their military uniform. When a question was put to the Spartans, the way they responded was by shouting and banging on their shields. Whereupon, the presiding official would try to determine which side had the loudest noise. It's like a voice vote in one of our own meetings, only a little bit more colorful. Most issues that came before the assembly were probably infrequent, says Thucydides. But when it involved something fundamental like war and peace or alliances, then they would have to go to the assembly to get their approval, he says. "My guess is that it would have been wildly reckless and therefore never done for the ephors not to going to the gerousia first," he adds. "The idea was to sort of have a representation of the ordinary Spartan to carry on the functions that I have talked about" Aristotle tells us that they in fact were just any Joe Spartan, that they were ordinary people, not distinguished in any way. Dorian's versus Achaeans still seems to have some meaning to the Greeks. It suggests that that division among the Greek peoples hadn't died down yet and I think that's what's going on and that's the system that was the Spartan way of life. Nothing could be greater as a contrast to this way of thinking than the way that the Athenians will develop when they go through their growth as a polis. Sparta became the first state to be in command, or in control, or to be the leaders of a coalition of states. The Spartans gain a reputation of being--because they often fight against tyrants--they gain a reputation of being hostile to tyranny. Sparta is by far the strongest military force among the Greeks, but they are more than usual reluctant to fight, and they don't like to fight wars if they can avoid them. War, if you win, you are going to have booty; loot of some kind will come back into Sparta. An ancient alliance between the Spartans and their allies is called the Peloponnesian League. The Spartans took on other Greek states trying to establish their domination. They defeated the powerful and important state of Argos. Spartans are trying to claim union with the Achaeans not dominance over them. The League was formed around 570 B.C. and lasted until the end of the fifth century anyway, says Herodotus, the ancient Greek historian and author of "The Histories of the Ancient Greeks" It's a very important state for the Spartans, not just because it's the neighbor right to the north of them, but because remember what I told you, if you want to get to Mycenae from Sparta you can't go across those mountains. So, its strategic importance is very great. The Spartans got into this war with Tegea and they claimed to have discovered the bones of the great Homeric hero, Orestes and taken it away. Also, there was a legend that maybe they propagated that showed up in some poetry we have. According to Thucydides, the fear of the Helots was at the core of it all. If we take our whole army, leave town, go three days march away, how do we know we'll find anybody alive when we get back? That's always on their minds, although they don't take place every day, take place very sparsely, but they keep happening so that the fear is never irrational. To that is added the permanent enmity of Argos, which never gives up the idea of returning to the great days of Pheidon. The city is Athens; the region in which they live is Attica; the people are Athenians. Everybody who is a citizen who lives in Attica is an Athenian, no matter if he lives sixty five or seventy miles away from the city. Their tradition, and this one is surely right, is that at an early time in their history, Attica became a refuge for people escaping what they would have regarded as the Dorian invasion. Some of the most important Athenians traced their ancestry to the Athenians who were there before the moon was created. Attica contained silver mines in the south of the peninsula, and that gave the state a source of income. The availability of that silver would turn out to be crucial at various moments in Athenian history. Just as it does elsewhere, it leads to new wealth and new class distinctions, which are now based not on birth but on wealth. We hear about Athenians divided into different classes, including the Eupatridae, the well-born, and hippeis, the cavalryman. Aristocratic implies means ruled by the best, and best in that time means simply best by birth. Nobody in Athens holds an office at this time, or as far as I can tell, at any time. In the year 632, an Athenian nobleman who had become famous because of his victory in an athletic contest. married the daughter of a very wealthy and powerful tyrant in Megara, right next door to Attica. Cylon, attempted a coup d'état trying to establish a tyranny in Athens. terms of the place where you sort of established your belonging. The phratres, because it was established by birth and tradition, was an aristocratic stronghold. The Greek religion chief jobs in religion, they were the government, because as early as we can tell that there was a regime after the legendary kings are gone, the council of the Areopagus is the number one governmental organization, you might call it. It's important though to realize that in these early days of the polis they probably had very had very strong ties to the aristocracy. Aristotle tells us that beginning in the early seventh century, the date he gives us, is 683 B.C. He tells us we are introduced to a new thing, magistrates are chosen from the aristocracy to do various jobs in the city. In Athens, the magistrates were called archons. The year after their archonship they automatically go into the areopagus and remain areopagites for life. They will be looking very carefully over the shoulders of the aristocratic archons whenever they are in power to see that they're not screwing up. they named the year after the leading archon, the leading magistrate of the state. Mesopotamian cities did the same thing. So that archon was called the archon eponymous, the one who gives his name to the state and was the most important. His responsibilities were mainly religious, but I should point out that all the archons, whatever else they did, every one of them also did justice, that is, they had courts to which people could come to get their quarrels settled. than a year. The only thing in town that has continuity, that can develop power and influence over a period of time, is the council of the Areopagus. Aristocracies love equality; equality among aristocrats, and then tremendous inequality between them and everybody else. Yalies are very nervous about anybody sticking his head up above the crowd, because the question is always why not me? You have high expectations of yourself and so sometimes unless you're invaded by later religious ideas that the Greeks didn't have, you's not humble, you're vying for honor. what we will see in the future is that men who are hippeis who are not necessarily aristocrats. At the bottom of the barrel we hear about people called thetes. They've always been around, they are the poor; they don't own land. They live at the mercy of chance; they work for other people. But now comes the new thing, people called zeugitai. What does it mean? It means yoke fellows. These were men who were sufficiently well off that they could own a team of oxen. opponents that he was defeated. The leader of the resistance was the family known as the Alcmaeonidae. They went up there, locked up Cylon and his supporters in the Acropolis, in a temple. They cut the cord and killed the Cylonians. That put an end to the Cylonian conspiracy but it brought something to AlcMAeonidae as well, a curse. They were declared accursed and driven from the city. Later on we will hear they're back again and they're very important. But the curse continues to be attached to the family.