Professor: angular momentum is just some geometric constant times the angular momentum. If you send an electron through a Stern Gerlach Apparatus, it always hits one of two spots. This is a different form of angular momentum, which is purely half integer, and we call that spin. The legacy of these little L equals 1/2 states, is that they represent an internal form of. angular momentum that only exists quantum mechanically, that you would have never noticed classically. Your support will help MIT OpenCourseWare continue to offer high quality educational resources for free. The value of a wave function must be equal to minus itself at some point. The energy depends on l but not on m in the energy eigenvalue equation. There's always a special point anytime you have a rotational symmetry around some particular point. So, the wave function, in fact, is non-zero, which is the physical thing is the distribution, which the physical norm is multiplied by 1.2pi to get a 0 at the origin. The origin is not the same as saying that little u has a 0, but it gets by 1 over 1 over r. to the very first lecture, and so, we'll do this in more detail, but I'm going to quickly tell you-- imagine take a magnet, a little, tiny bar magnet. In fact, well, imagine you take a little bar magnet with some little magnetization, and you send it through a region that has a gradient for magnetic field. If there's a gradient-- so you know that a magnet wants to anti-align with the nearby magnet, north-south wants to go to south-north. So, you can't put a force on the magnet, but if you have a gradient of a magnetic field, then one end a dipole-- one end of your magnet-- can feel a stronger effective torque then the other guy. And you can get a net force. Take an electron and send it through a magnetic field gradient. You want to see whether the electron is a little rotating thing or not. If it gets deflected, you will have measured the magnetic moment. The magnetic moment must be proportional to the angular momentum. But, the universe is rotationally invariant. So, in any direction if I measure the angular on this one-- this is also known as 1 over r dr squared r. And this is nothing other than L squared-- except for the factor of h bar upon i-- but if it's squared, it's minus 1 upon h bar squared. measured the magnetic moment, you'll have measured the angular momentum. If the electron weren't rotating, it would just go straight through. And so, the observation that the electron must carry some intrinsic form of angular momentum with one of two values, neither of which is 0, was actually an experimental observation-- quasi-experimental observation-- long before it was understood exactly how to connect this stuff. The intent of the experiment wasn't to solve-- AUDIENCE: No, no. The experiment was this-- there are the spectrum-- Well, I'll tell you what the experiment was in a minute. know of a fundamental particle. If super symmetry is true, then there must be a particle called a gravitino, which would be fundamental, and would have. spin 3/2, and four states, but that hasn't been observed, yet. So, we still need a reason for why the hydrogen system, quantum mechanically, is stable. We'll talk about that a little more when we talk about hydrogen, but it was observed and deduced from experiment before it was understood there was such a physical quantity. we're gonna talk about real, physical systems in three dimensions. And as we'll discover, it's basically the same as in one dimension, we just have to write down more symbols. But the content is all the same. So, the energy for this is p squared upon 2m, plus a potential, which is a function only of the radial distance. And along the way, we'll solve a toy model for hydrogen. And when you go through the equation, you get is minus minus some dimensionless energy, epsilon. guys cancel, right? 1 over r times dr. So, why is this a particularly useful form? We'll see that in just a minute. Any time you see a differential equation that has this form-- two derivatives, plus 1 over R a derivative-- you know you can play some game like this. You can do this sort of thing generally by rescaling r. And more, if you have a differential. equation that looks like that, that's something like a. differential equation with a derivative. over r? PROFESSOR: Oh shoot! Yes, that's supposed to be one of our-- Thank you. Yes, thank you for that typo correction. Thanks OK. So, anytime we have a system which is rotationally. invariant, we can write the energy operator in this fashion. And now, you see something really lovely, which is that this only depends on r. This depends on the angular coordinates, but only insofar. as it depends on L squared. Professor: "I'm going to do it in an abridged form, and it's a good thing for recitation" "So, in this spherical well, what's the potential here? So maybe here's a spherical well. And if it's 0, then it's an infinite potential. And the potential is going to be v or v effective, just v of r" "And finally, can r be negative? No. It's defined from 0 to infinity. So, our effective potential is the sum of these contributions" AUDIENCE: [INAUDIBLE]. PROFESSOR: Which one? AUDIENCE: Middle. Middle.PROFESSor: Up, up. Right there! Up! There. AUDience: [CHATTER] There! PROFessor: Excellent, so the thing that isn't here, would have a bar under it. Ah! You wouldn't think it would be so hard. OK, god, oh! That's horrible! Sorry guys, that notation is not obvious. My apologies. name for this. If you're spinning, and you pull in your arms, you have to do work, right? You have to pull those guys in. You're increasing your kinetic energy due to conservation of angular momentum. As you approach the origin from any direction, the function is going like 1 over r, OK, so it's rotational symmetry. But what the rotational degeneracy is saying is, look, if you've got some total angular momentum, the energy can't possibly depend on whether most of it's in Z. The wave function, phi sub E, which goes near r equals 0, like u of r over r. So, what should be true of u? Can u diverge? Is that physical? Does u have to vanish? Can it take a constant value? So, I've given you a hint by telling you that I want to think about there being an infinite potential, but why? Why is that the right thing to do? Well, imagine U of r went to a constantvalue near the origin. That's maybe not so bad. case-- when there's zero angular momentum, little l equals 0. Eu sub 0 is equal to h bar squared upon 2m. This is saying that the energy, a constant, times u is two derivatives times this constant. So, u0 can be written as a cosine of kx-- or sorry-- kr plus b sine ofkr. And so, this is just like the 1D system. It's just exactly like when the 1 D system. Professor: We can build something with units of a radius. We have the mass, which has units of mass. And from this, it's easy to see that we can build a characteristic energy by taking e squared and dividing it by this length scale. And if you actually take mu e to the 4th over h bar squared, this is off by, unfortunately, a factor of 4. This is equal to 4 times the binding energy, which is also called the Rydberg constant. Professor: "Dimensional analysis gives you this answer without ever touching that equation" "I just want to emphasize how much you get just from doing dimensional analysis" "This is something you should either do in recitation, or see-- go through-- on your own" "It's not different in any deep way, but it's a little bit easier. This is gonna be the easier way to deal with this, because I don't have toDeal with any stupid constant" "So, when rho goes to infinity, which terms dominate? Well, this is not terribly important" because solving it is a sort of involved undertaking. So, we had this differential equation-- this guy-- and we want to solve it. We extracted the overall asymptotic form, at infinity and at the origin, to get a nice regular differential equation that didn't have any funny singularities. And we do a series expansion. And the series expansion has a solution, which is a sub j plus 1. And in order for this terminate, we must have that some aj max plus 1 is equal to 0. As rho goes to 0, asymptotic analysis is gonna tell us that u goes like rho. Well, two derivatives is a constant. And if we get that d rho squared plus u, rho go to infinity, these two terms dominate.dominate. If l is equal to0, then this is the only term that survives, so we'd better make sure that that behaves gracefully. For normalize-ability, I picked the minus, I could've picked the plus, that would've been divergent.