The goal of this course is to give you the tools to interpret complicated phenomena. We take what we know about atoms, and build a minimally-complex interpretive picture. When we deal with n electrons, what we are going to discover is that in order to anti-symmetrize the wave function, we have to write a determinantal wave function. The matrix elements of operators that we care about correspond to how we observe atomic and molecular structure, Zeeman says. Bob Field: I was convinced that I had collected some stuff that told an interesting story. He says Klemperer showed him, on a scrap of paper, how to do it. That has been the foundation of my career for the last 50 years, he says. Field: You can understand the hydrogen atom in rather complete detail. You can't solve helium or any more-than-one-electron problem exactly. But you can do it really well, and it just costs computer time. can't-- just the question of indistinguishable electrons is such a subtle thing that you can't say, well, they have to be anti-symmetric. So what we know is this permutation operator, operating on any two-electron function, has to make-- OK, I'm skipping steps, and my notes are really kind of stupid sometimes. [LAUGHTER] OK, so we know that the Hamiltonian has to commute with-- these capital letters mean, many electrons' angular momenta. This is the spin, this is the projection of the spin. The world of spin orbitals is where I live, but we do that for a reason. And so this two-electron thing can be expressed as a space part. And alpha 1, beta 2, and then we have minus or plus beta 1, alpha 2. And that's just the combination of the name of the orbital with whether the spin is up or down. And the reason for this is it's easier to do the algebra, because there are certain selection rules, and stuff like that. can reduce it simply by, instead of writing psi every time, just writing the state. And you can also use lowering operators to generate all the states, once you know stuff. OK, so Hund says, which one of these has the largest S? which one? And that's easy to know. And for example, if you had 2p squared, you're going to get singlet D, triplet P, and singlet S. And I could tell you why you would do that. But I don't want to cause insanity at this stage, either. Stick diagrams are great, because it's easier to see on a picture, who are the actors, and have I included all of them, or have I left something out? And so now we're interested in the stick diagram for the 1s 2s configuration. And there are several kinds of 1s/2s configurations, depending on what the alpha and beta are. So there's four guys, and we can put our arrows on these things. And we know everything we need to know about these guys. It tells us what to do. "We want to know the trends of things, and we want to be able to do something like what you did in freshman chemistry on shielding. Now you probably memorized some rules about what shields what. But I'm going to give you a little bit more insight into that. So there is this. What time is it? I have a few minutes to talk about shielding, and I will. OK, so we have a nucleus. And it has a charge of z. And so if we penetrate inside of it, what we see is only the plus z, minus the number of electrons inside. Hund's rules is all about, of all of the states that belong to a particular configuration, which one is the lowest? One-- which one, not the second lowest. And why do we care? Because in statistical mechanics everything is dominated by the lowest energy state. So if you can figure out what is the low energy state, you've basically got as much as most people are going to want. The highest possible value of J is equal to L plus S-- so for L, N greater than 3. Z effective is a charge that is dependent on distance from the nucleus. It goes from the integer value that you know, from the atomic number, down to 1, because you've taken one electron away from a neutral atom, and taken it outside. And so beyond r0, the charge that you see is plus 1. Add 0, you see a charge of z, and so what ends up happening is you get z effective. And now we have this wonderful thing called the centrifugal barrier.