Nancy: Social intelligence is a range of phenomena that govern the interactions of large groups of people, like war. Ken: I think that when people talk about social cognition they do actually mean all of those things. Nancy: Trying to get a coherent account of everything from your hand motions and your perception of other people's hand motions all the way to politics and sociology is daunting and, frankly, deeply unlikely. Liz: I'm going to focus on three ways to use modern techniques in fMRI to study human mind. Psychologist David Frum: How much blame do we assign to people based on our beliefs? Frum says we assign blame based on what we think we deserve, not what happened. He says we can change the meaning of knowingly murder than to unknowingly murder. Frum's work focuses on how we assign thoughts or internal mental states to people around us. The more we know about someone, the more we can blame them for their actions, he says. The less we know, the less we should blame them. The scope of tests of our ability to think about other people's thoughts or internal states is very large. I share the worry that you could never make progress on this. So what I want to tell you guys is two phases of my attempt to make progress. I'm almost exclusively going to talk about the first one, so how we think about what other people see, think, and know-- but not want or feel. And then a more in-depth look at how I'm using more you thinking about thoughts. false belief task looks like. This is being given to a five-year-old human child. Do you know what pirates really like? CHILD: What? REBECCA SAXE: Pirates really like cheese sandwiches. Here comes Ivan. He says, I want my cheese sandwich. And he takes this one. Uh oh-- why did he take that one? OK, and so the traditional read of what just happened there is that's a kid who gets wanting. But he doesn't get believing. MVPA is a technique for getting more information out of the same data. It's an analysis technique, not a way of getting data. MVPA could be used to rediscover all of the things Nancy already discovered using the traditional analyses. If you use them uncarefully, what you're most likely to do is just re-go over old territory with new math. It gave us a measure that was sensitive to small distinctions in the stimuli. It was a totally stable set of examples within a totally different set of stories. The right TPJ is selectively involved in theory of mind, and so selectively depends on all the experiments I didn't show you. "involved in" is a euphemism that I think a lot of cognitive neuroscientists use and are satisfied with. But after a while, I found it deeply embarrassing, like-- what on earth is " involved in"? And so what I want to talk to you about is how to get beyond the euphemism in using fMRI to understand the mind. MVPA is an old, discredited theory of concepts, but nevertheless a powerful strategy in neuroscience, including in this context. The idea that we're going to look at is that populations of neurons will respond differentially to features or dimensions of our stimuli. And we can infer something about the representation underlying-- the representation that this brain region participates in-- and that is the representation of theory of mind. In every trial, you read a long story that sets up a complicated story that you want to show off your culinary skills for one of the dishes. For the first 15 years of fMRI, the only thing it could tell you was the average amount of response. Haxby method uses spatial correlations to get a more general way of thinking about fMRI data. It took a long time for other people to recognize what a cool technique this was, but he had this idea a very long time ago. For some future that I wonder if it's represented, is the correlation across neural responses more similar when the stimuli share that feature than when they don't sharing that feature? V1 is called V1 because information goes from your eyes to the LGN of your thalamus. It's the first cortical stop of visual information. One way that we know that it's very involved in vision is that if you're seeing visual stimuli, you get a big response in V1. If you're not seeing stimuli, like you're hearing auditory stimuli or feeling tactile stimulus, you don't get a large response. That's a selectivity type measure. We want to know what transformations over the information coming from LGN is V1 implementing-- what computational transformations, what representations. story by just changing your mental state. Whether you knew or you didn't know about your cousin's peanut allergy is really important to the moral judgment of what happened. And the right TPJ is tracking the important information about what you think. And so it's activated for both of these kinds of stories. So that's a univariate analysis. Now what's a multivariate analysis? The idea is, think in a very abstract similarity space. They're all unique. So if we find the same result, then it generalizes across all these incidental features. person who wrote the essay was in the room when you said that publicly shaming thing? A different story is about demonstrating your karate skills and knocking out your classmate-- again, totally new moral scenario. But again, this one feature-- did you know or not know that your classmate was there when you did the kick? Now here's the idea. Even though each of those new scenarios is completely different, if there are different subpopulations within your right TPJ responding when you knew you were going to cause harm, then a little part of that response will be the same. The amount of activity in the right TPJ is a big signal. The relative activity between one voxel and another is a tiny signal. And it's superimposed on a lot of noise. But if there's anything there at all, then you'll still be able to pick up a little more similarity for pairs that are matched on the feature of interest compared to pairs that aren't matched on that feature. We've actually found this a whole bunch of times. The rightTPJ doesn't care about valence. Other regions do. a Haxby style correlation is what's called the within-condition correlation. It's the spatial correlation of the response to two independent sets of stories that share this one feature. The more that you represented knowing harm as different from unknowing harm in your right TPJ, the more you judged them as different when we asked you for moral judgment. The pattern difference in your TPJ accounts for 35% of the variance in your moral judgment, which is pretty amazing, because that's a pretty noisy measurement. MVPA is a new technology that allows scientists to test their theories in real-time. In a new experiment, scientists used MVPA to test the theory of knowing and unknowing harm. The researchers found that the effect was hiding in the data that they'd already collected. The scientists say that there's something more real about it than if you knew the hypothesis before you ran the experiment, even though that makes no sense whatsoever. It's like, if I had the hypothesis in my head, maybe it somehow got from my head to the data.