Professor: We're going to be taking this IV curve that we've so laboriously set up and understood-- sorry about that. And now we will subject it to illumination. And as part of today's lecture, we have some wonderful little kits over there in the corner where we'll actually be testing IV curves of solar cells. We laboriously filled this out last class. We're just going to refresh ourselves to make sure we're all on the same page and redo it this class right at the beginning. Our goal is to understand solar cell conversion efficiency, which is the ratio of output to input energy. For most solar cells, this breaks down to the following progression, from the solar spectrum to charge collection. If any one of these is low, the efficiency for the entire system is low. We're going to be focusing on charge separation, incorporating elements of either side. We'll be in a good position to understand the different technologies and finally the cross-cutting themes. The efficiency of the solar cell is the product of each individual efficiency. Fermi energy, the chemical potential, is the same on either side of a solar cell. To get the solar cell to go into reverse bias, you really do need to bias it. Electrons can now diffuse over from the n-type into the p-type side, and that's why we have this diffusion current dominating in the dark. In the illuminated case, we'll have all of our carriers traveling from left to right. And in the increasing the number of electrons over here, which will naturally cause the energy of those electrons to increase on this side. In a pn-junction dark, this is the only case in which we have carriers traveling from right to left. And it's happening because we're using that battery in the dark to change the chemical potential on either side. So you can think about it as forcing carriers up the junction. And this is a very useful technique because, in effect, what it's doing in a real device, when we you have a two-dimensional device within homogeneities, the current will travel through the weakest point. let's try to imagine what will happen under illuminated conditions, and let's start out in a very simple case. We'll assume that the principle of superposition applies here, that the photo-excited carriers-- in other words, when light shines into our device. What will happen to those electrons now that they're in the conduction band? Where will they want to go? OK. So what you'll do is set up what's called an illumination current. And that's what shifts our entire curve down. The illuminated IV curve is, to the first order, is just your dark IV curve built up across the p and the n side of the solar cell. And it would be the maximum voltage that could be supported by that solar cell device under illumination conditions. Under all other conditions of operations, we're putting power into the device, not getting power out of it. This IV quadrant over here, this forward bias illuminated case is the only case in which power is coming, usable power is Coming out of our solar cell that we can use. In the dark is important because we can test our devices in the dark, and we can still learn a lot about our solar cell device characteristics. We can force carriers from one side of the junction to the other the wrong way and probe for weaknesses in the pn-junction regions. In the illumination condition, obviously we're testing the total amount of power that's coming out of our device. It's off of this red curve here that we defined the efficiency or the performance of the solar cell. your solar cell, you have a bias. Whether that's generated by light or a battery, that's a matter of detail. Photons are forward biasing the device. Can some ever reverse bias? That would be very difficult. What you could do, though, is have a bunch of solar cells connected in series with this one, right, that are producing forward power. You could shade this device, and then power it from the sun, for example. It's just photons. The maximum power point is the point at which the solar cell is producing the maximum amount of power output. Most often, PV researchers will report a current density, in other words, a current per unit area instead of the actual current coming out of a solar cell device. To ensure that the solarcell device is operating right here, you need to have the right illumination conditions, and youneed to have a good light source, the professor says. He says the ideal diode equation is a combination of the Jsc, Voc, and Jmp variables. Open-circuit voltage is just as you would think it is. When your solar cell is in an open circuit, when you-- say you took a pair of scissors-- please don't this-- and cut the leads. There's no energy gain of the electron traveling through the external circuit, but there's a maximum current. And no power flowing through that external circuit because there's no potential to be dropped across the external resistor. So remember, the Fermi energy is the same on either side. have the right load. So the two need to be matched to each other. And that's where some of the power electronics come into play. And the rationale for that assumption is as follows. The open-circuit voltage, this point, is generally between 0.35 and 0.4 volts minus the band gap, or lower than theBand gap. So you have the band. So it's a very interesting question. Let me repeat it so that the microphone can hear it. The homework question in the last homework, there was one question that inquired. not the current density, the current at the maximum power point. So take this current density and multiply by area, and that's effectively-- the units work out better that way. So be very careful whether you use total power in or normalized by unit area power, right? Just keep track of your units. Don't do like the professor. OK. So we have efficiency here as point divided by the solar insulation, fill factor being defined as the ratio of Vmp Imp product divided by Voc Ioc product. power out versus power in, the power out being the maximum power point power and the power in being the illumination from the sun. OK. This is starting to get interesting because it's beginning to click. Pieces from lecture number 2 come together with what we're seeing now. So this is solar cell output power at themaximum power point and sunlight coming in. And that box looks like this blue one right here. The area of that is the area of the solar cell that is producing power. box is Jmp times Vmp. OK? And notice I have another box around here. I have this clear box that starts at the Voc point and the Jsc point. And now I have two rectilinear shapes, this blue one and the clear one right here, the bigger one. The bigger one has an area of Jsc times Voc. And I'm going to define a parameter called fill factor, which will be the ratio of these two areas. If this is 1, which is virtually impossible to do, but if this were 1, it would mean that these two boxes were the same size. pay more for a high-efficiency cell because I'm using less area, you can use this type of calculation to get to the answer quickly. This is a really back-of-the-envelope envelope engineering approach to estimating costs of a solar system. So I think this is a great place to stop. And if anybody has an idea, a fun idea, for a class project, I'd invite you to give a pitch up here at the front of class, or you're welcome to send it on an email to the class listserv.