Professor: Today we're going to talk about partial differential equations. Next time I'll be lecturing to you will be a week from Friday. homework involves a COMSOL problem which might take some extra time, since it's the first time you're doing it. There's no lecture on Monday, but you have the quiz, too, Monday night. Wednesday, next week is Veterans Day so it's a holiday. There're no classes at MIT. The homework following the quiz will be posted and so you can get started on that. an equation like this, is that whatever partials you see-- When I have this and it has a term that's like d squared, dx squared, is one of the terms in this thing. This says t, this says x. The convention is, oh boy, I better hold x fixed. And here must be, I must hold t fixed. Because there's another one in the same equation. Now, you can change coordinates however you want. Just really watch out that you carefully follow the rules about what you hold fixed. Otherwise you can cause all kinds of craziness. methods. So all those methods basically look the same. You just get equations that have more unknowns in them. And so fundamentally, there's no problem, but there's a big problem if the number of unknowns gets to be so large. 10,000 unknowns are a lot harder to solve for than 100 unknowns. And once you get up to a million unknowns, we're starting to talk serious up to three dimensions, you might be able to solve it or might not. math, now. In the Navier-Stokes equations, what variables do you have? So you have pressure. What else we got? Density or temperature. So then you'd have all these species, right,? The mesh fractions are all the species. So that's a pretty big set of variables and you need to know all these numbers at each point. So the issue, to a large extent, has to do with just, can I solve it? Can I solve a system of 10 million unknowns? A lot of combustion problems are very sensitive to the physical initial conditions. A very small spark can make a really big difference in a system like that. Another class of PDEs where it's stable in some sense, but it causes a problem. A lot of these things, light a spark on a stove, it ends up basically how you light it. So I do a lot of work on combustion problems. So that's one idea about what to do for initial guesses. Another idea is the time marching idea. If it does, then this is a good idea. ones where there's some dissipation that's very significant. And so, in an elliptic problem, you introduce some numerical noise and as you solve it, the numerical noise kind of goes away. But if you try to do it the other way around, it would be kind of weird, right? You wouldn't expect that what in the future really affected stuff in the past. So it naturally leads us to sort of pose it as an ODE IVP, or IVP kind of problem. And the methods that we're going to talk about are ones for solving parabolic and elliptic problems. a flow in a pipe. And you have a nice, fast velocity flow down the pipe. What's happening downwind is very much affected by what happened upwind, but not vice versa. So it has a directionality, even though I might do it as a steady state problem and not have time in it at all. And so if you look at figure 6.8 in the textbook, you see you get perfectly stable solutions when you do that. But where you do this one, you get crazy, oscillatory, unphysical solutions. If you look in the textbook at figures 6.7, 6.8, it's kind of a very famous problem. If you make the local Peclet number too large, actually anywhere bigger than 2, and you try to solve this equation, what you get is oscillations, unphysical oscillations. It's crazy. It looks like the simplest equation in the world, right? It's a linear equation, so what's the problem with this? But it doesn't work. And so, then you could think, well, why doesn't it work? And there's, like, multiple ways to explain this. a diffusive flux coming in here. I don't have any drug up here, so there's no drug coming into here. But I have drug leaving. So basically, it's coming up and it's making a right-hand turn. And so then I could think, well, if I was going to try to figure out, what's the steady state concentration of drug in there, I could say, there's a certain amount of drug entering. And then this part over here would be the velocity, actually, just times the concentration. In this case, we have a 100 million squared matrix with 10 to 16th elements in it. Most of the numbers, are those 10 to the 16th numbers in this matrix are zero. But there still might be quite a few. Probably the diagonal events are non-zero, so that's like ten to the 8th of them right there. So, even if, initially, you can write down j and store it in your computer, you could easily overwhelm it with the third iteration or something. So what do you have to do? You want to find a method. Direct methods to solve this kind of problem. solve this. So you just try to minimize that, right? You know at the solution this is going to be zero. Right, jy plus [INAUDIBLE] zero when this is solved. And then this method, it turns out that the conjugate gradient, if everything works great, this is guaranteed in n iterations to go directly to the solution of this kind of problem. And so, they've worked out better methods. And there's one that people use a lot for these problems called bi cg stab. too big. Now, this is really good if an explicit solver can solve it. And also, if you want a time accurate solution. But suppose we're trying to really solve the steady state problem over here. Then we really don't care about the time accuracy. In the end, we're only going to report our steady state solution. That's all we cared about. So in those cases, you might instead want to use-- So this is time accurate. There's another method. I don't know if I should call it time inaccurate. set up is right, so you can use it. But if you can, it can be pretty good. All right. See you on Friday. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from. Click here for the latest from CNN.com. Back To the pageYou came from the page You came from: Back to the Page You Came From: Back To The Page You Were Originally From: The page you were originally from: The Page you were initially from: the Page you started from.