Jeffrey Grossman: We're getting to the point where we're electrifying everything. He says most electricity will play a role, but most of it is useless unless you can store it. Grossman says energy storage is so appealing because you don't really pay a penalty. He also talks about the chemistry of batteries, and why this matters to the future of energy storage, he says. He ends with a look at some of the things we can do with energy storage today, and how we can use it. Electricity is more and more important in our lives, and if you look at just sort of like the major sectors, so you have the power generation, you have transportation, and you have industry. That's how much electricity matters here, but the thing the watts. These are the things that matter in batteries, but so many other things matter, and this is why this is a complicated problem. The world at large scales unless you're running AC units, depending on how many AC units you're using, you're not going to store energy. would be like, I've got energy storage technology and it's got this much density, this much power-- well, then it's going to last if I use it at that power for 41 days and so forth. Now the interesting, though, there's lots of stuff on here. Why don't I just want high and high? That sounds like a good thing, right, so shouldn't we be pumping water up hills all over the place? Well, obviously, if you think about it, you don't do that in your phone. Entropy is about accessibility to states. It's about how many states you have to be in. A messier room does not have higher entropy, and in this case, it's just simply the rules of the algorithm. There's a lot of reasons why this is so appealing. No penalty on the second law of thermodynamics is no entropy. No entropy is not just disorder. No disorder is just smoothness. No smoothness is just disorder, right? No, no, no. In the 1930s, a physicist named Galvani tried to make a connection between things that move and electricity. He hooked a frog up to lightning rods and watched as the storm's coming, and he's like, the lightning rod hits and he hooked him up to some metals, and the frog went crazy. He deduced that the motion itself is something that generates electricity. The story of Frankenstein was written because they went around and electrocuted things and showed that they moved, and often they weren't alive, and so Mary Shelley saw that. Zinc and copper exchange electrons in a reaction that's called a redox couple. The zinc atom at the surface sees a copper 2 plus and it says here, have 2 electrons. Oh, and then it's like, wait a second. I gave two electrons away. I've got to go into solution. And that's exactly what you see over here, right. The copper is plating the zinc so what did I do? Well, I got my zinc strip but now I'veGot a copper strip. Batteries are all about neutrality. The power isn't coming from you as Galvani thought. No, the power is coming from the difference in potentials of those metals wanting or not wanting electrons. It all comes back to the same stuff we talked about. It's standard hydrogen electrode. So sometimes you'll see it as the SHE in the battery world. And what it is it's just a very nice platinum electrode that doesn't change. And it's a reaction that on that electrode happens with hydrogen, hydrogen gas. This is an ACL, so for every copper 2 plus that plates onto the copper electrode, two NA plus atoms go into this beaker from the bridge. Dissolved salt, sodium chloride is in water, so I got all these sodium ions. And when a charge imbalance happens because something plates here, I can draw sodium atoms out of the salt bridge and I canDraw chlorine atoms from that side. That completes your circuit. That's an iron neutralizer, the salt Bridge, and this is allowing the electrons to keep everything neutral, and that's how you get the current. Just that now we're talking about the metals and whether they're more interested than the other metal in having those two electrons. That's what a potential is. And so that's how you do battery chemistry is you look things up. You look up these potentials in tables, and you think about which voltage you need. And it's by a setup that is very similar to the one I showed you that is related to hydrogen. So what you can see is that the potential difference is all about chemistry, right. The Nobel Prize was given to the development of lithium ions as a storage technology. The flexibility of where you can put that other electrode and what properties it has gives you enormous room. That's why lithium-ion batteries can can be used in a variety of ways. And those things combined make it a beautiful battery technology, and that's why it was given the Nobel Prize. It's chemistry. We're in the class. And what I wanted to-- and there's a whole bunch of chemistry. need. So that's a real challenge for chemistry. I hope you guys have a great Thanksgiving and maybe hook up some different metals. And I'll see you all next week. Back to the page you came from. Follow us on Twitter @CNNOpinion and @cnnireport. Back To the pageyou came from, back to the CNNOpinions page.Back to thepage you came From. Back from the CNN Opinion page. Back in the page, click here for the latest from CNN.