Charles Brockden Brown: The Enlightenment is a critique of a kind of impoverished view of mind or consciousness that over-relies on reason. We started to look at it a little bit with Barlow's [assumed spelling] Raven poem with Poe. The idea that in fact there is something wrong with reason as a faculty, and this can take a couple of forms. One is that all of those nice ideals that come along with the enlightenment may in fact be parasitic precisely on the kinds of negative types of thinking that they are designed to get rid of. Franklin thinks about moral perfection, all right he's gonna use enlightenment ideals, but he has a little bit of you might say that Calvinist self-denial about him. He believes that you can identify error. And in so doing he's able as author to pick out the defective font [phonetic] of type those errors, and either talk about the ways in which he was actually able to correct them in real life in his real life. He still is getting a kind of do-over as he rewrites his life. Charles Brockden Brown's The Power of Sympathy is thought to be the first American novel. It is set in Philadelphia in 1787, the same time as the Constitution is being framed. Brown is an interesting character because he is one of the first US writers to try to take advantage of first American copyright law. The copyright law does something interesting; it makes a profession of authorship possible, because it suggests that writing is property, and if you can sell what you write then you can live off your writing. Wieland: or, The Transformation, the title about it a little bit but there is a certain kind of haste that is evident in the plotting of Edgar Huntly. Brown is writing in order to transform the novel into a higher form than it's thought to be, and he's writing something that is not within the main line of novelistic writing. This is part of the larger project of romanticism of gothic fiction. And we'll take it up again on Wednesday, when we look at the short stories of Irving Clitheroe. page. An American Tale, right? He's stressing that he's doing something American. If you could read the little epigraph here it says from virtues blissful paths away, the double-tongued are sure to stray. Good is a forthright journey to still, and many paths but lead to ill. All right again a kind of moral note. And yes, if you can actually see it, that is not an F,. that is an old fashioned way of setting an S. So the Gothic is, [inaudible] good true taste. fiction. And what is fiction, if not the opposite of truth? Fiction means lies, right? Why would you read this? If you do it's got to be only a guilty pleasure. There can be nothing improving by it. So fiction, as opposed to fact, fiction somehow has falsehood. Therefore early novels try to insist on their basis in fact. Don't worry about this, it's based on a true story. As if there were something that would then could be morally improving for that. There's a kind of weird conflation of supernatural demonic activity, sexuality, violent and disgusting death. Ann Radcliffe makes a distinction between what she calls, let me see if I have it here, the distinction between terror and horror. So Monk Lewis' Gothic is horror. Her Gothic she would've offered was a form of terror, okay? Finally, this is a rather famous if somewhat overstated account of what's going on in the Gothic novel. It comes from a moment when Freudian criticism was very much in the [inaudible] Gothic becomes a pejorative term by this time that is, that takes on the medieval association and makes you think of you know it's so Gothic, it's medieval, right? Romantic writers are gonna mobilize the medieval and Gothic and dark over against The Enlightenment to show you what's wrong with The Enlightenment. The novel, The Castle of Otranto, this Gothic novel which seems like kind is bad taste. Walpole starts to reclaim it. Brown wants to do something similar to reclaim the Gothic in the American context, okay. Classic Scooby-Doo is Ann Radcliffe. There appear to be manifestations of the supernatural. She often finds herself in the various kinds of settings crumbling castles, dungeons, graveyards, darkened churches. Usually she almost escapes her persecutors, then they catch her. They are trying to get her out of greed or lust or both. In the end, all of the ghosts and supernatural manifestations that have tyrannized her are shown to be fakes. It's a very popular formula and it continues to this present day. Ambrosio is a man who's so repressed and severe that Shakespeare calls, what does he say? He scarce confesses that his blood flows. He's soon readily corrupted by a satanic woman named Matilda who gains access to his cell by disguising herself as a young nun. They become lovers, naughty, naughty. But he soon gets tired of her and of course she's promoting this, and he dreams of possessing a 15 year old girl named Antonia, who is the daughter of a story about enlightenment. every eye was a loathsome and disgusting object. To every eye but a mothers. In vain did human feelings bid me recoil from this emblem of mortality. I was not insensible at that moment of the impulses of vengeance. But they were transient. I detested the sanguinary resolutions that I had once formed. Yet I was fearful of the effect of my hasty rage and dreaded an encounter in consequensive wish I must, I might rush into evils which no time could repair, nor penitence expiate. The sublime is kind of like the romantic emotion par excellence. It's what they are try, they are striving to recreate. In a sense, Matthew Lewis's you know disgusto Gothic is actually making fun of that. But you can see that this discourse of the sublime, is part of what Brown is drawing on in Edgar Huntly. The disappearance of Clithero had furnished new incitements to ascend its cliffs and pervade its thickets. The past is suddenly beginning to impinge on Edgar. There's grounds of hope for everybody, he says. But it also means destroying old systems of obligation. What if the total depravity of human beings is true, not because of something called the fall of human kind, but just because that's human nature? Then, we've got a big problem. All of this you might say is the context for Charles Brockden Brown's Edgar Huntly. Okay? Now, let's take a look at the first pages of this. This is the preface in my rambles with some traces of this man. Be impossible to arm myself with firmness? If forbearance be the dictative wisdom can it be so deeply engraven on the mind as to defy all temptation? My late experience has been of use to me. It has shown me my weakness and my strength. Having found my ancient fortifications insufficient to withstand the enemy, what should I learn from thence but that it becomes me to strengthen and enlarge them. No caution indeed, he says, can hinder the experiment from being hazardous. Curiosity is vicious if undisciplined by reason and inconducive to benefit. Clithero's story in these 4 chapters act as a kind of narrative counterweight to the primacy of reason that Edgar is trying to say this larger story is about, is a dramatization of. Take a look on page 88. Clithero is proof you might say that a rationality even madness is alive and well in the world and very powerful. Edgar refuses to believe this. On page 88, he describes himself as a dispassionate observer still. And later on, take a look at this on page 90, he still is unwilling to accept the evidence of what is in front of him. When Edgar looks for these letters, on page 128, he finds that they're missing. And when he can't find the letter he finds himself lost in horror and amazement. We start to see that there's a whole property motif that is sort of hidden and starting to come up to the surface here. He's been banking his whole future on the fact that Mary is supposed to inherit from Waldegrave. What doesn't, what happens if that doesn't happen? All right? the hand and by which force could be exerted. Some spring therefore secretly existed which might forever elude the senses, but on which the hand by being moved over in all the directions might accidentally light. The process was effectual. A touch, casually applied at an angle drove back a bolt and a spring at the same time was sent in action by which the lid was raised above half an inch. No event could have been supposed more fortuitous, by chance than this. No measure that I could adopt enabled me to place the lid in the same situation in which I had found it. enabled me to discover, to discover enabled me to push forward the bolt and thus to restore the fastening. I now perceive that Clithero had provided not only against the opening of his cabinet, but likewise against a possibility of concealing that it has been opened. So this is one of these da da daDa scenes that you should be looking at as kind of an exemplary moment. What's going on here? What's the immediate ideas that this scene conjures up for us? It's a box. by me which I had culpably neglected, to inspire my zeal, inspirit my zeal to awaken my remembrance and insight to me to the performance of this duty, did this glimmering messenger, this half indignant apparition come. And now some dodgy things come to light. Bottom of the page, and again this is maybe a critique of The Enlightenment. Waldegrave like other men early devoted to mediation and books had adopted a different [inaudible] different systems of opinions on topics collected with religion and morals.