Lipids are mostly hydrophobic, which can also be referred to as lipophilic. Water is a good hydrogen bond donor and acceptor, so there will be hydrogen bonding. Salts are going to need ways to get in and out of cells. Neurotransmitters, such as this, this is GABA, or gamma aminobutyric acid. It just can't get through without a transporter of some kind. It's actually proteins that end up doing the heavy lifting of the transport processes. Semi-permeable membranes are made up through the non-covalent association of phospholipid monomer units. These molecules assemble into supramolecular structures that form the boundaries of your cells. If they were fully permeable, anything could come and go and they wouldn't be much use frankly. So let's take a look at the boundary here. It's like a-- it looks like a ballerina or something. Anyone want to tell me what the answer is, and why? Yeah, did you-- are you-- yeah. Other small hydrophobic molecules can pass readily in and out through the semi-permeable barrier, but other things, things that are charged, Things that are big, need a different mechanism. Collagen is a structural protein that provides mechanical support for tissues. In the next class, we'll talk about transporters and enzymes, and as we move on to signaling, things like receptors and membrane proteins and so on. And we will see later on how proteins provide the opportunities to cargo things into cells or out of cells, even very large entities. The amino acids that are encoded in our proteins are all what are known as alpha amino acids. The amino acids are also chiral, but you'll learn more than you ever wanted to know about chirality in 512. Proline is a little odd because its side chain is kind of in a cyclic structure, and towards the end of the class, I'll talk to you about collagen, whose structure is totally dependent on the involvement of proline. And then the last sorts of unusual amino acid is cysteine. Compact, globular structure that's functional is encoded in that primary sequence. The primary sequence determines the fold, and it's the fold of the protein that mandates its function. It's not simple because what you're doing is you're solving a massive energy diagram, where as you fold a structure up, you're trying to maximize all those non-covalent forces for maximum thermodynamic stability, right? It's kind of a three-dimensional puzzle where they are maximizing interactions. When we write out peptides, we always write them N to C. If you don't always remember to write things in this order, and you tell your friend, oh, go and get this peptide made, they'll make the wrong peptide. When I write the MIT peptide, I write M first, I second, T third. If I wrote TIM, it would be a completely different chemical structure with different chemical properties, so the directionality is important to understand. Protein tertiary structure is not complete spaghetti. It's like spaghetti with little bits that haven't been cooked. What I'm showing you here is what's known as the alpha helix. It is an ordered structure exclusively made up of hydrogen-bonding interactions of the peptide backbone. And you can look at this helical structure. It’s a continuous strand of peptide, but there are hydrogen bonds between COs and NHs. And there are a couple of major forms of secondary structure. showing it in detail, they might show it as a cylinder, so you might need to pick that out of a structure. All right, so we've seen primary. Secondary is just with backbone. And things start to get much more interesting when we get to tertiary structure. Tertiary structure is enabled by all these other interactions, electrostatic, hydrogen bonding, hydrophobic forces, that can be put to use. OK, so this is like taking your very extended stored of polymer, knowing there are different kinks in it, because of the backbone bonds, but folding it up in a structure that maximizes the opportunity. GB1 is a very small protein that holds reversibly under appropriate conditions. This is a simulation. It's not looking at anything by spectroscopy or in solution or anything like that. This might describe the folding possibilities of that small motif. And it does that for about 30-- 60 seconds of the simulations, so I made a point to myself to take it to the next level and do it on a larger screen. And what I'm going to do is just show you for a few seconds, you know, this thing's like trying to find its thermodynamic minimum. is the green fluorescent protein, which is a cylindrical structure made up of anti-parallel beta sheets. And then in some cases, proteins may be a mixture of a secondary structure elements. Here it's a little hard to tell. This is triose phosphate isomerase, but if you look down it, you can see the helices. And these rolled together into a three helix bundle that has a fibrillous structure, and then all these structures come together to make the macromolecular structure that is collagen. A single amino acid change in the primary sequence of collagen can destabilize the structure, so it is no longer viable. The disease type I'm going to talk to you about is a set of diseases known as collagenopathies, and the particular one is called osteogenesis imperfecta. A lot of babies with this defect can't even be born through the birth canal because it would crush the bones, and many of them don't survive very long at all. So I think that's a good place to stop and I'll pick up next time with hemoglobin.