Deuteronomy is the first book in the Bible to mention the election of Israel as the chosen one. In Deuteronomy, Israel is a holy people, separated from the common or the ordinary. Separation entails separation from alien peoples and practices that are inconsistent with the worship of God. The most salient feature of the Deuteronomistic School is the conviction that Israel's residence in the land of Jerusalem is going to be Jerusalem, says Professor Hayes. In Genesis, there is no mention of a king or monarchy. In Numbers, the law of Moses says that when you have a king, you have to obey him. Moses warns the Israelites: Don't be tempted to say to yourselves, "My own power and the might of my own hand have won this wealth for me" He emphasizes, it is only because the wickedness of the Canaanites is so great that the Lord has to drive them from his land, and now he is giving you a chance. Don't fail him or he will a few decisive battles under the military leadership of Joshua. And the disunited Canaanites put up little or no resistance: they're paralyzed by a fear that is sent by God. In Deuteronomy 32:10, the image is that of an eagle that bears its young on its wings. It almost seems to play on the idea that when teaching its young to fly, the eagle will push them out of the nest, swoop under them, bear them up for awhile over and over until they get the idea. Some have suggested that this is quite purposeful. It points to an exilic date for the work's final composition, that is to say when it was finally redacted, the redactors were in exile. We have been discussing the Torah, or Pentateuch, and now we are moving on to the section of the Bible that is referred to as the Prophets. This section of redaction of these books, would put the materials together by inserting verses and speeches that would frame the older sources and link them together, give them some sort of common uniting thread. This is an important point for us today, as we begin to go through to the end of 2 Kings. It is making an argument and attempting to communicate the meaning and significance of the events of that time. There is a great deal of ideological baggage that is involved in the dating of the sources. Anti-priest, anti-cult sentiment is apparent in the history of biblical scholarship. P espouses a communal ethic, and post-exilic priests are going to turn to an individual ethic. Many sections of P do not seem to assume a central sanctuary. The idea of the central sanctuary really took hold in 622, Josiah's reform: that the central reform was Josiah and not Israel. The Bible is divided into two parts we refer to as the "Former Prophets" and then the "Latter Prophets." The Former Prophets include the books of Joshua, Judges, 1 and 2 Samuel. They read as a historical narrative from the conquest of Canaan to the destruction of the state by the Babylonians in 587-586 BCE. The Latter Prophets is a collection of books, each of which bears the name of the individual whose prophecies it purports to contain. In the first half of the book of Joshua, alongside the call for the destruction of all Canaanites, we find interesting tales of alliances and incorporation of various Canaanite groups. Yehezkel Kaufmann uses the term "historiosophy" which I have written up here, historiosophy, to describe this material. It's seeking to ascertain the meaning of events to draw larger philosophical, ideological conclusions from the events of history. We're going to return to this when we reach the conclusion of the Deuteronomistic history in 2 Kings. In the past 4000 years more wars have been fought for the possession of the tiny strip of land known as Canaan than for almost any other area in the world. In times of peace it would bring prosperity, but, of course, in times of war the land was perpetually invaded as armies would crisscross the land. The structure of Joshua is really somewhat simple. We can really divide it into two major parts. The first 12 chapters form a unit that conveys the invasion and conquest. The story is really a composite of two accounts that have been woven together into a single narrative. in Israel, it rises about 10,000 feet above sea level. As you move from the central area over to Jerusalem, that area is dramatically lower. The Dead Sea is nearly 1300 feet below sea level, which is the lowest point on the earth's land surface. The area around the Sea is basically semi-desert. We call this the wilderness, the wilderness of Judea between Jerusalem and the Dead Sea. It is a very desolate area. And tradition identifies this as the site of Sodom and Gomorrah. According to the Book of Joshua, Israel's tribal structure assumed its classical form at this time. This is a very neat picture of the rapid conquest of Canaan, but it's at odds with statements elsewhere in Joshua and in the book of Judges. Excavations at Jericho and Ai indicate that both of these towns were laid waste at least 200 years before the probable time of Joshua. The Israelites weren't even occupied in this period, the late Bronze Age, beginning of the Iron Age. of the places from which the Canaanites were not expelled. Also archaeological evidence contradicts the picture in Joshua. In the Ancient Near East, destroyed cities tended to be leveled, and then a new city would just be built on top of the ruins. Archaeologists have found really no evidence of extensive conquest and destruction in thirteenth and twelfth century archaeological layers. Some of the sites by the hosts of the Lord? Some of them were destroyed by the forces of God, not the sword or the bow. to have been peasant farmers, like other Canaanites. One interesting difference is the absence of any pig bones, which is kind of interesting. This suggests that these settlements were established peacefully, not by a group coming in and conquering. Maybe they emerged from within, rather than being established by peoples immigrating from without. The revolt model proposes that Israel began really as a social revolution within Canaan. The Yahweh cult may have been introduced by people escaping slavery from Egypt. Most scholars see the Exodus story as evidence for the presence of some escaped slaves among this community. perhaps not exclusively, and adopted the national story of the Exodus as its own at some point. The Hebrew tribes, themselves, were likely still in the process of formation. But the tribal structure of Israelite society that would develop would be strengthened by the natural division of the land into these separate geographical areas. And these local tribes probably did assimilate elements of the local population. We've really seen already the ethnic mix of various elements reflected in religious imagery and institutions, says David Perry, professor at the University of California, Los Angeles. century BCE, written by King Mesha of Moab Moab is to the southeast of the Dead Sea. In the inscription he writes, he boasts: "And the god Chemosh said to me, go, take Nebo from Israel" It is likely that such claims are hyperbolic in Moab, and it is likely they were hyperbols in Israel. But that does not lessen the shock value for a modern reader, says Andrew Keen. "War in our time is no less savage and no less brutal," he says.