Professor: In almost all cases when you address atoms, you do two photon courses because a photon is scattered. In reality, it is a two photon process and not two single photon processes. Professor: With two-photon emission with two lasers, we have the situation that we start in what we're doing with the atoms, cannot done on the d1 or d2 line. But I think you get the gist, and later on it will become clearer, even on a two-level system. many terms do you get if you write down the Hamiltonian? No approximation without. How many do youget? AUDIENCE: Four. PROFESSOR: Eight? I think it's multiplicative because we have four processes involving one-- oops. I wanted to say 16, 4 times 4. But now I would say in the first step, which is to the intermediate level, we have 4 at frequency one, four at frequency, which makes eight. But then I think in the second step you get eight more. But they're just all combinations, all combinations of frequencies. lowest order perturbation, second order perturbedation theory, in two steps. But if you're asking, what is the transition probability? The transition probability, we have to get the probability to be in the excited state. And when we divide the probability, the amplitude squared by t, we get a rate. And this is Fermi's Golden Rule. It is exactly the same you have seen probably more than 100 times. So this is the correct description of resonant fluorescence and Rayleigh scattering. Any questions? Yes. We've just cleverly defined our quantities. The rate to go from a to b is Rabi frequency squared, but it is the two photon Rabi frequencies. So therefore, our result looks almost indistinguishable from the result built on single photons. So in other words, if you were interested just in the physics of two levels-- Rabi oscillation, you name it-- you can just say the same thing happens. The only difference is that instead of having a coupling, we have stacked up the two photons. The Raman process only in the external degree of freedom, in the motion away function. The only change is you change the momentum. We need our intermediate state, which is often an electronically excited state. And now we have one photon going up and one photons going down. And it doesn't really matter if the power is delivered by a laser or a light bulb. The rate for this process is the same. And this actually was the discovery by Raman, which was rewarded with the Nobel Prize. say if omega 1 is very, very strong, you can exactly diagonalize the Hilbert space of states k and a. But again, what happens is you mix those two states. And it is the admixture now in a non-perturbative way of state k, which is sort of the stepping stone. And from this stepping stone on,you can absorb a photon omega 2. So we could actually-- let me just redraw this-- that we want to go to the final state b. But in this kind of picture I just suggested, I start with a dress state a. Spontaneous emission occurs with Einstein's a coefficient connecting the intermediate state to the ground state. This is actually also-- this kind of spontaneous Raman process-- has been very important historically. The system involves with the following operator, and this is the operator which completely describes the interaction of an atom with the electromagnetic phrase-- the randomness of spontaneous emission. But this operator will actually lead to final states of the photon field, which may not have a specific phase. So what I suggest is when we, really at the fundamental level now, discuss spontaneous emission, we allow this part-- excited atom, empty cavity-- to undergo half a vacuum Rabi oscillation. Two-photon absorption or Raman processes are like single-photons transitions. If you have a single photon, you always transfer momentum to the atom. But if you have two photons, the two momenta can cancel. And this is actually a powerful method to avoid Doppler broadening in spectroscopy. Really will talk about it in a second about the process you absorb or two photons from the left or the right. But you have sort of a broad pedestal where you take one photon from the right, whereas the peak is where you have free photons from counter-agating directions. You can't know for certain that the velocity distribution of the atoms in your laser beam is exactly at room temperature. You really have to go to low temperature, go to cryogenic temperatures. The lifetime of the 2s state is actually due to two-photon emission. Two photons in series. And you will, actually, with this rather simple description, get a fairly accurate estimate for the lifetime, which is a fraction of a second. It really depends what you want. If you simply want an atomic clock, all you want is a very stable reference point. line, which is sufficiently sharp, sufficiently narrow, and also insensitive to magnetic fields and electric fields. People who want to measure fundamental constants-- the Rydberg constant-- want to compare lame shift with first principle QED calculations. This is the case for hydrogen. And, actually, with some advance in the numeric calculation of wave functions and all that, it may also be possible to do it with helium. But so far it hasn't kind of-- helium has not replaced hydrogen. It's still is an important technique and important tool for measurements. Coherence exists if there is a well-defined phase. It's always a phase between quantum mechanical amplitudes. Coherence can be two amplitudes describing two different atoms, or it can be the amplitudes of two states within the same atom. When we observe an interference, that means we obesrve-- and this is how we read out of a coherence-- one observes a physical quantity, the population in a certain quantum state, total electric field emitted, but this quantity is usually proportional to the square of the total amplitude. There is a certain randomness in spontaneous emission when we go to the laboratory and look at the spontaneously emitted photons. And this is actually what I want to work out with you in-- maybe even today, I think ten minutes may be enough-- what is really the information-- the phase information-- which we have in a photon, which has been spontaneously emitted. I know how to least the diminishment of the read out. There may be situations where we have a laser beam which has a well-defined phase, photons are scattered, and we just cannot retrieve the phase of the laser beam by looking at the photons. When we scatter light for many, many atoms, we're not even asking for the phase. You immediately perform an incoherence sum because you sort of know deep in your heart that there won't be any interference. So it's always possible, of course, to lose the phase by not controlling every aspect of your experiment. So B is always possible. But for so many reasons that I don't want to discuss it, but the measurement process is very relevant. And so, therefore, I would have answered C here. one is we know for sure the atom is in the ground state. However, the excited state with zero photon will actually do Rabi oscillation. And so we have now our knowledge from the vacuum Rabi. oscillation that this part of the wave function does nothing. And if we start out with the superposition of ground zero and excited zero, we can get the same result with ground zero, excited zero and ground zero. And we can say that the atom in this state is in a state of superposition.