Professor Steven Smith: I want to talk today about Aristotle's discovery of America. Smith: In many ways, as it is for every student of politics, the most difficult issue one confronts is the problem of faction. He says, in a way, Aristotle has discovered long before James Madison's famous article in Federalist Number 10, the remedy for the control and containment, so to speak, of faction, he says. Smith says the purpose of the best regime is directed not Tolstoy, Henry James, and perhaps the greatest of all, Jane Austen. any sensible reader of Aristotle would reach is that Aristotle, in fact, discovered the American Constitution 1,500 or 2,000 years before it was written. Aristotle understands the mixed constitution as a balance of classes--the one, the few, and the many. For Aristotle, it is not the liberty of the individual so much as the functioning or functional well-being of the city that is the highest priority. He would regard elections as merely exacerbating the tendency to demagoguery, where each person seeking office plays shamelessly to the mob. Aristotle understood the importance of property and private property and commerce for a flourishing republic. He would never endorse the view stated by a famous American president that the business of America is business, he says. The political partnership must be regarded for the sake of noble acts performed well, he tells us. If wealth were the purpose of politics, Aristotle writes, the Phoenicians, you might say, in the ancient world, would be the best regime. But he denies that. He says the aim of the city is not wealth, is not the production of wealth. to war, but in fact to peace. The citizen of the best regime, he says, must be able to sustain war if duty requires, but only for the sake of peace and leisure. Leisure does not simply mean rest or inactivity, but leisure is necessary for education or what he sometimes calls by the term philosophy. By philosophy, he seems to suggest not so much the capacity for abstract or speculative thought, but rather a kind of liberal education that he regards to be the preserve of the megalopsychos. Aristotle's best regime differs from Plato's intransigent demand for the rule of philosopher-kings. The megalopsychos, the gentleman, whatever else he is, is not a philosopher in the strict sense. Most importantly, you might say, what distinguishes the gentleman as a class from the philosophers is a certain kind of knowledge or practical intelligence. The gentleman may lack the speculative intelligence of a Socrates, but he will possess that quality of practical rationality, of practical judgment necessary for the administration of affairs. Aristotle describes a quality of judgment called phronimos. He says it is a kind of knowledge most appropriate to politics. How is this knowledge acquired? Are we just born with it? Do some people just have it or is it a product of experience? Aristotle doesn't say, but I think the answer is clearly some of both. It is a quality, as I agree with Berlin, possessed by some of the great psychological novelists. To refuse to participate in that conversation is either to be below humanity or above it. To be human is to be part of that conversation. animal means first to possess speech or reason that allows us to participate in a community or a way of life governed by shared standards of justice and injustice. To be a political animal, for him, is to engage or for praxis, is his word for action. All action, all human behavior is aimed at achieving some type of good, is all aimed at action. When we act, we seek to preserve or to change. All political action, you might say, is guided by the idea of better or worse. Aristotle suggests that there will always appear to be something ad hoc about the methods used in the study of politics. We will have to let the method fit the subject, rather than demanding the subject matter fit a kind of apriori method. To insist on that kind of methodological purity would be to impose a false sense of certainty or absoluteness on politics, which is variable and contingent and always subject to flux and change. He lays out a set of common questions that political scientists have to address. These four questions are intended to guide inquiry, to shape and direct inquiry. They are not intended to yield sure or certain results, but to guide and inform statesmen and citizens in the U.S. The political scientist must have a grasp of the best regime, given the most favorable circumstances. He must also know something about the techniques of reform and persuasion, what we might call the area of political rhetoric by which existing regimes can be brought closer to the best. And he must have some knowledge of how to render any regime, no matter how imperfect, more stable and coherent. Most contemporary political scientists tend to be liberals. Their values are liberal values. This raises a question. Whether the relation between contemporary political science and liberalism is merely accidental or whether there is some intrinsic, some necessary connection between them. One might do well to ponder which political science is really more scientific--Aristotle's, which is explicitly and necessarily evaluative or that offers advice and exhortation to the statesmen and citizens about how to care for their regime, says Julian Zelizer. the back door. On Friday, let me just remind you, Il Principe. We'll study Machiavelli. On this very partisan note I conclude. On Thursday, we'll study the life of the Italian statesman and play a game of chess with him. We're going to see how well he can play the game of poker. I'm looking forward to it. I hope you'll join us for the game on Friday night at 8 p.m. ET on CNN.