"Between the Folds" is a weekly, off-beat look at the world of engineering. This week, the professor talks about infinitesimal rigidity. He explains how it can be used to test whether a 3D graph is generically rigid. The professor also says goodbye to origami creator Eric Joisel, who died on Sunday. He says Joisel was a master of origami, and he never met him in person, but he had a great spirit, and his photos will be shown Tuesday. of an informal notion-- a valid first derivative of a motion. I want to take such a motion, essentially, take its derivative with respect to time, And evaluate that derivative at time 0. If the motion exists, surely you can take this derivative and evaluate it. You need some smoothness. But if there's a way to get started moving, that doesn't actually mean you could actually move. If you have two vectors, a and b, you take their general, we want this thing to equal that thing. And if you rearrange terms, that's the same thing. In linear algebra, we need to understand how this length changes to the first order. This is a dot product in d of w-- that vector-- dot product with C of v minus C of w. If I project this vector onto this one, that's going to be the first-order change to this edge length. If we can ever find something and show that it's infinitesimally rigid, then we've determined it's rigid, professor says. The idea of a rigidity matrix is a matrix equation, if you want. There's a fun theorem called the rank nullity theorem from linear algebra. It says if you have a matrix, you take its rank-- which is another quantity-- and its nullity, and you add them together, it will be the number of columns in your matrix. In two dimensions, ideally your nullity is-- if you want rigidity, your Nullity should be 3. So this is telling us something we already knew, but essentially for free, which is kind of fun, if you know all thislinear algebra. it's another way of thinking about essentially everything we've seen. And if you know linear algebra, it's useful. Otherwise, I'll tell you how we can use it. OK, for this definition we need the notion of a minor. So we have some matrix. Actually, our matrices are pretty rectangular. And I just choose, let's say k columns from the matrix-- let's I'm saying is if it's non-zero for some choice of C, then it should be non- zero for this choose of C. say 3, and I choose k rows-- the same number of rows and columns. I look at those elements in the intersection, that's a square matrix. That's a minor-- that 3 by 3 square submatrix is called a minor. Then we take the determinant of that matrix, which I won't define. It's a number associated with that matrix. And if it's non-zero-- now remember, rigidity matrix is defined as a function of C. It depends where you put the vertices. Tensegrities are things like this-- here's a tensegrity built and given to me by Bob Connolly. And it has well, I guess, there are three kinds of edges physically. There are the springs, the struts, and there are these wire cables. And its rigid. It's a generalization of a linkage where we allow three kind of edges. It can be a bar-- and this is the old case, which is that the length is fixed. We can have cables, which are the reverse-- you can increase but not decrease. Theory of duality goes back to Roth and Whiteley, 1981-- good year. If I look at all the equilibrium stresses, and I find some stress that is non-zero on a particular structure or cable-- I should mention there's always a trivial stress, which is you set all of these S's to zero. Then everything will hold. If there's a stress that's nonzero on that edge, then in fact, it can't change length at all. It effectively acts like a bar in this configuration. But it's rigid if and only if this is true and this istrue. Professor: I have linear equations. I also have linear inequalities. I can write it as some other matrix R prime. Actually, it's the same matrix. R prime times d is greater than or equal to 0. This is the general form of a linear program. You can write an equality constraint in this world just by taking it and its negation. That forces them to be equal to zero. All you need to know is it there are fast algorithms to solve this, also. If I give you a tensegrity in polynomial time, you can tell whether there is a valid infinitesimal motion that does all things you want on the struts, cables, and bars. In a force polygon, all the stresses are positive, so you're automatically infinitesimally rigid. A polyhedral lifting is going to work if I have a non-crossing configuration. This is a brand-new result from this summer at [? OSMI ?] by Robert Lang and Alex Bateman. In particular, you're going to have to have non-triangles. Those should all remain planar. That's a lifting. If you have any lifting or any lifting, you could not lift them at zero. them before. A spiderweb is something where every edge is basically a cable. You can see under wind and tension, they get a little bit shorter than they're supposed to be. They are pretty strong at preventing expansion. A positive stress corresponds to a mountain, which is the same picture upside down. A zero stress corresponds. to a flat angle-- doesn't have to be horizontal, but it has to be flat. Theorem is there's a one-to-one correspondence between the equilibrium stresses and polyhedral liftings. a little bit, but all by the same amount. And then you twist them a little bit. So here they are twisted, and then you just connect the dots. This algorithm has been around forever, as far as I know. It's how most tesselations are folded. But when does it work? And there is a brand-new result from the summer that it works for some choice of those angles the chain. For convex cycles, it's a little less obvious, but it's also true. can't translate around, but you have one two-degree two-rotational freedoms, I think. So say remove rigid motions by forcing the outside face to lie in z equals 0. So in this particular example, this guy can go to any value, positive or negative, but that's it. Now, this is a lot like stresses-- in fact, it's identical to stresses. It's probably not obvious, but just like stresses where you could set everything to 0, here you can also setEverything to 0. This is called Maxwell-Cremona Theorem. configurations where no two edges cross. This is a smaller version of our old configuration space. It's still defined by polynomial inequalities. What we allow-- and in this case I'm just thinking about linkages for the moment. Two edges either share a vertex or not. And that's it. But they're not allowed to touch anywhere else. And now what we care about is something called a locked dimensions, and maximum degree 2. We can think about what happens with degree 3. Then you can get locked things, and other fun things like that. Claim this tensegrity is infinitesimally flexible, meaning it is not rigid. And that will imply that there's at least an infiniteimal expansive motion. And then you have to use some fancy tricks-- not fancy, some tricks I don't want to talk about. You basically integrate that vector field, and that will give you an actual expansive motion and straight or convex. But how do we actually prove this thing? Let's not worry about that. The interesting part is show that at least infinitsimally, this tense grity moves a little bit. In a typical case, we're going to get a polygon. Wherever it has a convex angle, you get a mountain here. Every polygon has at least three convex vertices. So that's the general picture. And the only thing that can happen is you actually prove that all of this stuff has to be flat. That's the one way it can happen. You can't have strict valleys, but you could have them all 0. And that is the Carpenter's Rule Theorem. still buy them at the hardware store. That's it. You can't buy them online. You have to buy them from the store. They are not available online. They can be bought at the store, but you have to pay for them in cash. They're not available on the internet. You must buy them in the store to get them. You cannot buy them on the Internet. They must be bought from the hardware stores. That is it. They have to be bought in the stores.