Nuclear materials are the biggest research field in the department, and yet, it's not talked about in 22.01. The basic mechanism of radiation damage is like you might imagine. If you want to actually say how long will it take to get materials to the end of their useful life, this tends to be anywhere from 0.002 DPA to hundreds of DPA in proposed fast reactors. The best we can wait for is 20 years to start building the reactor, which is 40 years for a return on investment. So what we really need is what is the full population of every single type of defect in an irradiated material? Stiffness is more of a response function, so it's how much does it deform in relation to how much stress you put into it. Radiation creates pretty much any and all defects, it's a great way to stiffen and strengthen the material. Dislocation movement is irreversible. You can't just snap it back when you relieve the stress. And by making something stronger and stiffer, you make it more difficult for those dislocations to start moving. If you throw absolutely anything in the way from solute atoms to interstitials to vacancies, all of a sudden it's harder for that dislocation to move. A measure called DPA, or displacements per atom, is a simple measure of how many times has every atom left. It's not actually a unit of damage, and I'll be giving a talk at MRS, the materials research conference tomorrow, railing against this DPA unit. Damage is some measure of the number of messed up atoms at the end of the game, and they operate in very different timescales. The DPA is all over in less than a picosecond, but it can take years for all these different defects to diffuse, to cluster up and to form these super structures. energy E and imparting kinetic energy T to another struck atom? That comes right from-- remember our treatment-- I think I've drawn this probably 50 times now. Our hollow cylinder treatment of a charged particle with charge little ze interacting with a particle a big ZE at some impact parameter B. We wanted to know well, for all possible approach paths, the area of this hollow circle, or the probability that this particular approach path is taken, is just the area here 2pi b db. not just ranting against it, no I am, but I'm doing so with evidence, so it's justified. Here's a nice experiment I like to show in every talk for this case. These folks took pure nickel and put it in the same reactor, at the same temperature, and got the same amount of swelling. All the conditions were the same. Same temperature, same materials, same microstructure. Same reactor, same neutron energies. Just a different dose rate. A 30% difference in the rate at which neutrons arrived at the nickel. Russia has a fleet of sodium cooled fast reactors that can get you 25 DPA per year. If your reactor is going to go to 500 DPA, you have to know whether or not your materials will survive. The reactor vessel looks like a gigantic forging of really thick carbon steel with a very thin liner of stainless steel. And the stainless steel is there to prevent corrosion from the reactor water. But if you were to take something out of the vessel and release it from the plant, the part would annihilate their stored energy. You can see it in real time. Most of the defects that cause these reductions in material properties are too small to see, even in a millisecond. Most defects are very, very small, and it turns out that-- first of all, the resolution of the screen is funny. I think I know how to fix that. Clone the screen and then jump back to presenter mode. That usually-- that's not what I wanted. That's what he wanted, great. That would be the worst with a gun, you are an expert marksman and deserve the delicious and tiny treat. build up, then what Jared said could happen. You could crack the material because it could get weaker, less ductile, less tough. Weaker is the opposite of strong, and what's the other one? Toughness-- oh, and harder, actually. So the origins of material swelling are the humble vacancy. A void is nothing but a bunch of vacancies or a pocket of vacuum or gas in a material. As they cluster together, they reached this threshold in terms of free energy where putting a few of them together is not quite energetically favorable. pocket of vacuum, then that pressure differential goes down and that void becomes a bubble, and that bubble is more stable. So there's this one here called Z alpha, which means neutron comes in, alpha particle goes out. alpha particle is just an ionized helium ion, which very quickly pulls in two electrons from anywhere else in the metal and becomes helium gas. At higher energy starting around 2 MeV, there is a small, but non-negligible chance that a neutron will go in, and a helium atom comes out. When you apply radiation, you can just create dislocations. This is a pretty slick image of a single crystal of cadmium being pulled in this direction, and you can actually see every plane there, that's a slip plane. That's a plane where disLocations have been moving all the way to the outside of the material, which is pretty cool, and this is the process that you want to happen. You get a mixture of bending and rotation to make it look like the bar is bending uniformly straight, but on the microscale, it's not. the metal that all those guys thought was going to be ductile like metal was more brittle than glass. And any sort of bump would cause just complete shattering of this metal and catastrophic release of radioactive material. So this took them-- let's see-- I think Kazakhstan is smaller than the US. So who here has done a cross-country trip? How long it take you? AUDIENCE: Six days from Seattle to here. MICHAEL SHORT: OK, so this trip took them 13 days because they went slow. what we call the ductile-brittle transition temperature. This is the property that people worry about for reactor pressure vessels. If this material's got a bunch of defects already in it, then you should release that defect energy by heating it and that would take a little less energy to heat it up. We're doing this process on nanograms of material and seeing if you can irradiate something and measure its stored energy because if you could, you could take a tiny little razor blade, take out the smallest sliver of the vessel. These out and you hit them with a very well calibrated hammer. And you can measure by actually turning this dial and letting the hammer turn it. So it breaks right through the material, in this case, it's in a quenched or brittle condition. And by doing this test at a number of different temperatures, you can recreate this ductile-brittle transition temperature curve. So they'll take a few Charpy coupons, they will test them at, let's say, every 25 Celsius, get a bunch of points, and decide where is the material brittle. that gets the most damage, you'd be taking out some of the stainless steel, which is a problem. You could take a piece out from here, maybe the outside, but then you've got a stress concentrator. Any sort of chunk that is missing is where a crack is going to preferentially form. The only way to do that is to go nano. Take that out. Anyone else have any ideas? Yeah? AUDIENCE: Is it impossible to just replace the vessel? MICHAEL SHORT: Yes. Scientists have developed a way to measure the stored energy in a material. It's called differential scanning color imagery. You simply heat two materials, one of which contains your sample, and look how much energy it takes between them to keep them at the same temperature. The heating is so fast that the defects don't even have time to show up, the researchers say. The next step is to use a nano a DSC, or nano differential scanning calorimeter, that can heat about 10,000. Snipes are real. You pretty much have to be British to know it, because they hunt them there for sport, and apparently, they're delicious. That's actually where we get the term snipe because the actual size of the sniper compared to the sniper is about that. If you can shoot that bird, if you can get that shot, you're a snipe hunter. You're not looking for a bird that doesn't exist. It's what we call the ultimate snipe hunt. It actually fits on a chip. There's one that we put our material on, and one as a reference that we both put in the accelerator being irradiated at the same time. This is what they actually look like. The scale bar here is 100 microns, and that transparent spot is a little bit of aluminum that we vapor deposited onto the calorimeter. Right there. That whole thing just went from zero to 450c. That pulse right there. It slowed down by a factor of 1,000. And so the way this process works, is we take our DSC chip, we put a mask over it. doing Charpy coupons of one place, which is what we do now, you can get a map. We don't have that information now, but if you take pieces from all over the vessel, then you get an actual 3D map. When some type of defect gets high enough in temperature that it goes from stuck to mobile, and as that moves, it encounters anything else. How do you know? You don't. You make measurements like these. Any other questions? Yeah? the vessel too much, it's no longer a code stamp vessel. Pretty tricky spot that we're in, huh? But we're trying to science our way out of it. I don't want to keep you longer, but I'll open on Thursday with a little story about how mass attenuation coefficients can get you out of apartheid South Africa. I'm serious. And then we'll move into dose and biological effects. It's a couple minutes after. Well, it was just a few minutes.