In this video I'm going to be going over lung oscilation specifically the sites of where you osculate. We're going to go over normal breath sounds versus abnormal breath sounds. In the next video I'll be performing an assessment on a patient and show you how to listen with your stethoscope to these sides. I'll also give you some landmarks to make your job easier so you'll know what intercostal space correlates with which lobe of the lung you're listening to. We're going to start from top to bottom and compare sides and work our way down. We'll start right above the scapula right where the Apex is and we'll listen here. Then we'll just inch a little bit down maybe to the seventh space down the lung and just listen in those lower loes. We will inch down to the sixth intercostal space but mid axillary so where their armpit is go Midway. We're down in the lower lobe of the lungs and we will have them in inhale and exhale and then we'll compare it on the other side. on women you want to have the woman raise up her breast so you can get underneath those sights so youcan hear those lung sounds because the tissue will muffle the noise and you won't be able to hear that. Third type of continuous adventitious breath sound is called stri spider and this is heard on inspiration because what's happening is that the airway is being obstructed by inflammation or some foreign object. Once you hear this you will never forget it's very unique sounding it is a high pitch whistling or gasp with a very harsh quality. remember to get the best sound quality so you can hear so you're not listening over the shoulder blades because that will muffle your sound and you won't be able to hear. Have your patient put their arms in their lap or just separate those shoulder blades from each other so they can get in between that spine and shoulder blade area. From C7 to T3 your cervical and thoracic spine that is where your upper loes are and as you can see here's your Fishers right here. and discontinuous now first let's go over continuous what does continuous mean this is a extra sound that you're hearing that is lasting SE more than 2 seconds with a full respiration okay the first type is called a high pitch polyphonic whe let the name help you okay so what is it it is mainly heard in expiration but it can be in Inspiration as well. A lot of times you'll hear it whenever the patient's breathing out it is a low pitch whistle sound and this is what Strider sounds like.