Professor Shelly Kagan: Life on the experience machine is perfect as long as you've got the right tape playing. But the vast majority always says, no, there's something missing from that life, she says. Different theories of well-being might answer that in different ways, Professor Kagan says. We don't have any kind of accomplishments we don't want, not in the right kinds of loving relationships, he says. Rather than trying to work out the details of these complicated views, we should try to add up all the positive experiences along with all the negative ones, says Kagan. All think accomplishment's important, but it's not as though any old accomplishment is important. We want a life in which we're accomplishing things, there's agency, and the life of knowing things. We need the right kinds of accomplishments and the right kind of knowledge. Without predictability you don't know where to put the peak. If you try to aim for peaking later, you might not make it to that. if you put it too soon, you may stick around for longer than that, and then the peak has come too soon. LZ Granderson: We add up the goods and subtract the bads of our lives. He says we can generalize across all humans, but it varies from person to person. LZ: We care more about being short-changed than we do about being overcompensated. He asks: Would it be better to know when you were going to die? Lz: In our world, not only do we have variability, we've got unpredictability. of chosen to become a doctor. The deprivation account says, death is bad for you insofar as, by virtue of dying now, what you've been deprived of is, another chunk of life that would've been good for you to have. We've now seen that that's a bit crude, right? We have to not talk--just talk about the good things in the life, but the good of life itself. And we have to notice that perhaps on certain views, for certain cases, it's not really the case that when I die I'm being deprived of a good life. Hedonism is a version of the "neutral container theory" of the value of life. Hedonism says life itself has no value in and of itself. The value of being alive per se outweighs that, he says. So more life would always be better, no matter how horrible the contents might be, Hedon says. "I find the fantastic valuable container theory fantastic in the sense of incredible. I can't bring myself to believe it, which--I also have some sympathy for neutral container theories" subtract the ignorance and deception. Doing that in terms of the contents gives you a subtotal, but that subtotal is no longer the entire story. If we accept a valuable container theory, we also have to add in some extra positive points to take account of the fact that, well, at least you're alive or have the life or a person--or whatever it is that you think is valuable in and of itself. Even if your content subtotal was negative ten, that doesn't mean you're not better off alive, because negative ten plus the extra hundred points for the mere fact that you're Alive is still going to give you a positive total, plus 90. On the modest view, if we ask ourselves, would it have been good to be immortal? the answer's going to depend on whether we accept Bernard Williams' claim that immortality would be bad for you. So on balance, being immortal is a good theory myself--I don't find it particularly attractive. But let me remind you that saying that does not rule out the possibility of consistently going on to say that even though it's a good thing that we die. For some of us, death does not come too soon. David Frum: The fundamental badness of death is that it deprives me of life worth having. He says it's arguable that this isn't the only bad thing about death. Frum says there are other features of death, as we experience it, that are separable from the deprivation account. He asks: Does the variability of death make it better or worse? He says perhaps there's some comfort in the inevitability of death and the fact that most people die too soon. Dostoyevsky: It's not merely the fact that you're going to die, it's inevitable that we're all going to death. He asks: What about this inevitability of death? Does that make things worse? He says if we see that something is just necessary, we--it reduces the sting of it. He says variability, although it's a requirement for unpredictability, doesn't guarantee unpredictability. The fact that there's variability and so some people get less than average--that extra bad, I suspect, outweighs the extra benefit of some people having more than average. in life is necessary, then we'd get a kind of emotional distance from it; it would no longer upset us. We could no longer be disappointed, because to be disappointed in something presupposes that it could've been some other way. Spinoza thought if you see that it couldn't go any other way, then you can't be sad about it. Well, maybe that's right, but going back to the firsthand, I don't know how many of you have read Dostoyevsky's short novel The Underground Man. of view of somebody who gets less, this is obviously a bad thing. It's bad enough that I'm going to die too soon. I said I wasn't going to keep saying that remark, and here I am saying it anyway. That's clearly an extra-bad. But we might then wonder, for every person who gets. less than the average amount of life, there's another person who has more than the median amount of. life. That person gets to say, hey. Well, you know, it's a pity that I am going. Because of unpredictability, you can't really know, it's difficult to make the right kinds of plans. You decide to go off to medical school, become a doctor. And that's a very long commitment. It's a long-term plan, which can go wrong if you get sick and die in your early 20s. If only you'd known you were only going to have 20 more years instead of 50 more years, you would've picked a different kind of life for yourself. Somebody starts out poor and makes his way through hard work and dedication and effort to riches and success. That's the Horatio Alger life--H.A. Great life. But notice that in terms of the contents of the life, at The narrative arc, as I put it. The story "bad to good" is the kind of story we want for ourselves, while the story "good to bad" we don't want. Why is that? And this of course should remind us of the puzzle about Lucretius. Why do we care more about future non-existence than pastNon-existence? A lot of us might feel that a life like this, where we peak but then we stick around--you know, isn't--can at least fail to be as desirable in which we end with a bang. If you start thinking about narrative arcs--imagine a novel, right? It's one thing to have--it's not to say that the best--if you want your life to be like the plot of a great story, it's not as though you think, "All right, the dénouement must occur at the very last page" ask--so I'll throw the question out and we'll call it a day, start with this next time--then we have to ask, would it really be better to know? would you want the birthmark? Would you want to know exactly how much time you've got left? All Right. See you next time. Back to the page you came from. Click here for more from CNN iReport. Back To the pageyou came from, back to thepage you were from.