in this module of tools and equipment we're going to explore cookware and storage wear. There are five basic metals that are used in cookware aluminum copper stainless steel cast iron and carbon steel aluminum pots and pans are the ubiquitous pans that you'll find in most every kitchen. A rondo is an amalgam of several different metals cladware sometimes referred to as allcloud because of its brand name is using different layers in of metal including stainless steel copper and aluminum to be able to provide the benefits of each one of those metals. interchangeably in many ways but believe it or not though there is a difference between these two does it make a difference in your cooking if you use one instead of the other. A saute pan or satwa is one with the straight sides and has a larger surface area which makes it ideal for tasks like searing meat or reducing a pan sauce. A sawtooth or skillet has a slope side and is used mainly in sauteing the slope sides providing the ample and perfect angle for flipping your food or as it's referred to as saute or to jump a rondeau. These are the basic pots and pans you need to get started in the kitchen. The best rule of thumb is quality over quantity make sure you invest in good quality pots and pan that will last for years. These heavy duty polycarbonate food storage containers often referred to by the trade name cambro are the workhorses of the restaurant kitchen. They can store produce in the cooler liquids in the freezer and dry goods at room temperature. They wash well by either hand or dishwashing and can stand up to years of usage. notice that this two inch hotel pin will fit directly into this and it'll fit snugly. This is because you'll have water underneath in your four inch hotel pan that will be simmering. You also have perforated hotel pans which are basically hotel pans with holes in them. These can be used as steamers you can use them to drain things in a steam steamer setup. There's a lid you have a lid with it takes up too much room in your coolers and takeaway number six you can never have enough hotel pans no matter what size you have. Sip top bags are an indispensable storage device for kitchens. They allow the storage of dry goods and other small quantity items. They can be used in the freezer or refrigerator as easily as they can be in dry storage and they can even be used for sous-vide cooking. They come in a variety of different sizes but most common sizes are the full size and half size. The speed rack is essential for storage and movement within the restaurant. The ziploc can be left open wrapped with plastic for transportation and air protection or draped with a plastic bag.