Jonathan Gruber: What stops people from bingeing on everything? It's their budget constraint. He says budget constraints can help with a lot of kind of decisions in life. Gruber says we're not going to tell you what to eat. People like to have choices, and they like to let choice drive things, he says. Grubert: We're not saying it's right or wrong. It's positive economics. This is not normative economics. We're talking about how consumers use budget constraints to maximize utility. The median American household has $400 in the bank. If you're below the poverty line in America, roughly speaking, you get help with buying food. The SNAP program gives you a debit card, and that debit card can be used to buy food and food only. If your income goes up, but your parents decide to send you more money, what does that do to your choices? If you get $500 in cash, now all we've done is shift out your budget constraint from 5,000 to 5,500. You can essentially devote your income to some combination of pizza and cookies. The rate at which you can trade off pizza for cookies is minus 1/2. Every extra cookie that you buy, holding your income constant, lowers the amount of pizza you can have by p sub p. This is a really good slice of pizza, OK? Well, what happens to the budget constraint? Let's look at figure 3-2. You have your original budget constraint BC1. Now we're going to have MRT, the marginal rate of transformation. The more you spend on one, the less you get of another, Jonathan Guber says. Gubers: By having more of one, we're getting less of the other. "You are choosing six cookies and three pizzas. That is the best off you can get given your budget," he says. "We are not literally transforming pizza into cookies. That would be kind of cool, but we're not doing that. That's somewhere else at MIT, OK? But it's effectively doing the same thing" Weight Watchers has developed the best method of weight loss in America. They set up a budget constraint and ask you to follow it. They essentially assign point values to every good you might consume. So, for example, they say, if you want to achieve a weight loss of x over y days, then you've got to limit yourself to z points. So the slope has fallen from negative 1/2 tonegative 1/3. The y-intercept has not changed, but you can have fewer slices of pizza. A 10-piece nugget is 12 points, apple slices are one point, and a Diet Coke is zero. Now you have 13 points and plenty of room for dinner. "I'd much rather a Big Mac and fries and a Coke than nuggets and apple slice and Diet Coke. Give me a break," he says. "But I'd also much rather have dinner, OK? So, basically, this lets you make a choice." "Anyone who tells you that second lunch is as good as that first lunch is a liar," he adds. Jonathon Gruber: How do you determine your marginal rate of transformation? How do determine your-- like say it wasn't just pizza and cookies. How would you determine that value? JONATHAN GRUBER: That's a great question, and we're going to actually answer that question next lecture very explicitly. Next lecture, we'll compare explicitly why income changes differ from price changes and what are the underlying mechanisms. You want the bang for the-- you want to put your next dollar where it's going to make you happiest. budget constraint, which runs from 6 pizzas to 12 cookies. That's the original budget constraint. And you have a series of indifference curves. And these indifference curves, I1, I2, I3, I4, they all come directly from this utility function. And what we see is that point D is the furthest out indifference curve you can achieve while still meeting your budget. And, therefore, we say that the optimum, graphically, is the tangency between your indifference curve is minus 1/2 at point C. point A better? Why isn't it better to have two? Maybe you like cookies a lot and don't like pizza a lot. How can we say that point D is better than point A? Yeah? JONATHAN GRUBER: It's on a higher indifference curve. So point D dominates point A because it's a higher indifferent curve. Well, fine. Same person, by that logic, why not choose point E? It's above the budget. OK, likewise, point C you wouldn't choose. The marginal utility of pizza is 1 over square root of 10. Marginal utility of cookies is 2.5 over the square root. Utils are not, but that is a meaningful concept. So we only care about it in ratios, so we need the ratio. Remember, marginal rate of substitution is MUc over MUp. So your marginal rateof substitution is minus2.5. What does that mean? Can anyone tell me what that means? Your marginal rateOfSubstitution is 2,5. Jonathon Gruber asks audience to trade two pizzas for one cookie. "That's what that number means. And that is a meaningful number," he says. "You are willing to give up 2.5 slices of pizza to get one cookie" "So what should you do? Eat less pizza. Eat more cookies," he asks. "We can use that. That's not an ordinal. that's cardinal" "You're willing to trade. Yeah, say it loudly so we can hear," he adds. how we do constrained optimization. OK, that is hard and very important. If you understand this, you're sort of done with consumer theory, OK? This is sort of the core of what consumer theory is all about. It's all about this balancing act. The whole course is fundamentally all about one equation, which is marginal benefits equals marginal costs. OK? Everything we do is going to be about weighing the marginal benefit of an activity against its marginal cost. We want to set them equal. And this sort of example I hope explained why. Jonathon Gruber: Food stamps are not actually called food stamps anymore. They're basically a program the government has that provides money for individuals to buy food if they're low income. The point of SNAP isn't really with contentedness or happiness, but rather like what would be to a more sustainable life, he says. GRUBER: If you really just care what makes people happiest, you should give them cash, OK? He says a way people could get around food stamps is to buy and sell it. it makes it a lot easier to have two goods. Your two goods are food and shelter. And, actually, if you're that poor, that probably is the only two goods you have to-- you can worry about at that level of income. The fundamental-- one of the important things is people always get to the point that makes them happiest, OK? We call it the robustness of economic equilibria. They want-- they always before had the choice of spending $500 on food, and they chose not to. you die, that would be really bad. The reason to do this is because we think they don't know best. In that case, maybe we don't feel so bad about forcing the guy to buy food instead of cocaine, OK? In other words, this a program which might make sense if we are paternalistic. If we think that people won't necessarily make the right decisions for themselves, then it may be worth actually making them worse off because they're not worse off. Their perceived benefits are worse. in practice. Are they making a difference? Well, actually, we've run an experiment on this, OK? We're going to talk in this class a lot about empirical results in economics. This class is mostly going to be a theoretical class. That is we'll talk about models and ideas. But we're also talking about empirical economics, which is results and testing the theories we develop. And the empirical evidence is that, basically, the price of our paternalism is 15%. We are making people, effectively, 15% worse off. Vox.com followed these women up nine years later, and the effect had totally gone away. They're not worse off, but it looks like, at least what in the short run made them better off, well, that effect fades over time. But the bottom line is, at this point, I think the evidence is sort of probably in favor of being less paternalistic and just giving people cash, but that runs into a lot of difficulties in terms of our concerns about how people will spend it. stop there. We will come back on Monday, and we'll talk about how we actually go from this stuff to the demand curves we started the class with. Back to the page you came from. back to CNN.com home. Follow us on Twitter @cnnireport and @CNNOpinion. Follow CNN Living on Facebook and Twitter. For more, go to www.cnn.com/lifestyle and www.dailymail.co.uk/lpin.