Expectations play a huge role in economics, says Ricardo Caballero. He says they play a big role in the decision of all economic actors, including investors, consumers and firms. He gives a shortcut to think about the role of expectations in the kind of models we have already discussed. CaballERO: I want to revisit the consumption function and the investment function, now taking into account expectations and motivate how you should really think about consumption and investment in a more realistic model than we have been discussing. Milton Friedman called it the permanent income theory of consumption. It says what really matters to you in a consumption decision is what you expect to get on average during your lifetime. How wealthy you are will pin down more or less the consumption you have more than your current income. The very rich often have no income, [CHUCKLES] at least labor income. All the income comes from returns on assets, and they mostly borrow against that. But in any event, what really brings out your consumption is your wealth, not the current flow of income. expect to inherit or whatever, minus the debts you have. So very much as we discussed in the previous lecture in the context of asset pricing, the expected present discounted value of the cash flows of all the assets you have, that's your financial wealth. And that's important. You have more financial wealth, even if you have no income today, you will probably borrow against that wealth to the extent that you can. And so you're going to fund the consumption, which is above your current income just because you have morefinancial wealth. Investments that give you a return, a quick return, are worth more than things that have a pay-off in the very long run. So the decision, for example, of buying a machine needs to look at the price of the machine right now and then at the expected present discounted value of the cash flows, OK? So suppose you buy a machine for a price. Let's normalize that price to 1. The first thing you need to know is, well, how long will this machine last. much or is not as optimistic as the firm is and so on. So it may not borrow-- the firm may not be able to borrow as much as it would want given how optimistic that particular firm is on its own project. And one way that firms use, actually, to get around financial constraints is simply by returning-- retaining their earnings, meaning they generate a cash flow, and they save. So, for example, if you have a fiscal contraction that leads to an anticipation of a big cut in interest rates in the future, that may be expansionary. firms, especially smaller firms, have deposits and cash flow and so on mostly because, if they get a good opportunity, they may face financial constraints. So if current activity is high, sales are high, firms are going to be less likely to be financially constrained. And that's the reason current profits also end. But if interest rates go up today, and I expect them to remain high for a long time, that's going to affect a lot more the present value of profits. time, because otherwise it would be irrelevant. If the Fed cuts the interest rate but doesn't persuade anyone that this rate will remain low in the future, then it is going to get very small effect on output. However, if we convince people that there will be future changes, that the rates will remain lower for a long time, that means that this IS now will shift to the right, OK? That's what we have here. So again, expectations mattered quite a bit. If you convince the markets that-- and the markets and consumers, households, and so on-- that you're cutting interest rates and that, with that, you'll be successful. but are the variables we expect of those-- are the values of respect for those variables in the future and, again, with the same sign. So if output-- so if taxes go up today, aggregate demand will decline, and output will decline. But if I expect future taxes to go up as well, then that's going to depress aggregate demand even more. That's the type of logic I want you to develop. So this is the IS in the same space I had before-- interest rate and output, current output. the static model. Changing government expenditure, same idea-- it will also move aggregate demand to the right. But will it do it by more or less? Well, think how government expenditure worked in the basic model. It increased aggregate demand, and that then led to a multiplier. And we got a lot more income and so on. Now, if we expect this government expenditure it to be temporary, that multiplier also will be a lot smaller because, yes, it will increase income, but people are not going to spend all their income today. Alan Greenspan is known as one of the biggest central bankers that the US has, at least in recent memory. He went through a period which was called-- was known as the Greenspan conundrum. He kept hiking interest rates, but the loan rates kept coming down. So he couldn't cool off the economy. There was no way around that because they couldn't persuade the markets that this would be a long-lasting effect. The reason was a different one. It happens that, at the same time, you had China sending massive capital flows to the US. reason, the fiscal deficit, the perception of fiscal deficit,. was really dragging the economy down because people didn't know when there could be a financial crisis in the near future. Then you can get a situation in which the contraction, fiscal contraction today, improves the perception. of stability of the country in the future, which in turn may increase expected future income and be expansionary. So most of the fiscal contractions are contractionary. But there are some famous episodes of what are called expansionary fiscal contracts.