Bentham's principle is "the greatest happiness of the greatest number" He thinks all utility is quantifiable. Bentham allows interpersonal comparisons of utility. If you imagine a status quo, a perfectly egalitarian world in which each person has six units of utility, you can start asking yourself, "Well, let's imagine if we could redistribute things." What would that mean as far as Bentham's doctrine is concerned? It's a potential departure from the status quo the utility monster talked about last time. Prof: In the first instance we say that utility is quantifiable and expressible through money. Then related to that, we can work with a doctrine of revealed preference. We can vary the price that we charge admission for the course. And we could even influence your behavior without actually changing your preferences. Your enjoyment from coming or not coming to class wouldn't change, but your behavior would change if we varied the price. Student: Diminishing marginal utility, the principle of diminishing marginal utility of all good things. Professor Ian Shapiro: Bentham was a fairly radical guy. He was a supporter of democracy, which was a radical thing at that time. But he wasn't as egalitarian sticker, he's saying the rich will burn their crops before giving them to the poor, and that is a common argument in politics. Shapiro: In principle absolute equality would maximize the greatest happiness of the greatest number, but in fact if a government set out to do that, the rich would rebel. It seems to allow ethnic cleansing, even genocide, all justified on the grounds this is maximizing the total utility of society. Econ 101: How many of you have done ECON 101, the first econ course? Yeah, so what is the principle that would tell you if you have no food and I give you a loaf of bread, your utility goes up a lot to say it would have to be pairs of shoes, right? Student: Yeah, I guess. Prof: Okay, but that's a great example to start us off on this. What else? Anything else anyone might find problematic? yeah, over here. diminishing marginal utility says that this line will get flatter and flatter. Each new Porsche is less valuable to you than the previous Porsche. If we just kept giving you lots of right shoes, there'd be a problem. So it's the best assumption you can make given that you've got to assume something. But now, and now I want to come back to the sophisticated point that was made in the middle at the back there a few minutes ago, when you made the point that the principle of diminishing marginal utility is true. just need more money to get the same amount of happiness. For Donald Trump to get more utility, you have to give him a huge amount of new money. So the more money you have, the more you will want in order to of diminishing marginal utility. So we should take the dollar from Trump and we should give it to the bag lady, and the greatest happiness of the greatest number will have increased, right? But then maybe we shouldtake another dollar, shouldn't we? I mean it worked the first time, so we shouldn't stop. When are we going to stop? Prof: If you had one and I said, "I'll give you my one, it's right out there," you wouldn't want it? Student: It's not that I wouldn't. want it, but maybe the utility for the second one in some cases would be more than the utility. for the first one. Prof: Okay, so it's a possibility. Any other examples of where this becomes problematic? I mean, think about beer. One beer increases your utility a lot. The next, and the next and the fourteenth. Spitzer's integrity is blown it's not like there's some--it's a binary good. People either think he's either a hypocrite or he's not, it' a binary thing. So there might be some goods like integrity that are not easily capture-able in this logic. We should put that out there, but yeah, over here? Student: What about health? It's not quite binary because you can be in medium health, but I think it would be pretty useful to be healthy and then super healthy, ad infinitum. start to think about the utility that people at the bottom of the social order derive from a particular good, versus the utility of those at the top. Let's suppose a two-person society, again, and let's suppose it consists of Donald Trump and a homeless woman living out of a left luggage locker in Grand Central Station. And the question is, should we take a dollar from Trump and give it to the bag lady? What? Should we? Yes? No? How many think yes? Okay, yeah, almost everybody. as all that, and he wanted to temper the downward redistribution that flows from his principle, and so he makes a distinction between what he refers to as "absolute" and "practical" equality. When have we passed the point of practical equality, to use Bentham's terminology? Are we close to it? Have we gone by it? are we nowhere near it? There have been periods in our history when we've had top marginal tax rates of 90 percent, right? Reagan thought a topmarginal tax rate of 40 percent was beyond the point. because it's where you start to see our old friend the workmanship ideal creeping by the backdoor into utilitarianism. Bentham says, "Law does not say to man, Work and I will reward you but it says: Labour, and by stopping the hand that would take them from you, I will ensure you the fruits of your labour" So another way of thinking about this is, that Bentham's idea of the state is essentially regulatory. It stays the hand of somebody else who would steal your goods, but the government cannot itself create utility. Ronald Reagan came in and said, "If we cut taxes, the pie will get bigger for all and they'll be actually more revenue," and so utilitarianism says do it. And the Democrats say, "No, they won't," and it's an empirical argument. And you will find, if you go back now and look at what happened during the 1980s, perfectly credible economists will line up on both sides because they cut the taxes, but, of course, eight other things happened as well that affect the macro-economy. classical to what we're going to all neoclassical utilitarianism is a subject with which I will begin on Wednesday. See you then for the next installment of this week's Daily Discussion, which will focus on the role of utilitarianism in the development of the modern world. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from. Click here to read the first installment of the Daily Discussion. Follow us on Twitter @CNNOpinion and @jennifer_newton.