Al shalot is the CEO of GT Sports. He is also a member of the Olympic commission the international Olympic Comm. He has been involved in the conception and Advising the I on what's not public the Olympic sports games. The turning point for him are the Asian Games the people from the Olympic Committee when they attended this event they're like okay now we get [Music] it hi there my name is Al shalots. I'm the CEO of GT Sports uh it's an official Olympics Esports organization pretty Global they call us the real Madrid of Esports. to connect with the audience the youth audience where they are and to leverage gaming and Esports to do that so it was strategically cited and we're just part of a discussion about how to implement it. I think uh it's totally possible that in the future uh finding the balance as always between popularity relevancy and a certain fit with the values that the Olympic Committee wants to project this kind of game will be futureed. I'm I have to be optimistic and and I'm very positive one of the big criticisms of the Esports World Cup is that there were 22 events just one of them specifically for women. Saudi Arabia is the fastest growing region of the world right now for gaming and eort so this is why PC always brought the idea to bring a property and events to a country to create some bridges. I remember when when Beijing was elected to host for some Olympics it created kind of like a a moment of like creating Bridges with like China and I I see the same way gaming entertainment in general could be a breach now for Saudi Arabia. There's been a lot of criticism about Saudi Arabia as a host uh some LGBT players uh women saying that they don't feel like they'd be welcome. There's not a huge amount of female participation at the moment at that event what are your hopes for how to improve that. Paris Olympics this summer will to perform with the highest level and then it will be the job of the rest of the industry to build the the step stones to get there. There might be some people who might feel a bit disappointed about that potentially it's not my role to say yes or no because I'm not decision maker but I would their country wherever the country. Olympic opening ceremony will be similar to the summer and winter games. There will be something you know with a flag ceremony probably at the beginning. I think it's going to make a huge difference of like touching emotionally people that have not been touched so far by easts. I'm French so I I will cheer for the the national team of League of Legend uh potentially with one of my players on representing my country. We have been dreaming of this like France against Spain with the best player of the World. "Everybody wants to see what a dennish team will do against Corin I I would love to see it too you know so um I've seen a lot of players making the the guess or what the team could look like so his aspiration to be part of is is clearly part of the discussion," he says. "You follow a bit like the conversation about but uh rocket league and OverWatch back in the days at the at the World Cup for for their game and and and League of Legend also often have this conversation about creating the Euro Cup or World Cup"