"Unlockable" can mean either it's possible to unlock it, or it is not possible to lock it. There's an "-able" that changes verbs into adjectives, and there are "un-"s, one that combines with verbs. "Un-" can combine with either a verb or an adjective, and so we get this ambiguity. And the ambiguity is what we would expect it to be, yeah? This is all review. Go ask some people whose minds have not been contaminated by linguistics. in the following way. We'll say some things which are clearly true. There's a "-able" suffix that changes verbs into adjectives. And then, we said, there are two "un-"s. An "un-" that combines with verbs and makes verbs. That's an "un" that means something like undo the effects of, or change something so that it is no longer in the state that it would have been if the verb had applied to it. "Un-" number two combines with adjectives and makes adjectives that mean more or less "not" horrible thought, and it's random. When Alexander cut the Gordian knot, he wasn't untying could imagine that it would, but that's not what it means. If I untie a shoelace, first of all, it has to start off tied, is that right? So if I have a Shoelace which is not tied, I can't untie it. But if it's tied and then I take scissors and I cut it into many small pieces, have I untied it? No, surely not. true, but it is not a complete description to say that those are two sentences that consist of a noun, a verb, a preposition, a determiner, and a noun. We had this operation, we were calling it merge, that takes pairs of things and puts them together into a larger thing. And similarly here, what we're going to do to create a sentence like "I will find the red book," we'll start with just the end of it, "find" You can ask questions like, "Up which stairs did John walk?" It's a strange way to ask the question, but you can say it. "Up the cats" is not a prepositional phrase. You can say, "I will wake him up" but not "up the cats up" "We up" is different from "I'll walk the stairs up," I think. I think maybe "up" is modifying "to her" or "to the student" I think I'm using her as a ladder. Theory of syntax would divide sentences into three kinds. There are sentences that you've heard a zillion times before, like "We're going to class" And on the other hand, sentences you have possibly never heard anyone say, but that are fine. "My anteater is hula dancing," you may never in your life have heard that. But it's an OK sentence. As opposed to, "We's class going to," which I've given a star there. Recall that the star is what syntacticians give to things that are bad. We're not going to be talking about prescriptive studies of English grammar. We're going to try to get sentences like, "This is the answer" or whatever. Flies, sudden heart attacks, and then other kinds of things that are maybe less clear to think what to say about them. Nobody ever performs an infinitely long sentence, but we're competent to produce them. And then, yeah, eventually people die, and so nobody ever says a sentence that's infinitely long. In English, there's this distinction between the examples where leaving a preposition behind is what you prefer, "Who are you talking to" But you can kind of say, "To whom are youtalking?" And others, were "About what are you Talking?" Is either of those acceptable at all? "What did you leave despite?" and "Despite what did you left?" Who would do anything to avoid saying either of these things? Yes. So here's another example of one sentence that's quite bad and another sentences that's only bad-ish. Vince Richards: We can have English sentences that consist of two adjectives modifying a noun. He says certain types of words are categories that you can add more words to, even if you don't know what they like. Richards: The problem here is that there are facts about how English pronouns and English particles work that mean you can't get to the meaning of a sentence that doesn't mean anything, but you feel as though it doesn't, right? He says it's possible to have feelings about sentences of the form, well, I don't understand what this is supposed to mean. NORVIN RICHARDS: English speakers end sentences with prepositions every day. "Who are you talking to" where, without the "to," it doesn't have to be about redundancy, he says. "To whom" is part of this phrase that's at the beginning of the sentence, he adds. "Why does "to" have to come along, according to Mr. Richards? I don't know about you guys," he says to the audience, "but it's not my go-to way to say this" your English teacher? Yes? AUDIENCE: Is this another example because that's how it's done in Latin? NORVIN RICHARDS: Yes. English is quite rare in being able to do this. Most of the languages of the world can't. Some time in the 15th, 16th century, a number of grammarians decided that English would be way cooler if it were more like Latin. And that's why your English teacher told you that you can't say this, which is ridiculous. here's another useful distinction. It's sometimes called competence versus performance. Imagine that I'm standing up here talking to you and I say, "This is the--" and then I Inhale a fly. And then imagine that this experience is so traumatizing for me and also for the fly, that I just I never complete that sentence. So we're going to be talking about speakers' competence, what they would do if there were no distractions and no problems. There's also performance. That's the study of what people actually do. Journalists know that the best way to make someone look like a complete idiot is to quote them accurately. What journalists, in fact, do is to clean up all that stuff so that people sounded like they were talking in complete sentences. So we're going to develop a theory of what English speakers say, but it's going to be a theory that's divorced from reality to a certain extent. We're Going to Imagine what English Speakers Say is going to look like to you and me. There is no bound on the length of English sentences. For any sentence in English, it's always possible to create a longer sentence. You can always say, "She thinks that S," where she maybe refers to different people in every clause. When we say it that way, you can tell that I am talking about competence because no matter how long you say it, it can keep going arbitrarily long. It's a possible sentence of English. "Mary thinks that John thinks that it's raining" is a possible English sentence. begin doing some syntax? Here's the sentence, "I will find the red book." grammatical sentence. It's clear what it means, although we've just said it doesn't matter whether it means anything. We're going to look for these units. We'll give it the label "noun" Kind of like when we added "un-" to "lock" and got "unlock," we said, oh yeah, this is also a verb. It acts like a verb in every other way. will find the red book," for example, we'll see that syntax treats that string, "The red book" as a unit. It's possible to say things like "The blue book, I will leave right where it is" but not "Find the red" "Thered book," we want it to be a substring that has certain privileges, as opposed to "find the red," which you can't do those things with. This way of talking about words has the virtue of giving us a vocabulary for talking about those kinds of kinds of observations. "Find the red" is an acceptable answer to a question that you're finding this-- suppose you have this fictional-- this children's game where there's a bunch of little tiles. So we have some cases where we have things that you certainly-- should be adjectives, that either we're getting to use them as nouns, or we're using them as adjectives. It's kind of the same thing-- "land of the free," "home of the brave," NORVIN RICHARDS: Oh. a unit that we've created as we've been putting these pairs together that consists just to "find the red" Do people see that in this tree? So there's a node in the tree, if you want. It's the one that I circled in red that consistsjust of the words "the red book" But there is no thing that I could circle that would consist just of the word "find" That's a unit that topicalization gets to make reference to. that's a property of this tree. is that it contains a noun. "Find the red book" we're going to give that the label verb, because having a verb is the important part for that. "In the garage" is a unit, it's a constituent. It's the kind of thing syntax gets to care about. And again, if I say, "I will find the book in the garage," and you're amazed, you can say "in the garage?" It's a prepositional phrase. just contain a preposition, like, "I will look up," where, again, you can say, "Up?" (Why will you look up?) "I said I would look up, and up I will look"-- Maybe. Maybe this was your point, maybe we want "up" and "to your room" to be separate adverbs. But just like you can walk up to your room,. you can climb a ladder up toyour room. The ladder isn't-- AUDIENCE: --or the stairs. don't want to think of "up the cats" as a unit that has the cats as an object. We want "up" to not be a preposition that's combining with the cats to be aprepositional phrase. "I will wake up the cat" is OK. But when you're done, the cats are up. And possibly also red. It depends on how you did it, I guess. And so we are learning-- this is why I'm glad I'm not a physicist. So I work in the domain in which up and down can be the same thing. her room. I will-- but similarly, you can walk the student-- so I keep going to the student from her, because there's a difference between pronouns and non-pronouns. You can't walk up the student, unless the student is lying down and you're walking on her. But if you mean you're going to walk with the student so that the two of you are up, so we want "walk the student" up to be different from "wake the cats up" construct syntactic trees for strings of words. It's often the case that we get ambiguities like the "unlockable" ambiguity. There is more than one way to combine things. And what we'll do is develop tests that allow us to see which way we've combined words in different ways. And we'll find cases where, depending on in what order you combine things, you get different meanings, and our tests will combine with that. All right. We will do this again on Tuesday.