Fluorescence is the absorption of light energy by a molecule. Luminescence is the general term. Fluorescence is a little bit more specific. There are different types of luminescence. And you'll get to see some of those varieties of fluorescence. And then we'll talk about the application of fluorescent dyes in the electromagnetic spectrum in the next couple of slides. And we're going to see a little more detail in a minute in a detail on some of the fluorescent proteins that are used in biology. Luminescence is the interaction of a chemical with another chemical to give luminescence. In a crime scene, luminol interacts with the heme of blood at an amazingly sensitive level, such that when the lights are turned out, the room's just sort of this battlefield of bright luminescent that indicates that this was a crime Scene. Another pretty useful type of luminecence is bioluminescent, which is a biological reaction that causes luminesence. And many, many marine organisms actually undergo biolueminescence, and it's a whole party there at night in the ocean. The first thing to learn about fluorescence is how to spell fluorescence. It actually is fluor, F-L-U-O-R-E-S. The photo physics of fluorescence involves the excitation of a molecule with light of one energy. Once that molecule has absorbed light, there's a very transient period until the molecule lets out energy in the form of light. And returns back to its ground state now. And I'm going to redefine all these terms properly in a moment. When you excite a molecule, you'll take it to the excited state. It'll sit and vibrate there a little bit. Then it will kick back energy out at a longer wavelength. For the majority of the fluorescence experiments that we do in biology, the wavelengths that you see emission at are in the visible range. Whereas the wavelengths you might excite your molecule at are often in the UV or a bit longer. And these things are going to come up. This isn't the first time that you're going to see them. And it's not the last time. very often related to what's around it. Why is that the case? It's because the excited state may behave differently in different environments. That's why you might see fluorophores experience a change in their fluorescence as a function of their environment. So the molecular environments, if I'm a fluorophore and I'm in water, I'm going to feel pretty differently in my excited state. It's pretty dramatic when you see it. So here, say molecules. Now, ethidium bromide is a dye that can get into cells. And we can look at DNA within cells. Here's a picture of how it would look. DNA microarrays exploit the complementarity of DNA sequences. They can spot 40,000 distinct sequences of DNA in grids to recognize these sequences. And they could be used for profiling genetic material, not just DNA, but RNA and other genetic material. The next class will discuss what the limitations of that are, but we've already talked about the fact that we have to use antibodies with fixed, not living anymore, cells. And a particularly important technology is known as a DNA canores, which can be used to probe for a particular sequence of DNA. dye does when it gets to the DNA. What would that do to things like replication and transcription? It just kind of messes it up. And so these are toxic dyes that can only be used in fixed cells to do observations of cells. So we use it a lot. We need to be careful of it because if it gets absorbed through our skin, it could get into our cells. And it could interfere with replication and other cellular processes. Because it would accumulate on our cellular DNA. in those grooves and you're dissociating easily, you're not going to interfere so much with replication. Does that make sense? So it's a weaker force. Now, I moved this slide up. I realized he was in the wrong place in the deck. This is just an application of the DNA minor groove binder CEOCHST. And in this case, we're looking at three cells. These two are not actively dividing. But take a look at this cell, it's actually clearly in the state preparing for cell division. Professor Martin will talk about antibodies, which are agents of the human adaptive immune system. Antibodies are biological macromolecules that particularly evolved to recognize target antigens. They have been exploited intensively to study biology. In two or three lectures, Professor Martin will learn more about the nuts and bolts of the immune cells, and how it mounts a response to disease and other features. The lectures will take place in the U.S. at the University of California, Los Angeles. B cells are the cells of the immune system that produce soluble antibodies. When you challenge a B cell population with a foreign entity, the B cell will go into gear to produce antibodies that very specifically recognize that foreign target. B cells adopt a very classical shape. But another part of the structure is variable. And when B cells mature, there's loads of rearranging in that variable section in order that it adapt to bind to target. This is what you want to think about is it's a combinatorial system to take little pieces of DNA into a super molecular structure to give you antibody combining sites. The way you make antibodies is by injecting.at cells through the use of antibody structures. The way you generate antibodies is through laboratory animals. And very commonly we use either mice or rabbits for antibody production. The rabbit is used when you need a lot more antibody material. The mouse will satisfy for some experiments, but it's not necessary for all experiments. It's just a way to get the antibodies to bind to the foreign agent or antigen that you want to make an antibody to, which would normally bind at a variable region of the molecule.