As a nurse we will transfuse a patient who is low on red blood cells with new blood cells via a venous access of some type. It takes anywhere between two to four hours for a unit of blood to transfuse. You typically want an 18-gauge or larger IV site some hospitals will allow you to transfused through a twenty engage. It's also important that as the nurse you know the patient's compatibility and their Rh factors. What blood they can receive and can't receive and I have a transfusion. Red blood cells are very vital for our survival and how our body works. What can cause a person to be low on red blood cells and what can cause them to need blood transfusions. Who is the universal donor who can donate to all types that's oh now who's the universal recipient they can take from everyone that's a B next you'll want to get informed consent tell the patient what they're going to be receiving assess their understanding of it also this is a good time to ask about their allergies and if they have received any blood transfusion in the past. When is a patient transfuse well this really depends depends on what's going on with the patient their vital signs how are they tolerating that low blood level and recent guidelines by the American Association of blood banks recommends transfusing blood when hemoglobin levels fall to 7 to 8 grams per deciliter. A lot of times physicians like to pre medicate them and you'll want to let the physician know if they do have a history of that and sometimes they're pre-medicated with benadryl or Tylenol acetaminophen before hand orally. From the time that that blood bag leaves the refrigerator it needs to be in the patient's body within no more than four hours because there's a risk of it developing bacteria and we can give the patient septicemia so you want to transfuse it in that time frame. Before you even start the transfusion you're gonna be doing this verification process so as the nurse you're going to be getting another nurse it's usually to our ends cuz ourian's are usually the ones who can transfuse. matches up perfectly you're gonna look look at the patient's blood type versus the donors tie and the Rh factor. You'll be collecting urine urine on them looking for the free hemoglobin that's came from those red blood cells I have lysis. If there's a discrepancy you'll need to notify the blood bank immediately and just from personal experience this has happened with one of my patients I was doing the whole verification process with another nurse and there was one letter that they had did a clerical error on so I had to send the blood. If someone's having an anaphylactic reaction to something another type is febrile. This is non hemolytic so you don't have the breaking up of those red blood cells. This causes the body to build antibodies so you can see that increased temperature like one degree Celsius or one point eight degree in Fahrenheit from the baseline. Another transfusion reaction you can have is the GVHD the you start having this rash from head the this fever diarrhea all this stuff for several weeks after you've had this blood transfusion. graft-versus-host disease and again like I said this is rare but it's deadly and it tends to occur days to weeks after the transfusion. This is where the donors T lymphocytes cause an immune response in the recipient but actually in grasping in the marrow of the recipient and attacking the recipients tissue. What can happen is they can have a fever and this really peculiar rash all over the body it'll be on the hands and the feet as well with GI issues diarrhea nausea inflammation of the liver. signs every five minutes looking at them watching them looking at that respiratory status it's not compromised or they have an allergic response what's going on now whenever you contact the physician depending on what type of reaction they suspect the patient's having or how severe it is they may order some medication so it varies some things they can orders like corticosteroids which is going to suppress that immune response along with fluids helping flush out that free hemoglobin that's in the body getting it out we want out of the body.