William Wordsworth is a very famous individual along with the next person we talked about Samuel Samuel Taylor Coleridge probably the two of the most influential of this particular era. The piece that we'll read today it's heavily influenced by his past you know they say that he was a true literary pioneer he defied the conventions of his time by insisting that poetry should be should express deep feelings about everyday experiences. The next piece we read is called The Rime of the Ancient Mariner forColeridge that was as we will read here and for the intro for that. Sister I've never lost a parent um I don't know if anyone has but I would imagine that's a big gap in your life and you may be bond a little bit more with your siblings maybe she being the only female he has a sense of protection for and so being separated you can imagine the struggle that one might have in dealing with it with the loss and so he you know he longed to be with her and such and it wasn't until it said the mid-20. This is probably one of the most difficult readings that we have throughout the semester I don't think it's impossible but you're going to have to you're gonna have to work a little bit ok. Just kind of grab onto those moments those moments of nature and such but also as this is kind of like a monologue where he's going on all of a sudden we find out at the end that he's actually talking to somebody. If the rhythm gets choppy and you start to get lost refocus this is only about eight minutes so it's not a long one but focus on what he is saying about nature from time to time. different than the typical every line it's kind of its own little thing and so when it's read in a different way it's it might see a little Jill at times button jamming is something very easy to visually identify a once you understand oh that's in JAMA it's a piece of cake okay. It might give you a little bit of reservation here and there but it shouldn't okay what I want to talk about first is a 786 lines composed a few miles above Tintern Abbey on Abbey you know a religious building. a little bit you know there's one look at you know a grass I think there's no roof on it but imagine what it'd have been like to walk through this when it was a practicing monastery and such what was the like with that big roof on there with the stained glass windows all still in there I mean we don't have much of this here in Fort Wayne you knowthere might be a couple bigger churches sprinkled throughout that are kind of still Gothic influence but you know things like this it's pretty pretty amazing. he talks a lot I mean just describing you know leaning against the tree and looking out amongst the field on looking at the orchard with the you know it talks about the all of the which at this season with the unripe fruits are clad in one green hue. He almost has kind of a teleportation back to some degree of when he was a child okay he goes into great details about when I found through around the river like a like a row like a deer and I would play and when I was little I was having a great time. you distinctly remember a visual image have you ever gone back to that same place and like oh yeah this is the place one of my earliest memories was I was like two or three and I went to Disneyland on California I remembered nothing throughout my life except I remember visually what it looked like and so I took some journalism students to a convention there four or five years ago and I remember standing there in the front of Disneyland in California and watch the train go across. It's kind of a nice little Wow think about how I've changed in my life think aboutHow I've grown up things that I've experienced. hitting it wasn't now we know it's not just because he wants to record all the beautiful panoramic surround it's recording my time with my sister as well okay and so to see that they can appreciate that you know a few lines in your nature never did betray the heart that loved her nature's power over the mind that seeks her out is such that it renders that mind impaired impervious to evil tongues rash judgments and the sneers of selfish men and instilling instead a cheerful faith that the world is full of blessings.