The two-level problem is one that's exactly solved. It's one of our favorite exactly solved problems, although it doesn't seem to have any physical relevance. So we can take a two by two Hamiltonian and exactly diagonalize it. And that's done using a unitary-- or actually, in the case that we looked at, orthogonal-- transformation. But the good thing about it is it's solved by a computer. You just have to have a computer that's patient or fast. And it will crank out the results. Robert Field: What do spectroscopists do? Field: I want something a little more profound. Field: We record spectra. We get energy levels. And we get intensities. We're not allowed to determine the wave function by any experiment. But we are able to observe the energy levels and properties of the Hamiltonian. And that's the subject of this lecture and the next lecture. It's called non-degenerate perturbation theory. And so you want to know J-- sorry, C-- extra lines and extra lines. you the tools to be able to take any arbitrary spectrum and extract from it the crucial information. In the last lecture, we talked a little bit about matrix mechanics, and that involved linear algebra. And you have a wonderful handout on linear algebra, which will give you more than enough to do any quantum mechanical problem we're going to be facing in this class. And there is notation. And the notation is unfamiliar, and you have to learn how to use it. And so we have for example-- the analogy to the Schrodinger equation in matrix language. put parentheses around things. So this is now what we were calling h tilde and this is c tilde. This is now an equation that says, OK, we can transform the Hamiltonian into diagonal form-- E1, En, zeros. And when we have this in diagonal form,. we can say, well, this equation is just E1,. 100 et cetera. So for any eigenvalue, we have an eigen vector. Now what we'd really like to know is, how do we get these eigenvectors from the unitary transformation that diagonalizes H? Morse oscillator is a cheap way of generating something with this shape and then doing the perturbation theory to understand how the nonharmonic aspect of the Morse can affect the energy levels. Now for polyatomic molecules, if you have n atoms, there are 3n minus 6 vibrational normal modes. And so even if you could excite a pure overtone or combinational level, the energy moves around the molecule. And that's called intermolecular, vibrational redistribution. And those there are processes that you could names that any educated physical chemist will know to say, oh, that's the Bixon-Jortner. to know J, CJ eigenstates. Once you have this, then you know how to write the time dependent wave function. And then there's the origin of life. You need two particles to come together and start to condense into a liquid. That's the beginning. Perturbation theory explains the long range interactions by which all gas phase particles attract each other weakly. So that's important too. And so you'll be able to do all of this stuff. So here we have non-degenerate perturbation Theory. And it is important too, because it is just mechanical and boring. we do is now we write the full equation and we sort it into sub equations corresponding to powers of lambda. So the lambda to the 0 equation is really easy. It's just H0 psi 0 is equal to E0 psi0. We could put n's on this. And this is the exactly solved problem. It says, yeah, you build your foundation from the Lambda to 0 equation, and it's just what you know already. And what you're going to do is use the psi n 0 and en 0 to do everything else. energy levels that we're sampling in our experiment. So the molecule more or less tells you how to focus on the part that you care about. And it just contaminates the wave functions a little bit. And if you wanted to know what that contamination is, you could deal with it. So this is your handy dandy key. And you don't need a computer, although when you see the horrible complexity that will result when you start dealing with these sums, you will say, well, I do want to use a computer. talk about the primary paths for the energy to flow and the rates. And that was a major area of research for the last 30 years. But it started out being IVR, yeah, anything can happen. It's statistic or whatever. But no, only specific things can happen, and they're controlled by these specific coupling terms. And you could calculate them. Now there's an interesting other thing. I told you that the first-order correction to the energy is equal to a diagonal matrix element of the correction term to the Hamiltonian. isn't just blowing smoke. This happens an amazing number of times because stretches are higher frequency than bends. And it's very common for the bending modes to be roughly half or one third the frequency of a stretching mode. And so you get a resonance. So this is special because now it's violating the fundamental approximation of non-degenerate perturbation theory. But it's a two-level interaction. And these resonances have names. There is a Fermi and there is a Darling-Dennison. level V1 minus 1 V2 plus 2 V3. Because of the energy denominators, these two guys are nearly degenerate. One gets shifted up, one gets shifted down a little bit. And it might also be that this state is what we call bright and this is called dark. This state might be connected by an allowed transition from a lower-- an initial state and this might not. So the levels repel because they're interacting and they're out of position. But because of the interaction between these two levels, the eigenstates have mixed character.