Ka-Yen: "I walked into MIT not knowing a single thing about nuclear energy" "What causes nuclear resurgence? This is the perfect time to talk about why nuclear power's cool" "I'm going to be honest with you. I don't know all that much about potentially spewing out that much information" "How do you calculate this? Bozeman Tzeman. Cool? Whew." "What is the difference between fissile, fertile, and fissionable material?" In 1951, the first nuclear reactor to produce electricity was the experimental breeder reactor, the EDR1. The first nuclear powered submarine, the USS Nautilus, was launched in 1954. The real heyday of nuclear was between 1960 to 1975, when people like Westinghouse were creating nuclear reactors. Today, we're entering what people like to call a nuclear renaissance, which is between this chunk over here and 2002. But basically there's been a whole new push for creating more about what I've mentioned. Nuclear creates 75 times less carbon emission than coal does, and 35 times less than natural gas does. Nuclear power is able to provide a good baseload source of energy. The main thing that holds us back from just having nuclear power everywhere and creating about 90% of our electricity as we would hope it would is economics. It's just about $0.01 per kilowatt hour, as compared to natural gas, which the majority of electricity comes from. But if you look at the operation and maintenance, which is the same as maintaining a coal power plant, it's about the same. The fuel core is basically just a bunch of rods of uranium, sometimes it's clad in something like zirconium. Neutrons can simulate other fissions, and the control rods are there to make sure that there's not too many fissions happening in the fuel core at a certain time. The heat that gets created during these nuclear fissions goes and heats up the water. It creates steam so the steam goes and spins a turbine. The turbine creates electricity. And it comes back and gets recondensed. The next kind of reactor that falls under the light water reactor category is the pressurized water reactors. With BWRs there is a higher chance of leaking radioactive material into the environment. PWRs comprise about 60% of the reactors the United States. They are functionally essentially the same, and it's just slightly more complicated. The main downside of this is that deuterium is really expensive, which is really ridiculous because a kilogram of water is really much at all, you know? So even though you're using your reactor with lower enriched uranium, you're actually replacing it more often. Heavy water reactors use heavy water instead of light water. Heavy water has a much lower absorption cross-section than light water does. This means that when neutrons are flying around in the reactor there is a chance of it hitting a fission product and a piece of fissionable material and undergoing fission. But there's also a chance that the water that surrounds it will absorb that neutron. If that neutron gets pulled out of the system you're not able to create any more fissions. This is actually kind of a bad thing because the whole point of nuclear reactors is to create heat and fission, right? keep adding more fissile materials, because it's not as perfect as they want it to be. And then finally we're going to move on to generation four reactors. Generation four reactors are all the new kind of reactors that people want to build. Here are the six kinds of generation four reactor types that were deemed to be the most promising. So there's gas-cooled fast reactors, lead- cooling reactors, molten salt reactors, sodium-cooling reactors, among others. After a nuclear accident you can see a pretty steep decline in the amount of nuclear reactors that are being commissioned. This is especially noticeable at Three Mile Island, which is essentially the first nuclear reactor accident that we all had to go through. The next reactor accident, the big kahuna I like to call it, is Chernobyl. And again Fukushima, once again, with the number of reactors being commissioned after the accident just declines dramatically. So these are mainly the things that people who don't really have any nuclear energy energy think about. At Three Mile Island there was containment that prevented radioactive isotopes from leaving the system. They didn't realize that it became stuck because their equipment and their instrumentation wasn't able to detect that. So now there's water leaking out so the core is getting hotter, but then they also took out the water that is usually used to cool the reactor core, so again it's also getting hotter. This combination of events led to a core meltdown. So the core melted down. That's never a good thing, by the way. 28 highly exposed reactor staff and emergency workers die from this radiation or from thermal burns during this time. Officials also believe that there is about 7,000 cases of thyroid cancer that occurred because of Chernobyl. No one really lives near Chernobyl at the moment. It's kind of been deemed unlivable because these radioactive isotopes literally went everywhere in this environment. It is not safe to live there. Luckily we see that there are animals coming back now now. But it's been about-- how long has it been, like 30, 40 years? People aren't advised to live here. The U.S. wants to bury nuclear waste deep into the ground and never be able to retrieve it again. It turns out that if you were to just keep all the spent fuel that we create in fuel casks, it'd take about 300 acres of land, which is absolutely insane. Yucca Mountain is the primary push by the United States to find a deep geological repository somewhere in the US so we can deal with our spent fuel. The main push for this was-- well, first of all, it's a permanent method of disposal. Yucca Mountain is located in Nevada. People in Nevada weren't happy about this. There was a lot of opposition. Because of the social opposition there was government opposition and many loopholes we had to jump through. They also realized that it wasn't as geologically sound as they had hoped. There's a lot more groundwater running through and seeping through Yucca Mountain than they thought there would be. So there's a huge debacle. Basically the costs are rising, nothing much was happening. And then 2011, under the Obama Administration, he just called it quits. can I have a billion dollars to build this nuclear reactor? It's going to take five years to get your profit back. No investor is going to be like, yeah, that's a good idea. That's the main reason why we can't get nuclear up and running. We have the possibility to create a lot of plants, but we just don't have the money to do so. And also, if for some reason something happens, you have to stop building your reactor. Like, there's no turning back, right?