Fiscal policy has three different views of how well it works or how well pieces of paper to buy stuff at a than it does at sea but there's the same amount of output similarly if we're in a situation like this so here we would use expansionary fiscal policy we could also be in a boom. Once you start spending that money it's hard for people to stop is that look you got this deficit right here but you're eventually gonna have to increase my taxes to pay it back the bonds do eventually come due you can't continue to borrow money forever. it doesn't work so let's kind of look at them in the atas model right we have this Keynesian view. We have our kind of a classical view and we have our what would be called supply-side view. There's more views than that obviously but we're just gonna look at these these three stir them the three main ones. We're at some full employment level of output YF and here we are initially we're in some recession right we're at output level say y1 and some price level just call it P l1. exactly right with that Marg propensity to consume and thatMarg propensity to import and knowing all of that lets us know the multiplier and we know how large autonomous expenditures are and all that stuff we can essentially just it's just an Excel spreadsheet you just plug in the number that you want for these changes and taxes or these changes in government spending now you've got a political problem here. Once you actually start spending money it becomes difficult to take money away once you start giving people something taking out money away now becomes very very difficult so politically speaking it's easy to do this it's difficult to this. money aside for college that was the loanable funds market they're putting money in there for savings they're saving it they're the suppliers you guys are borrowing money to go to school and you're now demanders you're the ones taking money out. When the interest rate goes - I - what happens to private borrowing what is it at now do it q2 is the total that's private and public how much is private borrowing spending the money they want their money right but we could even make this guy go back down to a hundred still have this deficit. if this guy's going down what does that mean for the long-run do what well of investments decreasing what else is decreasing investment goes down we don't build the factory your interest rates are too high I'm not building a factory in 2017. If investments going down the quantity and quality of our resources are smaller the capital stock is smaller the future output will be smaller you will have less stuff in the future and here's what's really interesting how are people going to know that here they are on the red line and they could have been at the blue line. Paige: There's some tax rate here between zero and 100 that makes tax revenue as large as it can possibly be. Paige: Every single Monday that I come to work I'm essentially not doing anything I do all the day's work I deal with all of the kids. If you go labor every Monday right Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday 20 40 60 80 100 % I don't teach on Saturdays all right and so if they're taking 20% it's like they're like forget it it's not worth it. run doesn't really matter it's the long run stuff that matters is their view and there's some evidence that people respond to these incentives right. Which view is Keynesian new classical supply I don't know if you figure it out you let me know I'll write the paper and win the Nobel Prize and I can go to Sweden and get the nice little 1.2 million dollars and the nicelittle bitty gold medallion that I couldn't wear around my neck for the rest of life at such a such recession.