Professor: We're talking about evolutionary game theory in the case of, well, biological evolution. He says it's not that we think that the cells are engaging in any sort of weird puzzle solving. Instead, he says, they're just mutations. And the more fit individuals spread in the population, and somehow, you evolve to the same or similar solutions in the context of game theory, he adds. "From my standpoint as an experimentalist, I don't forget about the basic insights about the experimentalist," he says. Professor: We're going to start with an entire population at 0, 0, and now these mutations will be occurring randomly at some rate. Somehow the population is going to climb up this fitness landscape, and we're trying to figure out the relative probability that it's going to take kind of one path or another. Professor: The answers to all these questions are in principal already on the board. But in another way, you have to keep track of lots of different things, and which regime we're in and so forth. short genome that's string length 2. We're going to start in the 0, 0 state with 1,000 isogenic individuals. And the question is, what's going to happen eventually? In particular, what we want to know is the probability of taking this path. We'll also discuss whether it somehow is very likely is going to kind of have to go through one or from 0,0 to 0, 1. The probability for that first path would be the S for 0,1, so it's 0.02. a minute. But if you don't understand what's going on, it'll take you an hour. Ready? Three, two, one. OK, all right, so we do have a fair range of answers. I'd say it might be kind of something like 50-50. And that's great. It means that there should be something to talk about. So turn to a neighbor. You should be able to find somebody that disagrees with you. And if everyone around you agrees, you can maybe-- all right. So there's a group of D's and aGroup of B's here, which means that everybody-- AUDIENCE: Let's fight. Professor: "I think the arguments there-- there's a lot of truth to the arguments that you're saying" "I really like drawing the graphs of these things, because I think it's just much more clear" "You can't keep just the first term in a series. If the terms grow with number, 3.98 or something" "There's less than a 1% probability of it fixing. Is this believable?" "I never thought that my calculator would become so controversial" that are present maybe in one copy. In order for this individual to fix, he has to survive stochastic extinction, which happens with the probability of 2%. And the 1, 0 individual has to go extinct, which happening 90% of the time. So this is, indeed, answering the question that if you had one copy of each of these two mutant individuals in the population, that's the answer to what is the probability that this 0, 1 mutant would fix in thePopulation. Professor: No clonal interference corresponds to mu N log NS much less than 1. He says as you get more and more mutations, when clonal interfered is really significant, then you're pretty much just guaranteed to take the 1, 0 path. Professor: Once you have multiple mutations that have established, then it's likely that one of them is going to be this. And if it's established, it's going to win, he says, and it's not even nearly neutral. of those two steps-- going to 0, 1 or 1, 0. And in particular, this is like a chemical reaction, where we have some chemical state here. And what we know is we know the ratio of those rates. And that's everything we need to know to calculate the relative probabilities of taking those states. So this is how we get 1/6 instead of 1/5. Because this thing is 1/ 5 of that. So it's like 1, and then 1, 5. And this is cohered at this peak in the finished landscape. rate, you don't even do successive fixations. So it may be that neither state ever actually fixes, because it could be that the 1, 0 state is growing exponentially, but is a minority of the population. And it has a lot of the same behaviors, in the sense of exponential suppression of probabilities as a function of the depth and the width of the valley you're trying to traverse. And there's some very nice papers, if you're interested in looking at this stuff. we have a 0, 0 state that has some fitness. 0, 1 has a higher fitness, and so forth. But in general, these fitness values may depend upon what the population composition is. And in that situation, then you want to use evolutionary game theory. For example, you can have situations where the population evolves to lower fitness. In that case, everybody's getting to fitness 1. Now, as a lone individual, what can you do? All you can do is switch. In evolutionary game theory, what we can do is plot as a function of the fraction of the population that is cooperator or defector. And we can imagine that the only thing that's important are how these lines cross each other. And surprisingly, that does not mean that strategy that is higher fitness, in the sense that you may evolve to a state of low fitness or low coexistence. You can have one strategy that dominates, which is what occurred here. That's what's weird. be in trouble, et cetera. So the idea of the prisoner's dilemma is that if you set up these jail sentences in the right way, then it could be the case that each individual has the incentive to confess. And we'll call this-- so this is for individual one, say and individual two. So there are different strategies you can follow. And do you guys remember from the reading slash my explanation how to read these charts? All right, now the question is, just to remind ourselves, what is the Nash equilibrium of this game? In a Nash equilibrium, if everyone's playing that strategy, then nobody has the incentive to change strategy. If both individuals, or an entire population, say, is playing A, they're getting fitness 5. Question is, as a lone individual, you can choose to switch over and get fitness 3. Do you want to do that? No. So that means that A is going to be a Nash equilibria. But the funny thing is, what that means is, it doesn't matter what you do at the equilibrium. cooperator and for the defector. Do you understand? So what should these things look like? I'd like to encourage you to-- I'll give you 30 seconds to try to draw what this should look like. So this is the payout or the expected payout. So we're assuming that you're going to interact randomly with the other members of the population as a function of the fraction cooperator. So then 1 minus that will be the fraction defector, do you understand what I'm trying to say? you to be influenced by this. Does that mean that this game has no Nash equilibrium? Yes or no, verbally-- ready, three, two, one. AUDIENCE: No. PROFESSOR: No, it does not mean that. This game has a Nash equilibrium. And indeed, all games like this have Nash equilibria. This is what Nash won the Nobel Prize for, so this is the famous one-page paper published in PNAS. And if you have questions about this, I'm happy to answer it. In a population, if you have genetic A's and genetic B's that are each giving birth to their own type, then you evolve to some coexistence of genotypes. Whereas in this situation over here, we have coexistence. Does not matter where you start. So long as you have some members of both A and B in the population, you'll always evolve to the same equilibrium. Whereas the mixed Nash equilibrium is a situation where you have, in principle, genetic homogeneity. So this is a single genotype that is implementing phenotypic heterogeneity. about exploring in my group is this distinction here, where it's known that in many cases, isogenic populations of microbes can exhibit a diversity of phenotypes. So that's a molecular mechanism for how you might get heterogeneity. Another question is, what is the evolution explanation for why that behavior might have evolved? Now in general, we cannot prove why something evolved, but we can make educated guesses that make experimentally testable hypotheses. In the coming weeks, we'll talk about this idea of bet hedging-- that given uncertain or fluctuating environments, it may be advantageous for clonal populations to have a variety of different strategies.