Alberto Riva: The most important resources for finding and using biomedical information, especially information connected with the study of the human genome. Most of them will be websites, where you can find information, and to talk about how this information is stored and represented. You're going to see a long list of references to sites, websites, with URLs. Don't worry if you can't remember all of them because, of course, I'm going to distribute the slides and will be easier to just look them up. So-called central dogma of molecular biology, as you know, almost all our cells contain DNA in their nucleus. For DNA, you just look at the sequence and you know essentially all that there is to know about DNA. For proteins, you cannot look at. the subsequence of a protein and understand just by looking at it what. the protein is going to do. So how is all this information represented? What are the different ways that we can store and describe this. information? Where does it come from, where is it stored, how do we find retrieve and use it? The genotype is digital, because each base pair in our DNA can be exactly represented using one of four symbols, A, P, G, C. On the other hand, the phenotype is, say, analog. Because most phenotypes are qualitative in nature. They cannot be measured exactly or precise, they cannot even be defined precisely in most cases. You always have to take into account the effect of environmental factors that, again, are very hard to describe in a quantitative way. And we'll talk later about why genotyping is important, what kind of information you can get from that. was discovered, more or less, the same years. Nobody had any idea that there was any connection between these two things, between the DNA and inherited traits. It took over 80 years for this concept to be proven. And finally, the Human Genome Project, that was officially declared a success last year, brought us to the point where we now know the exact base pair sequence of our genome. So we will see as we go forward that we're going to encounter very different forms of data. Your DNA sequence is slightly different from the sequence of any other human being. One of these polymorphisms, every 1,000 bases, adds up to a very large number of differences. If you have enough sequences from the same organism, you can try assembling them, putting them together, and trying to reconstruct the entire genome. And this is what was done to assemble the human genome, for example, and all the other genomes that are being sequenced. And if you find that organism A shares a gene with organism B, and B shares it with C, then you've built what they call a triplet. The process of transcribing the DNA sequences into RNA is, of course, at the basis of expression analysis. Differentiable analysis, clustering, and so on, these are all the usual things that can be done using microarrays. Other resources are found in different PGA projects, PGA are programs for genomic applications managed by the NIH. The Stanford microarray database is a repository of all the-- of a large number of micro experiments performed at Stanford, and a portion of these are public. NCI60 is a famous data set that includes gene expression profiles for 60 human cancer cell lines. GenBank is a database of all the sequences in GenBank with all the orthologs. There are tracks that tell you the location of SNPs, and so on. UniGene is an automated system that looks at all the GenBank sequences and tries to build these clusters. LocusLink is a curated directory, means that there are people who spend their days going through gene records and adding information, checking it, correcting it. This one is partly curated, partly calculated, partly using algorithms to do that. LocusLink is a repository of information about genes, and it collects everything that is known about the genes. It gives you information about the sequence, itself, about the functions of the gene, links to other databases, and phenotypes that are known to be associated with that gene. This is all information that you can find in LocusLink. And the most important thing-- and this is very important-- is to establish an accurate connection between the defining sequence for locus and other descriptors. It basically means, you have a stretch of DNA, you know that there is a gene, let's collect everything. phenotype. What I mean is that, for example, if you have a SNP in the coding. subsequence of a protein, you're going to get a protein that has an abnormal sequence. And that can be a change that doesn't cause any consequence, or it might be a very dramatic change. There are many diseases that are due to the fact that you have SNPs that truncate proteins. They can be used as evolutionary markers, because SNPs arise randomly during the replication, and then they are transmitted from one generation to the next. SNPs get-- how the frequency of the SNP changes in a population. Most SNPs are deleterious. But in some cases, the SNP can also provide an advantage, if it generates something that was not present before, and that works better than the original. If a SNP is neutral, then there is no selective pressure, and it will either go away by chance, or will stay at a certain basic level of frequency. So if you have a SNP that introduces a change is beneficial, then you will-- given enough time-- you will see that thefrequency of the SNPs increases. information mainly from dbSNP, from Golden Path, from TSC, from Alfred, from HGbase. It tries to put everything together in a unified view that allows you to look at the gene. And it provides a way of exporting this data in different formats to make it easier to process later. And I just want to show you one slide from SNPper, but this is a window that describes-- that tells you information about the particular SNP. This is a [? SNP ?] identifier. the gene it belongs to, notch 4. And here, it tells you that this gene is in the coding sequence of the gene, and it actually causes an amino acid change at position 319. It affects protein domains-- this is the list of protein domains that are affected by the SNP. And finally under here, I wanted to show you, this data comes from TSC, andIt's a frequency information data. So they sampled 41 individuals from a population of African-Americans. And then they looked at a different population-- these are Caucasian, I think-- and they found very different alleles frequencies. these domains are overlapping. And this information comes from Swiss [INAUDIBLE] database of protein information. And so you see for example, this first domain covers almost all of the protein. AUDIENCE: So six would be the maximum number? ALBERTO RIVA: No, no, it's just that these domains can be overlapping, just because the Swiss people, they annotate the protein sequence saying OK, from here to here, we know that this happens. But-- well, well, there are some domains that cover the entire protein. LocusLink provides a nomenclature of genes. No LocusLink assigns a name to each gene, and if you stick to that name, then you're sure that everybody knows what you're talking about. In many, many cases, genes have lots of different names, even if it's the same gene, people have been calling them with different names. It's a mess when you try to out which gene is which. So it gives a name, it give a number, and you can use these as identifiers to look up your gene in other databases. a software system for the automated annotation of genomes. It's basically means it's a system that discovers genes and tries to find as much information as possible about these genes. It provides information about genes, about proteins, diseases, SNPs, cross-species analysis, microarray data. They claim they receive 30 million searches per month. Gene ontology is something that stays at a slightly higher level, above everything that we've seen so far. It is to build a dynamic controlled vocabulary that can be used to describe biological concepts. is a consequence of the fact that there is a very complex machinery behind it that determines which genes are active or not, and how much, in different conditions. This is actually a system that integrates a lot of different factors that might include the following, in no particular order-- The tissue, we know very well that the set of genes that are expressed in one tissue is very different from the set that is expressed in another tissue. External signals, of course, all response to external stimuli. And it also depends on the expression state of any number of other genes. The first thing you need to do is need to be able to reliably identify which transcription factors bind to a given gene, and where, exactly, in the promoter region of the gene they bind. And transcription factorsbind to locations that are called transcription factor binding sites. So if you know where the binding sites are, you have a first idea of what factors binds to this gene. Most of the information in TransFIC is experimentally validated. So you can actually trust the fact that particular piece of sequence they give you. a view of taxonomy, for example, for biological process. If you are talking about site communication, then response to external stimulus is a subclass of communication. And if you want to talk about the immune response, you can cite this biology term. OK, I think we're out of time. Well, just a conclusion slide that I'll just let you read, because I think it's just repeating what we're saying so far that we are drowning in data and converting this data into knowledge is not easy.