JUDY HOYT: Hopefully everybody's recovered from their Thanksgiving feast. What I'm showing up here is the schedule to orient us. This is lecture 22. We'll talk about silicides, device contacts, and I've added in a new material this year on novel gate materials. And then next week we have two class periods scheduled. There'll be four speakers in each. And those will be the oral reports and the student reports given on Tuesday and Thursday. And I just want to remind people, if you're doing an oral report, you're expected to provide handouts. The contact itself is still generally considered part of the frontend because you're contacting the silicon. And then beyond, that everything is in the 6.773, which is the backend technology. The advantages of aluminum has a low resistivity. It's the second lowest of all the metal candidates, copper being the lowest. And it has very good adhesion to silicon and to silicon dioxide. It makes good electrical contact to heavily doped silicon, as long as the silicon is heavilyDoped. In the early days, if this was the drain are going to be silicides, either cobalt silicides or nickel silicide. We'll talk more about that. But the point is they're a contact between a metal and a heavily doped semiconductor, which is silicon. In 2003, they wanted to have about 2 times 10 to the -7th ohm centimeter square. But if you go to 2004, you want to lower it according to ITRS about 1.6 times10 to -7. The modern interconnect material is copper. A few places are still using aluminum. Copper oxidizes very readily, even at room temperature. So you need to protect it, if you're all aware of that. But copper is the material of choice for today's interconnect. And in fact, this was annealed for 10 minutes at 425. So this was all pretty copper colored. You can see all the silicon in aluminum from the substrate has actually gone up into the substrate. And when you etch off the aluminum off, you see all these holes. Aluminum was a convenient and a good material for people to use for many years. The only other metal of consequence that has a lower resistivity is copper, which is shown here. Copper has a much high melting point. Copper, if it gets into silicon, can be a deep level. So we're coming up against the red brick wall here because the device scaling and the need to make the contact size smaller means that we need to drop rho C at this rate. It's just nobody knows yet how to make a contact that has 0.8 times 10 to the -7 ohm centimeter squared for the specific resistivity. is not considered desirable for making a good contact. An ohmic contact on the other side, or a tunneling contact, occurs when you can actually tunnel right through this barrier. And if you do make high doping right near the metal, you can reduce this depletion layer width. And it enables this tunneling. This is a problem as we scale, unless we scale roh sub c. Unless we do something to make better contacts as we Scale devices, just because of this geometric factor. That means the resistance is going up as devices are scaled. it's got a units of resistance times an area-- and divided by the area of the contact. And basically what this tells you is-- and you notice you it's the total resistance of a contact in ohms is inversely proportional to area. So if I make a smaller contact area for a given specific contact resistivity, you're going to have a higher resistance. And this is a problem if I'm scaling devices. If I'm packing more and more devices on the chip, it means I want to make the total area occupied by every device smaller. A Schottky contact is governed by thermionic emission. So it's a thermionic process emitting carriers over this barrier. So if we change that barrier height, we can change rho sub C. But rho C is not really scaling because of the doping electrical solubility limit. So the contact passivity doesn't scale as we shrink technology. And this is a major problem. People are looking for new methods, new materials, whatever, some way of getting the doping up, or a new method of making contact. this number, is about 10 to the minus 7 ohm-- that's ohm centimeter squared for an aluminum and silicon contact. So the question is if I change the doping from 1e19 to 1e20 by a factor of 10, how much does rho C go down? And again, this is an exponential relationship. So you expect a big change. The problem is we know that there are electrical solubility limits. We cannot just arbitrarily keep increasing doping. But you know if you do an implant and you do a certain anneal, you get doping up to a certain value. The metal contact is assumed to be 0.2 microns in this direction in width and 1 micron in the other direction. When the metal, the titanium, is contacting the silicon, you form a metal silicide, say TiSi2. It only forms where it's in contact with silicon, which is right here, this dark region, and on top of the gate. Everywhere else you have still remaining some unreacted metal. So we've created a material, a titanium di silicide or a metal disilicide, that because of the virtue of its chemical structure, it now stands up to the etch. The resistance of the current just to flow through this contact is 100 ohms on the drain side. There is another resistance called the spreading resistance. This is a major contributor-- it can be a major contribution to the total series resistance. It's a very two-dimensional problem. You can't calculate it by hand. But I just want to point out, so couple of days. It is not a homework assignment, but I think it's something you should do-- how to calculate these three resistances. And then we can talk about it and go through it next time. Figure 11-35. There's a reference to it in your textbook, a paper that an article that talks about it in much more detail on how it's actually made. And what you do is you have these dark regions here that are funny shaped are considered to be the N plus region that you want to contact. So that would be called the n plus diffusion, has this particular shape. The dashed lines represent the metal. So this is going to take at least three masks to powder. And these little square regions with the X's going through them are the contacts. 1 and 4 and you measure the voltage drop across that face. And then you just divide V divided by I, whatever you measure. And that's going to be equivalent to rho C divided by the area of the contact, L squared. So this is a very common way to do it. You might say, well, why do you go to the effort of having separate probes? Why don't you just measure the current and the voltage on the same probe points? And the reason you do this is because you don't want to have extra contact resistance, say, of your probes going down. in the 1980s or so, but again, it's still not something that people typically do because you're going to get a higher contact resistance. The way people go today is to form what they call a barrier layer. It forms a barrier between this aluminum and the silicon. The barrier has a very low specific contact resistivity. So it still makes a good contact, but it doesn't allow the aluminum or the silicon to talk to each other. So you cannot get this void formation. You can't get the spiking. his book how he's saying titanium may work as a sacrificial barrier. May or may not exactly work this way, but it's one potential methodology. Ti-silicide also has a tendency to agglomerate when it's very thin at higher annealing temperature. Industry moved a number of years ago primarily from Ti-Silicide, although some people may still use it, to cobalt bisilicide. The beauty of Ti is, again, the titanium eats its way through things, through oxides. I did not have to do any photolithography to pattern this metal. The metal was deposited over the entire chip. It was reacted with the silicon, and then it was just etched off in a blanket etch. So this kind of a salicide process was a big breakthrough in CMOS technology, say around the 80s or so. It's very good alignment. You form a low resistance contact to the source drain and to the gate simultaneously. And finally, it can be used as a gate material. The latest silicide that people are exploring in research and development-- and at some point will probably be in production-- is nickel silicide. Nickel silicide has the lowest silicon consumption. It can be formed at very low temperatures. It also avoids the PVD damage to the gate oxide. It's self-aligned, reduces the sheet resistance of the deep source drain region. It reduces the gate sheet resistance because you put you put silicide on the gate. And it also provides a local interconnect layer. Polysilicon doesn't have enough carriers. A metal has 10 to the 23rd. So it's not going to get depleted. People want to remove the semiconductor from the gate. But poly is an extremely easy material to integrate. It's not reactive with SiO2. That's not the case for metals. So people are thinking of replacing poly, but it's got a lot of complex process integration. The work function between the metal and silicon determines the threshold voltage of the transistor, the voltage at which the transistor turns on. FUSI gates are also interesting, not just because it's a little easier to integrate the processing. The frontend processing is what we're all familiar with. Everyone knows how to etch a poly gate and make a good poly gate, and you can convert it to silicide. But depending on how you dope it, you may be able to adjust your threshold voltage. It can be varied by whether you put doping in or not and by how much doping. And this is important because you need this flexibility. control the PT or adjust the PT a little bit. It's still a very tricky process. The reaction temperature or the thermal stability temperature is reasonably low. So you cannot take these and then take them to a backend process that is too hot. So they're very much a research. It was only published by IBM a couple of years ago. They're certainly not ready necessarily for manufacturing right now. Perhaps in the near future, but just to give you an idea of the types of things that people are concerned about. about your oral report or whatever, please get back to me. OK, thanks. About your oralReport.com. About. Your oral report. About Your Oral Report. Please get. back tome. about your oralreport or whatever. about. your oral Report or whatever,. please getback to me about.your oral Report. about Your OralReport.org. OK. Thanks, thanks, thanks for your report. You can send it to me via e-mail at jennifer@dailymail.co.uk.