George Church: How do we get that multisequence alignment? He says the indels for any pairwise combination may not be optimal for the triple. Church: You can get something that's very close to the true optimum if how to prune this hyperlattice. He says there are others which are more heuristic. They are not guaranteed to be optimal, but on the other hand, they don't necessarily require arbitrary pruning, he says. The two that we'll illustrate in the next couple of slides is a tree alignment and a star alignment. will be a recursive algorithm where the score of a two-character string is defined in terms of the maximum of various shorter strings. The number of different cases we have here-- before, it was 3 for a global alignment, which was k, being the number of sequences, was 2. Now k is three for a three-way comparison. All possible subsets is 2 to the k minus 1, in this case, so it's 7. And you get the best score is S1 with S3, which has a score of 9. general is going to be 2 to the k minus 1. And so the time complexity is have to do 2 to k comparisons per node. And the larger k is, the more you can explore. It's like doing a huge mutagenesis experiment and exploring viable mutants. And it's not like we only want to do k equals 2. There are very good reasons for inferring structure or function without experiments, just from sequence. So we use all the power that we developed for the pairwise comparison and we're just generalizing it. The final branching closest to the trunk of the tree or the roots of tree is called the dendrogram. The longer branches indicate greater divergence. And they're in their own cluster. The common ancestor for all the sequences, which would be the common ancestor of the common ancestors of the first two clusters, is represented by this final branching. And here, distance is this horizontal axis. And then, once you have this dendprogram, the next step, or the full steps, are aligning each of the sequences. best score for S1 with each of the others, and have S1 in red in each case, and use that as the anchor. And so then in the multialignment, you take all the indels relative to the red one, and introduce them so that it's the anchor, and so on. So those are two radically different ways. And we'll get to the Gibbs sampling later. The Gibbs sampling, just in a nutshell, is in general when you have a hard problem, where you can't comprehensively go through the entire space, what you do is sample it. or RNA-coding region, you'll have regulatory elements such as promoters and so-called CG islands. Promoters and CG islands are sort of degenerate. They're weak sequence signatures. There's a high variety, and they're used in combinations. If you need longer ones, then you'll miss tiny proteins. And we'll talk about this in just a moment, specific examples. So now the final topic, which talks about a very simple and short motif, is the CG motif, which we claimed is over-represented in promoters in vertebrates. cell type and the rare [INAUDIBLE],, rare messenger RNA within a cell type. Let's talk about the sizes of proteins. How is it that it precipitously drops off at 100 amino acids? Why are there so few proteins that are short? And there are slightly more short proteins in Mycoplasma? Any guesses why they're so few? Why does it drop off at100 amino acids?" STUDENT: There are more but we can't find them? GEORGE CHURCH: Right, there probably are. Stop codons tend to be made up of As and Ts. The stop codons are TAG, TGA, and TAA. So if you have an AT-rich genome, you're going to tend to have a lot. You tend to run into a stop codon at random quite frequently. And it turns out that-- again, experimentally biases. And I just elaborated on one of them here, which is the triplet bias, documented here that this 10 times lower frequency of ATG than some of the other arginine codons. row happen to be-- the next gene down is a histidine biosynthetic gene. And not only that, but about eight histidine genes in a row come after that. And the same thing with phenylalanines. This weird excess of tryptophan is upstream of tryPTophan biosynthesis genes. So what does this all mean? What it means, probably-- and there's actually quite a bit of experiments on this-- is that this is an excellent feedback loop, where you want to do feedback in the most relevant way. Bayes' theorem is a Bayesian idea that says the probability of models in your collection of models, irrespective of sequence, should sum to 1. Now let's see what all this Bayesian stuff is useful for. We're going to be doing-- of the various applications, we had recognition discrimination and database search. A question might be like, what are all sequences in [INAUDIBLE] that look like a serine protease? This would be asking for recognition multiple times, over and over. P of s/m, s bar m-- is the probability that you would get that sequence given a model. So the model might be this weight matrix we've been talking about or it could be something more complicated. And as with any good probability, as we mentioned in the first class, they should sum to 1. If you sum up the sigmas of s, you sum over all sequences, then the probability given the models shouldSum to 1, that will be true for the p of the sequences. the dinucleotide level, and so on, and rather than just dump this on you as a mathematical fact, I want to give you some biological rationale for why you can have nonrandomness at every order of a Markov chain. And so here's one that's illustrated, this dotted, brown line, where it says probability of a C minus-- meaning in an ocean-- given that you have an A plus. So that would be a transition point going 5-prime to 3-prime, from an island into an ocean. are 0s. 0s are a problem, both for the CG dinucleotide in the ocean and for the transitions between oceans and islands. The way you handle it is called pseudocounts. You basically say, what if we just missed finding that thing? We're going to add 1 to it because however big the counts are, you can always add 1. And you can recreate these numbers with that simple formula. Now this, is a real training set based on 48 known islands, again annotated by some person.