Borat: I want to talk about my favorite part of the Second Discourse, a book that never grows old, that never fails to produce. I focused on a famous passage in which Rousseau claims it was the establishment of private property that was the true formation of civil society. But in fact, that's not really true. Rousseau understands that even for institutions like property and civil society to be possible there must be huge and important developments that go on or take place even prior to this. Rousseau's Second Discourse describes inequality as the result of amour-propre. The French term is untranslatable, but it is related to a range of psychological characteristics. Rousseau says the desire to be recognized and respected by others is at the root of our sense of justice, justice and justice. The desire for recognition or respect is a part of our feelings, beliefs, attitudes and opinions, he says. It is also related to something positive, in many ways, in the development of humanity. in such a state to feel pride or vanity that requires human sociability and requires the esteem of others. How could pride have arisen in a state of nature which on Hobbes' own account is solitary? Rousseau speculates about this and, again, this is part of his hypothetical or conjectural history. He speculates that amour-propre began to arise and develop as soon as people began to gather around a hut or a tree and to look at one another. Only a very few people, Rousseau writes, are capable of finding their way back to nature. gaze of another, and it is from that gaze, from the look or gaze of another that the passion of vanity was born. The one who sang or danced the best, the handsomest, the strongest, the most adroit or the most eloquent became the most highly regarded. From these first preferences were born vanity and contempt on the one hand and shame and envy on the other. Our own sentiment of self and existent comes entirely from the judgment, as he puts it, of those around us. Toleration in many ways is a liberal virtue because it requires us to distinguish between beliefs that we may take with the utmost seriousness in private life and yet bracket them in some way once we enter the public world. Rousseau's political philosophy begins, at least he believes, with the realistic or even empirical assumption that each individual has a deep rooted interest in securing the conditions of their own liberty. He does not presuppose altruism on the part of any human being or any other kind of self-other regarding characteristics. Rousseau: Amour-propre and society gave rise to the state of war. Do you remember that, about the cartoons of the prophet Muhammad and the outrage and the protests, often violent, that occurred about that? To some degree, I think, Rousseau would believe the protesters over those cartoons had a point. Their views were not being respected and to which you might say a Lockean or a liberal formulation of the problem or response would be, "Well, so what?" The task of government, according to Locke or the liberal view, is to ensure the respect.proportionate to the esteem in which he held himself. Government's job is not to impose a gag order on what can and cannot be said, he says. This is a respectable, sort of liberal line of thought going from Locke to John Stuart Mill, he adds. But there is something powerful and true about what the government is supposed to do, he writes. It is to protect you from harm and provide you with the freedom to practice what religion you like, consistent with others' freedom to do so too, he argues. The Danish prime minister has refused to apologize for the cartoon. Rousseau: Government is a con game that the rich play upon the poor. Political power simply helps to legitimize economic inequalities. Let us take men as they are, Rousseau says, following Machiavelli. He will not begin, he tells us, by making any heroic assumptions about human nature, he says. The Social Contract begins with itself in many ways as a utopia, an ideal city, in some respects an answer to the Calipolis of Plato's Republic. of preserving it and protecting it. Each of us has a desire to preserve his or her own freedom and that social order will be rational or just, that allows us to preserve that freedom. The state of nature quickly becomes a state of war based on conflicting desires and conflicting again means of liberty preservation. So how do we preserve our liberty without lapsing into anarchy? This is the question that the Social Contract sets out to answer and to which his formulation, his famous formulation of what he calls the general will, is the solution.