Professor: We're going to look at this unitary time evolution and calculate this operator u, given the Hamiltonian. Then we will look at the Heisenberg picture of quantum mechanics. Professor: We'll find the He Eisenberg equations of motion and solve them for a particular case. And then we are going to define a new way of thinking about this, which is called the Heisinger picture of the quantum mechanics, or the Schrodinger picture. It's a pretty useful way of seeing things and makes the relation between classical mechanics and quantum mechanics more obvious. The Schrodinger equation can be solved in three ways. When h is time independent, h has a little time dependence. This is an idea, the sign to make it possible for you to solve the equation. So you could have Hamiltonians that are time dependent, but still have a simplifying virtue. For example, the spin in a magnetic field is minus gamma B dot the spin. So here it is. U of t and t0. T it's called the time ordered exponential. This operator does something to the exponential function. U of t t0 is going to be e to the minus iHt over h bar, some constant matrix. When t is equal to t0, this matrix becomes the unit matrix. And therefore from here, U0 is the inverse of this matrix, which is nothing else but e. And that's our solution. There's very little to add to this. We discussed that in recitation on Thursday. This unitary operator you've been seeing that from the beginning of the course in some sense. The Heisenberg operator is actually time independent. It just doesn't depend on time. So if you have a magnetic field that is fixed in one direction but change in time, you can have a situation where your Hamiltonian is time dependent, but still at different times it commutes. But later on as we do nuclear magnetic resonance, we will have the more interesting case in which the magnetic field rotates. So let me call this quantity R of t. And then, armed with our unitary operator, we know that As is here. the derivative of this quantity with respect to time. When you differentiate an integral, you get just the integrand evaluated at the time represented by the upper argument of the upper limit of integration. So that's basically our solution for H and for the unitary operator U in terms of H. And what we're going to do now is turn to the Heisenberg picture of quantum mechanics. Yes, questions? AUDIENCE: Why does R dot [INAUDIBLE]? PROFESSOR: Because that's really a property of integrals. of this, you will get H times that thing. So since it's a power series, you'll differentiate the first term, and you'll get the right thing. Then the second term and you will start getting everything that you need. It's reassuring that something like this success, but in general, you would want to be able to do all these integrals and to sum them up. So it's of limited usefulness. But when you have a practical problem, generally that's not the way you solve it. We will try to figure out the solution some other way. T is not an operator in the usual sense of quantum mechanics or anything like that. When t is equal to 0, U of t-- of 0 0 is the operator propagates no state, so it's equal to the identity. So this is a wonderful relation that tell us you that time equals 0 the two operators are really the same. And another simple remark. If you have the unit operators in the Schrodinger picture, what is the unit Operator in the Heisenberg picture? Well, it would be exponential of e to the minus iHt over t with the x operator and another exponential. solutions? PROFESSOR: Yes, pretty much. Because at the end of the day, this is a first order matrix differential equation. So it's a collection of first order differential equations for every element of a matrix. It's pretty much the same as you have before. If you know the operator at any time, initial time, with the differential equation you know it at a little bit time later. So the operator is completely determined if you knows it initially and the differential equations. So I think it's completely analogous. U t 0 dagger 1 U t 0. U dagger with U is 1. This is a 1 Schrodinger, and therefore it's the same operator. So the unit operator is the same. It just doesn't change whatsoever. OK, so that's good. But there are some cases, as we will see immediately, in which some operators are the same in the two pictures. So we will have an interesting question, in fact, whether the Heisenberg Hamiltonian is equal to theSchrodinger Hamiltonian. We'll answer that very soon. C Heisenberg is just A Heisenber times B Heisenburg. So there's a nice correspondence between those operators. Also you can do is for commutators. If the Hamiltonian is time independent, does that work for any operator that commutes with the Hamiltonians? PROFESSOR: Hamiltonians is [INAUDIBLE]. AUDIENCE: Because then you can push the operator just through the exponential of the Hamiltonia. PROFessor: Yeah, we'll see things like that. Expectation values are the same as Schrodinger expectation values, except that the states are taking up time. When you're computing the expectation value of the Heisenberg operator, you're using the time equals 0 version of the states. So this is something very useful and we'll need it. The.whole thing is the same. We right it in the bottom, but we mean the top equation. And we use it that way. And now we know that the expectation values of Schrodingers operators are the. same as the expectationvalue of their Heisenburg counterparts. P Heisenberg times the commutator of X and P, which is ih bar times a factor of 2. And then what do we get? The ih there and ih cancels. Well, it actually looks like an equation in classical mechanics. So how do we solve for them now? Well, you sort of have to try the kind of things that you would do classically. Take a second derivative of this equation. And the dPh dt would be [INAUDIBLE] 1 over m times minus m omega squared Xh. still doesn't look like what you would want, does it? No, because you haven't used the time equals 0 conditions. At time equals0, the Heisenberg operators are identical they to the Schrodinger operators. So any expectation value of any power of X and P that you will want to find its time dependence, just put those Heisenburg operators, and you will calculate things with states at time equals zero. It will become very easy. So let's see. I hope I didn't make mistakes. m omega squared cosine squared omega t X squared. And the cross term. Plus 1/2 m omega squared over m omega times cosine omega. t sine omega t XP plus PX. Schrodinger Hamiltonian. So you confirm that this theoretical expectation is absolutely correct. And what's the meaning? You have the Heisenberg Hamiltonian written in terms of the He Eisenberg variables. But by the time you substitute these Heisenburg variables, you get the same result. variables in, it just becomes identical to the Schrodinger Hamiltonian. All right, so that's all for today. I hope to see in office hours in the coming days. Be here Wednesday 12:30, maybe 12:25 would be better, and we'll see you then. [APPLAUSE] We'll be back at 12:50 on Wednesday, and be here at 1:30 on Thursday. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from.