The sa node is located in the upper part of the right atrium. It is the starting point of the electrical conduction system. The sa node acts as the pacemaker of the heart. If it's working like it should it should cause your heart to beat at about 60 to 100 beats per minute. The reason this rhythm is occurring is because our sa node was firing rapidly and it's causing this heart to beating rapidly. The heart will start beating fast because it knows that the body is in dire need of oxygen. With sinus hack the atrial rate is going to be greater than 100 beats per minute and then whenever you're looking at the p wave take your calipers and go from p wave to p wave and make sure there's the same distance between those because that means it's occurring at a regular interval. The p wave represents atrial depolarization so with that you want to make sure that you count your p waves. The qrs complex represents the ventricular rate so just like with the p waves you're going to count your qrs complexes and that's going to give you the rate. p wave so i'm going to go from r wave to r wave with my calipers and i'm just going to confirm that they are regular. Now let's measure the qrs complex we want to make sure it's not too wide or too narrow so it should be less than 0.12 seconds. Now we have a regular rate and it's 110. Now i want to check out that pr interval and that is found at the beginning of the p wave to the begin of theqrs complex. the heart rate now this can be disease related or it can be non-disease related so we want to increase our heart rate whenever we exercise because that gives us a good workout so in that case sound attack isn't really that bad or if we're in a fearful stressful situation let's say you're about to be robbed your sympathetic nervous system is going to kick into gear and it's going to increase your heart rate so it can help hopefully protect you from danger and that's a good thing. whenever a patient develops sinus attack and they have a disease it could be that their disease is worsening. A patient who is post-op from surgery especially some type of bone surgery like hip surgery or they're in the postpartum period where there's a high risk of blood clots after you have a baby or they are immobile. Let's say you're patient develop sinus tachycardia well you'd want to be thinking okay possible pulmonary embolism. You also want to look at their extremities how do they feel are they cool check that capillary refill is the time increase that could mean you definitely have decreased cardiac output. that and see what's possibly going on with the patient assessing blood levels like the thyroid level making sure they don't have hyperthyroidism looking for anemia or maybe infection they have a white blood cell count that is high and looking at that medication history making sure that they're not on any medicines that could be increasing their heart rate. This leads me to medications that can be ordered to help slow down that heart rate one group of medications are beta blockers and one type is called metoprol beta blockers.