Professor: Games from last year will give you a sense of what the scope of this class actually is. Professor: You're not constrained to building games that look exactly like those. "I really, really hesitate not-- try not to put any live digital components in your game," he says. "If you make a decision and the outcome hasn't changed, it wouldn't terribly be meaningful," he adds. "That doesn't necessarily make it not a very good game, which is a different thing, right?" I want to-- I try to cover quite a bit of it from the first reading during class itself. Was anyone here not here on Wednesday? OK, all right. So we need to make sure that your name's on the attendance sheet. And you should come and talk to me after class. And we'll make sure you get a copy of the syllabus and everything like that. Make sure that you get expectations for this class. Anyone want to guess what that is, someone who hasn't played the game? a game? AUDIENCE: (COLLECTIVELY) The players. PROFESSOR: The players, right, not the designers, not you. But you when you actually play someone else's game. Then you're the most important person. If that person's experience is problematic or exciting or engaged or outright hostile to other players, or something like that, that's making it the way that they want to take it. If they say, hey, I really, really wanted this to be a lighthearted game, and you gave me this hardcore game. And it made me hate the people around me, the table. And I don't like it, that is fine. In games, the die roll basically tells you what to do, not actually thinking about it. If you don't let the player know what changed the game state, is it that meaningful a decision anymore? Some numbers changed inside the system. It's good to affect how things go out later. But more as a puzzle solving thing. So it's like something changes right away, and you need to figure out what changed. There's feedback somewhere in the world. But I want to say I probably didn't enjoyed games. Candy Land was invented to keep kids from getting polio from each other, professor says. Professor: "There's a huge inversion from the get out and get some exercise" "I've played a number of adventure games that actually have this," he says. "It's a serious game. It has health benefits. Let's there" "You can't really see what your opponent is doing," professor says of competitive games. "You're doing it yourself 200 turns later, like hours later in this game" you don't actually know what happened. And also if you expect players to get very into your game, this is the stuff that you can leave with because they will understand it and figure it out on their own. And then there's an interesting phenomenon that goes with that in a lot of strategy games called save scrubbing. And that is where you know that the outcome of something is based on a probability. And so if you save and reload often enough, you will always be successful. When I do this one attack. And it's like, yes, because you saved the random number seed. So that is actually a problem because people have this concept about how the mechanics of what does 90% probability of success mean? And I am specifically thinking of XCOM right now. If anyone wants to play that. 90% chance of success to a lot of people means that most-- means that it's going to succeed. But for a game whose seed has been saved and you fail and then you reload from the start, it means you will always fail. Don Norman's first chapter in the design of everyday things. The book used to be called The Psychology of Everyday Things. He talks about things like single control, single function. And he asks this question-- why is it so hard to actually make something right? Anyone remember? Or anyone thinking of-- AUDIENCE: Doesn't the designer never really communicate one-to-one with the user? They're communicating through the object that either was designed or being used? PROFESSOR: That is definitely true. So iteration is the reason why design starts off as being very clunky. in a visual game, that's telling me visibly, right now, that this might be the way I get to do that. In a lot of strategy games, some of these things are very literal, right? So and so technology gives you this bonus. But visibility has something to do with the intent of the player of the user in Norman's case. He's talking about the information from other people. And then there's the affordances of the system. Now if I wanted to hide my cards from you, then I will hold my cards in a way that only you can only see the side that doesn't reveal any useful information. design of everything. And what the system can actually do, the actual operations of the system. The other thing is this concept of mapping, that there is this-- again, it has to do with the player's intent of what they want to do. But mapping, instead of the actual Operations of the System, actually has toDo it for the player. So I need to be able to convey to the player that this is not something you can actuallyDo in the game. You can tell which hex to move your tank, but that's it. what you can see of the system. So there are affordances and there are constraints. These are both words that are introduced in that reading. I think affordances is introduced in this reading. What's an example of an affordance? If you can sit on a chair? What about this thing tells you that you can sitting on it? What is one of the things that this-- not in the rule book completely. If you have this in your game, what is this thing good for? face on it, which I always thought was a little bit strange about-- that might have been designed, too, actually. That might have something because if you-- this won't kill you, really. So you should put it in your home. I want to find out more about the history of the Edison plug. AUDIENCE: It's actually-- the design with the ground on the bottom is a bad idea because if something starts falling out that are too exposed to it, it will not be the ground one. recognition is really easy. The way how they've been designed makes it possible for you to do pattern recognition. Pit's one of those games where exchange is a real time thing. It's easy to mix them up too if there was a really good random aspect to the game. The fact a hidden back gives quite a lot of different possibilities. This rule in particular uses mostly because of this game's shuffling and this rule. You don't know what you're going to draw for people who haven't played this game. stationary stores actually do sell punches, corner punches around of your cards. You're not really supposed to have more than one tile at a time in Carcassonne. So it's OK that the tiles are designed in such a way that it makes it hard for you to hold on to do. For the cards, for instance, you're notreally supposed to stack them. They are not very useful to you when you've got them face down because you can't really see the information. couple of things in this game that is this board. There's a back of the board, which is not colored. And it has a design on it. We could just pass this one around. It's got little playing pieces that are referred to as meeples by the hardcover board game fact base, I guess. They look like little people. Actually, there's probably enough in that for everyone to grab one or two. And then you can just take a look. a whole bunch of ways that you can help people with these sorts of mappings. I guess Donald Norman would describe a lot of these as spatial, metaphors to use. Spatial mostly to describe things like driving in a car and you turn the wheel to the left specifically toward the top of the wheel. And you car it's directed to turn left, that sort of thing. There are sort of bodily metaphors as well. Things that are high are either supposed to be good and happy, things that are low when you're feeling depressed. deal and trade your cards to corner the market, et cetera. When it comes to Carcassonne, there is actually a deep, deep problem with this game despite how popular it is. And that scoring is actually pretty difficult to do. It's a math intensive problem. It does largely map on to how many of the meeples that to get all the CarcASSonne bits back. So and then we'll pick this up in about five minutes. We'll be back with the next episode in about 30 minutes. a couple of board games where you have to put pieces together, and that gives you an idea of maybe those two pieces don't go together. What others things look for in the realm of feedback when it comes to board games? AUDIENCE: Maybe a track? PROFESSOR: Hm? You mean a board track? Audience: Yeah, you want to stay on the track. If you fall out of it, you are no longer-- that's not a legal place for you to place your token. Other players are your primary feedback mechanism on whether you've done a move that's OK or not. Everything that you know about the thing that you are trying to guess is something that only other people can see. In Mafia, all the information you're getting in the game is through other people in Mafia. In Battleship, there's information that's hidden from you, but it's completely available to your opponent and vice versa. In Charades and Pictionary, usually your teammates are the ones who are guessing. your objectives from the player that knows the information. The person who's running knows where they're going at any given time. The detectives are working on partial information to try to corner and close this dragnet. So I think that's on the list. Do you remember it? That was on the syllabus. It used to be-- Scotland Yard. But we may have changed the game. But that also falls in mastermind category of games where it's like, here's this person with all the information, only that person is changing the information as the game goes on. That's a big difference in Scotland. order problem. You're designing something that then becomes this manifestation that somebody else uses. And that's actually when all the problems occur. Market forces push you to add things, to do additive design in order to distinguish yourself from the competition. That naturally leads to complexity in interface. And a lot of products, you said, don't get through that process because it'll take five or six times to get it right. But if it's not good by the second time, people just won't buy it. what he's talking about only, I doubt that actually imagined that this was something to be possible at the time when he wrote it. That was 1980. And cell phones obviously have gone through a lot of criticism. But it is it has been successful through a number of different reasons. Don't discount marketing as being a big part of it. It's expensive for what it does. But then, arguably, by locking out a many things that you might want to do but maybe don't have to do, they are trying to make it easier for you not to do the wrong thing.