Professor: What exactly happens with the half l states? We're gonna talk about that in some detail in a couple of weeks, but let me give you a quick preview. Professor: It is impossible to represent the half integer states with a wave function which represents a probability distribution on a sphere. If you take that wave function, if you rotate by 2pi-- in any direction-- if you rotated by. 2pi, then you have a half-integer state. And we quickly deduced that that was impossible. The value of the wave function at some point, is equal to the wavefunction at that point. So, you can't write a wave function if it has to be equal to minus itself at any given point. The important thing here, is that if you have a magnetic field which has a gradient, so if it's zero0.2pi thewave function comes back tominus itself. So that's a strange thing. But the question is, look, these furnish perfectly reasonable towers of states respecting these commutation relations. If you send a magnet through a region, it'll get deflected in one direction or the other. How far it gets deflected is determined by how big of a magnet you sent through. You send in a bigger magnet, it deflects more. So, let's put this together. Imagine we take a charged sphere, we send it rotating with same angular momentum. We send it through a field gradient, a gradient for magnetic field. What we'll see is we have a force. And that force is going to be proportional to how big your magnet is. Stern Gerlach Experiment: Take an electron and send it through a magnetic field gradient. If it gets deflected, you will have measured the magnetic moment. If the electron weren't rotating, it would just go straight through, right? It would have no angular momentum, and it'd have no magnetic moment, and thus it would not reflect. But electrons carry a form of angular momentum that can't be represented in terms of rotations on a sphere. It's like an angular momentum in every possible way, except it cannot be represented. that fixed the fact that I was probing Lz is that I made the magnetic field have a gradient in the Z direction. So, what I was sensitive to, since the force is actually proportionally to mu dot B-- or, really, mu dot the gradient of B, so, we'll do this in more detail later. The direction of the gradient selects out which component of the angular momentum we're looking at. This is also true of the L equals 1 states. What about Lx? Lx also takes one of three values, those three values. we're gonna talk about real, physical systems in three dimensions. And as we'll discover, it's basically the same as in one dimension, we just have to write down more symbols. But the content is all the same. So, this will make obvious the reason we worked with 1D up until now, which is that there's not a heck of a lot more to be gained for the basic principles, but it's a lot of more knowing to write the expressions. And that is a beautiful abuse of notation-- in spherical coordinates. In 3D, I want to think about systems in 3D which are spherically symmetric. This is going to be a particularly simple class of systems, and it's also particularly physical. Things like the isotropic harmonic oscillator, things like hydrogen, where the system is rotationally independent, the force of the potential only depends on the radial distance, all share a bunch of common properties. Along the way, we'll solve a toy model for hydrogen, and I'll show you how to do it. can be written in a nice form. This is minus h bar squared, 1 upon r dr squared r. And from the second term, L squared over r squared upon 2m plus 1 over 2mr squared L squared plus u of r. OK, and this is the energy operator when the system is rotational invariant in spherical coordinates. These commute. So, we can find common eigenbasis which are eigenfunctions both of E and of L squared. We can also simplify our lives if we also use phi phi. Professor: "This is for any given value of l. This is a constant over r squared, with a plus sign" "Can r be negative? No. It's defined from 0 to infinity. So, that's like having an infinite potential for negative r" "Oh shoot! Oh, I'm sorry! I'm terribly sorry!" "I've abused the notation terribly. Let's-- Oh! This is-- Crap! Sorry" "I'm really sorry, I did not realize how confusing that would be" God! OK. Let's check our sanity, and walk through the logic. So, the logic here is, we have some potential, it's a function only of r, yeah? As a consequence, since it doesn't care about the angles, we can write things in terms of the spherical harmonics. Here's the energy eigenvalue equation. We discover that because we're working in spherical. harmonics, the angular momentum term becomes just a function of. r, with no other coefficients. And now we have to ask, what exactly is the effective potential? if it's 1 over r. So, we get an effective potential-- that I'll check-- there's the effective potential. And finally, the third fact is that r must be strictly positive, so as a 1D problem, that means it can't be negative, it's gotta have an infinite potential on the left. If you see this, declare in your mind a brief moment of triumph, because you know what technique to use. You can do this sort of rescaling by a power of r. And more generally, if you have a differential equation that looks like. something like a derivative with respect to r plus a constant over r times phi, you know how to solve this. if there were nothing else, equals zero. If there were no other terms here, then this would say, ddr plus c over r is phi, that means when you take a derivative it's like dividing by r and multiplying by c. But if phi goes like r to the minus c, that's not the exact solution to the equation, but I can write phi is equal to r to minus c times u. And then this equation becomes ddr, dot, dot u equals zero, OK? Very useful little trick-- not really a trick, It's just observation-- and this is the second order version of the same thing. Professor: angular momentum barrier is just an expression of that. It's just saying that as you come to smaller and smaller radius, holding the angular momentum fixed, your velocity-- your angular velocity-- must increase. The reason is that the electron can radiate away energy and angular momentum, and so l will decrease and decrease, and can still fall down. So, we still need a reason for why the hydrogen system, quantum mechanically, is stable. [? Why do ?] [? things exist? ?] The wave function, phi sub E, which goes near r equals 0, like u of r over r. So, what should be true of u? Can u diverge? Is that physical? Does u have to vanish? Can it take a constant value? So, I've given you a hint by telling you that I want to think about there being an infinite potential, but why? Why is that the right thing to do? Well, imagine U of r went to a constantvalue near the origin. That's maybe not so bad. The energy is going to go like, p squared over 2md squared. But here's an important fact, d squared-- the Laplacian-- of 1 over r, well, it's easy to see what this is at a general point. As you approach the origin from any direction, the function is going like 1 over R. So, the second derivative has to go as you go across this point. But it changes from plus infinity in this direction, to plus infinity. That's badly singular. exactly the way you need to get the delta function. OK, which is pretty awesome. So, what that tells us is that if we have a wave function that goes like 1 over r, then the energy contribution-- energy acting on this wave function-- gives us a delta function at the origin. If we calculate the energy, we'll discover that the energy is badly divergent. It does become divergent if we don't have u going to 0. That's about the derivative of u, as you approach the origin from Lucatau's Rule. would've got the same equation. And that means that the energy eigenvalue can depend on l, but it can't depend on m, right? So, that means for each m in the allowed possible values, l, l minus 1, [? i ?] minus l-- and this is 2l plus 1 possible values-- for each of these m's, the energy is the same. And so, here we have a degeneracy. And this degeneracy isn't fixed by rotational invariance. of E and Lz. Can I also find a common eigenbasis of ELz and Ly? Are there common eigenevectors of ELZ and Ly. Are thereCommon eigenfunctions of Lz andLy? No, because they don't commute. E commutes with Lx plus iLy and Lx minus iLy, L plus/minus. So, this tells you that if you have an eigen function of E, and you act with a raising operator, you get another eigenfunction of E. And thus, we get our 2L plus 1 degeneracy. some examples. So, the first example is gonna be-- actually, I'm going to skip this spherical well example-- because it's just not that interesting, but it's in the notes, and you really need to look at it. OK, so, the spherical well. And if it's a spherical infinite well, then I'm gonna say, the potential is infinite outside of some distance, l. OK? And it's 0 inside. So what does this give us? Well, in order to solve the system, we know that the first thing we do is we separate out with yLms. case-- when there's zero angular momentum, little l equals 0. E-- and I should call this u sub l-- Eu sub 0 is equal to h bar squared upon 2m. This is saying that the energy, a constant, times u is two derivatives times this constant. So, u0 can be written as a cosine of kx-- or sorry-- kr plus b sine ofkr. And so, this tells you what the energy is. It's just exactly like when the 1D system. that the eigenfunctions are? And let me do that here. So, therefore, the wave function phi sub E0 of r theta and phi is equal to y0m. But what must m be? 0, because m goes from plus L to minus L, 0. And so, there's an overall normalization constant, that I'll call n. OK, so, we get that our wave function is 1 over r times sine of n pi over Lr. do I have a 0 at the origin? Is that the question? AUDIENCE: Yeah. PROFESSOR: OK. There's nothing special about the origin, except for two things. Little u has a 0, but it gets multiplied by 1 over r. So, the wave function, in fact, is non-zero, there. The physical thing is the probability distribution, which is the [? norm ?] squared of the wavefunction. And it doesn't have a0 at theorigin. Professor: I am not about to solve for you the problem of hydrogen. I am going to construct for you a nice toy model, which turns out to be an excellent first pass at explaining the properties observed in hydrogen gases. This is a model. It is a bad model, It doesn't fit the data. But it's pretty good. And we'll be able to improve it later. So, it is the solution of the Coulomb potential. And what I want to emphasize to you, I cannot say this strongly enough, physics is a process of building models that do a good job of predicting. We know that the wave function is this little u times 1 over r times yLm, for some l and some m. So, the first thing we should do any time you're solving an interesting problem is do dimensional analysis. E squared must be an energy times a length. Also known as p squared l, momentum squared over 2m, 2 times the mass times the length. It's useful to put things in terms of mass, momentum, and lengths, because you can cancel them out. The ground state has what energy? Some finite energy. It doesn't have infinite negative energy. What do you expect to be roughly the ground state energy of this system? Roughly minus e0. That seems like a pretty good guess. It's the only dimensional sensible thing. Maybe we're off by factors of 2. But, maybe it's minus e 0. So, that's a good guess, a first thing. And if you actually take mu e to the 4th over h bar squared, this is off by, unfortunately, a factor of 4. Solving a differential equation is a sort of involved undertaking. Professor: Just dimensional analysis gives you this answer. "This is one of those miraculous differential equations where we can actually write down the solution by doing the series approximation" "Most differential equations of some, maybe if you're lucky, it's a special function ... but most don't have a simple solution like a Gaussian or a power large, or something. Most of them just have some complicated solution," he says. "You know what those solutions look like, they look like exponentials," he adds. function, which I'll call v, little v. Little v of rho, and this, asymptotically, should go to a constant near the origin and something that vanishes slower than an exponential at infinity. So then, we take this and we do our series expansion. And the series expansion has a solution, which is a sub j plus 1. So, what that tells us is that for some maximum value of little j, for some aj max plus 1 is equal to 0. root 2 epsilon times j maximum plus l plus 1 is equal to minus 1. But that gives us a relationship between overall j max, little l, and the energy. And if you go through, what you discover is that the energy isequal to 1 over 4 n squared. And so, by solving the differential equation exactly, which in this case we kind of amazingly can, the energy eigenvalues are, indeed, exactly 1/4 of e0. And they're spaced with a 1 over n squared, which does two things. nice bit of experimental data, but we've discovered the energy is, in fact, not just independent of m, but it's independent of l, too. Why? What symmetry is explaining this extra degeneracy? We'll pick that up next time. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from. Click here to read the rest of the article. Back To the pageyou came from, click here to reads the rest. Back into the pageYou can now read the full article on this site.