CNN's John Defterios takes a look at three different views of fiscal policy. Keynesian, classical and supply-side views are shown in the atas model. The Keynesian view is based on the idea that if you borrow money and make aggregate demand increase, eventually it will increase. The supply side view is more of a Keynesian approach and focuses on what happens when aggregate demand is increased rather than how much it increases. Defterius: We have three main views of how well fiscal policy works or how well it doesn't work and we're just gonna look at these. change the demand for loanable funds so you have this market right if you're gonna have the government go out and borrow money they're going to borrow the money. When the interest rate goes - I - what happens to private borrowing what is it at now do it q2 is the total that's private and public how much is private borrowing yeah it's less than q1 it's a way over here I'll call this guy q0.private investment private borrowing goes down I didn't even stay atq1 it went down interest rates went from i1 to i2 so let's think about what this guy's says. get over here we wanted to get the YF right and we said oh look we can just easily program the number into the our Excel spreadsheet and so exactly how much to increase government spending. We're just gonna change it by this much so here's this increase of G but if that increase in G changes interest rates and causes these guys to go down the guy doesn't become this guy what does he do he doesn't shift to this guy he's down alright because Gees gone up but consumption or investment I've also come down a little bit. In 2025 with the high marginal tax rates right in essence people wouldn't work and save and invest as much because it wouldn't be worth it and so the PPC curve is that guy in blue rather than the guy in black. There's some evidence that people respond to these incentives right because if you think about it like this think about like this somebody makes somebody who's on welfare they're getting a check % thousand dollars and you say that's bad we don't want you doing that go get a job. doesn't make any sense I'm not gonna do that I'm gonna goof off. I don't want it because they're facing a marginal tax rate that's really really high so which view is Keynesian new classical supply? I'll write the paper and win the Nobel Prize and I can go to Sweden and get the nice little bitty gold medallion that I couldn't wear around my neck for the rest of life at such a such recession. alright this is the end of test three material I will.