Charles Brockden Brown: The Enlightenment is a critique of a kind of impoverished view of mind or consciousness that over-relies on reason. We started to look at it a little bit with Barlow's [assumed spelling] Raven poem with Poe. The idea that in fact there is something wrong with reason as a faculty, and this can take a couple of forms. One is that all of those nice ideals that come along with the enlightenment may in fact be parasitic precisely on the kinds of negative types of thinking that they are designed to get rid of. self as author which requires him to create a self as character. In so doing he's able as author to pick out the defective font [phonetic] of type those errors, and either talk about the ways in which he was actually able to correct them in real life in his real life, or, saying I wish now that I would correct that, I can point that out as an error. It's a sort of textural do-over as he rewrites his life. The Passion of the Christ is set in Philadelphia in 1787, the same time as the Constitution is being framed a hop, skip, and a jump away. Brown is an interesting character because he is one of the first US writers to try to take advantage of first American copyright law which was passed in 1790. The copyright law does something interesting; it makes a profession of authorship possible, because it suggests that writing is property, and if you can write, you can be a writer.  copyright law doesn't protect US writers from being pirated abroad. It does nothing to prevent US publishers from publishing pirated editions of well-known books already circulating in the continent. So that seems like a bad thing for the aspiring US author. On the other hand remember what I said before, there is no patronage system in place in the early republic; therefore, what is emerging is a kind of marketplace for writing. Without that market, a young American author wouldn't be able to sell his writings and sustain himself as a writer. In 1798 Brown publishes his first novel Wieland: or, The Transformation: An American Tale. He says that his aim isn't merely to please the idle and the thoughtless, but actually he says to engage those who study and reflect. In Edgar Huntly there's another kind of scientific fact that is played with right? Sleepwalking. And you can see there is a certain kind of haste in the plotting of Edgar Huntley. There are red herrings, there are loose ends that are not exactly tied up, and that might be the result of the fact that it was the third book that he wrote in that year. happy, many, many pages. Has anybody read Clarissa or an abridged Clarissa? Clarissa's a seduction narrative right, in which a middle class heroine is menaced and finally seduced and raped by an aristocrat. And you might say right away in the early English epistolary novel there's the worry about what it is we're writing and reading. One solution early on was well, it would be realistic if these were letters that you were getting to read. Of course, the idea that people would spend that much time writing and then reading, would leave hardly any time for living. There's a worry that's probably a worry of Puritanism that there's something wrong with novels because they're fiction. And what is fiction, if not the opposite of truth? Fiction means lies, right? Why would you read this? If you do it's got to be only a guilty pleasure. There can be nothing improving by it. So fiction, as opposed to fact, fiction somehow has falsehood. Therefore early novels try to insist on their basis in fact. As if there were something that would then could be morally improving for that. Brown is trying to find a form of the novel that can be used to instill virtue and all of these other qualities. He's trying to wrest the novel away from its association with some kind of damaging femininity. In part because he wants to say that you know to accept that kind of separations of fear does neither men nor women credit. So if we could get away from this idea that somehow there's something feminized about the novel, it's good for both sexes. One last quote, this comes from the Reverend Samuel Miller. He says that if it were possible he would wholly prohibit the reading of novels. The Gothic novel is a forum that in the English context is probably pioneered by this guy, Sir Horace Walpole who wrote a novel that was called The Castle of Otranto that was published in 1764 on Christmas Eve and subtitled, A Gothic Story. Now Gothic, you know is a form of architecture I suppose, first and foremost. It's a kind of you know the pointy churches after the Romanesque arches that are more rounded. Gothic is more pointy. But it becomes a pejorative term by this time that is, that takes on the medieval association. of a trifle nevertheless has a role to play because it frees up these resources of fancy. Walpole had a decided predilection for what may be called the Gothic style, a term which he contributed not a little to rescue from the bad fame into which it had fallen. But it's interesting that the novel, the Gothic novel itself as a form doesn't take off in 1764. It has to wait about 25 years in and around the French Revolution and then it really takes off when a woman named Ann Radcliffe writes her Gothic novels. like that. There appear to be manifestations of the supernatural. She often finds herself in the various kinds of settings crumbling castles, dungeons, graveyards, darkened churches. Usually she almost escapes her persecutors, then they catch her. They are trying to get her out of greed or lust or both. And usually there's a Theodore-like protector who's kind of chasing after trying to save the day. Usually, they catch up, they don't catch up. In the end, all of the ghosts and supernatural manifestations that have tyrannized her are shown to be fakes. Gothic is almost always in English a kind of political anti-Catholic, anti-Italian sort of strain and you know anti-French I guess as well. In The Monk you might say is really horrific Gothic. In it the ghosts are real. It is blasphemous. And, this is a French an illustration from a French translation of The Monk. The story goes something like this. Juan Ambrosio is the abbot of the capechins [assumed spelling] and he's presented as a. kind of admired preacher. Elvira who is a noble lady who is one of his, you know in his parish. He's her confessor. With the aid of the satanic Matilda who conjures up the devil also for added backup, Ambrosia gets into Antonia's room and is about to rape her. So he kills Elvira by smothering her with a pillow, gives Antonia a sleeping potion, and throws her in the dungeon. She cries out so he kills her. At the same time there's another woman who is there named Agnes. She's been imprisoned for other reasons down there and she actually gives birth to a baby down in the [inaudible]. There's a kind of weird conflation of supernatural demonic activity, sexuality, violent and disgusting death. Ann Radcliffe makes a distinction between what she calls, let me see if I have it here, the distinction between terror and horror. Terror would therefore be linked to the sublime and the faculty of imagination. Her Gothic she would've offered was a form of terror. Matthew Lewis's you know disgusto Gothic is actually making fun of that. It's doing what might be called the anti-sublime. think there's a cultural reason why Gothic takes off, not when Walpole writes, but when Radcliffe and Lewis do. All those democratic ideals, liberty, equality, fraternity, turn into the horror of the terror, and that's a terror that is a horror. And then finally the Napoleonic era which is the re-institution of anti-democratic principles. So, the experience, the cultural experience of the French Revolution would suggest that this regime of reason is not all that it is cracked up to be. All of this you might say is the context for Charles Brockden Brown's Edgar Huntly. The author lays out what we might think of as the project of American Gothic. He says America has opened new views to the naturalist and politician but it has seldom furnished scenes to the moral painter. He's presenting this. Puerile superstition and exploded manners, Gothic castles and chimaeras are the materials usually employed for this end right? If you're not writing seduction obviously you're writing Gothic. But here in the United States we have an opportunity. The incidents of Indian hostility and the perils of the western wilderness are far more suitable. at the second, second to last paragraph on the page. But it suddenly occurred to me for what purpose shall I prosecute this search? What benefit am I to reap from this discovery? How shall I demean myself when the criminal, all right the one who murdered Waldegrave, is detected? I was not insensible at that moment of the impulses of vengeance. But they were transient. I detested the sanguinary resolutions that I had once formed. Right and that's a form of [inaudible] right, for talking about being bloody minded or being revengeful. Yet I was fearful of the effect of my hasty rage. insane. And he says oh curiosity if vicious if undisciplined by reason. Okay, so we can keep curiosity in check and disciplined if we use our reason. But how does that square with what he says in the next paragraph? Curiosity, like virtue, is its own reward. Knowledge is a value for its own sake and pleasure is a next to the acquisition without regard to anything beyond. It is precious even when disconnected with moral inducements and heartfelt sympathies. But the knowledge which I sought by its union with these was calculated to excite the most complex and fiery sentiment in my bosom. to your knowing cares, to the deep and incurable despair that haunts you to which your waking thoughts are [inaudible] from which sleep cannot secure you. I know the enormity of your crime, but I know not your inducements. Whatever you were I see the consequences with regard to yourself. I see proofs of that remorse which must ever be attendant on guilt. That is enough. Why should the efforts of our misdeeds be inexhaustible? Why should we be debarred from comforter? An opportunity of repairing our errors may be demanded from the rulers of our destiny. Clithero portrays Edgar here not as a redeeming confessor, but as an agent of perdition, of damnation. And if we look at what happens in these 4 chapters right, Chapters 4 through 8, which his Clithero's story, we see that he actually has had nothing to do with the death of Waldegrave. And the story reinforces the novel's picture of identity as confusing and inconstant right? Think about the motif's in there. There's that strange co-partnership of being that Mrs. Loramer has with her brother Arthur Wyatt. the hand and by which force could be exerted. Some spring therefore secretly existed which might forever elude the senses, but on which the hand by being moved over in all the directions might accidentally light. The process was effectual. A touch, casually applied at an angle drove back a bolt and a spring at the same time was sent in action by which the lid was raised above half an inch. No event could have been supposed more fortuitous, by chance than this. No measure that I could adopt enabled me to place the lid in the same situation in which I had found it. The opening of Chapter 13 suggests that Edgar may be feeling guilty too because you might say he's torn by conflicting allegiances to his dead friend Waldegrave and to Mary. Third sentence however was banished from my waking thoughts and occurred in an incongruous form to my dreams. Chapter 13, the chapter that follows cements our understanding of the perils between Clithero and Edgar. It gives us our first glimpse into Edgar's personal history. It comes fairly soon after Clit hero's account of himself and so it invites us to compare the two. Edgar's experience in the woods is key to the story. Brown maps the woods onto Edgar's mind. In exploring the woods, Edgar starts exploring facets of his own mind that have remained hidden from view. Brown: "Famine and blindness and death and savage enemies never fail to be conjured up by the silence and darkness of the night. I cannot dissipate them by any efforts of reason" "My cowardice requires the perpetual consolation of light. My heart droops when I mark the decline of the sun"