ae houseman 998-999 uh very intellectual individual um with these two authors today um we're really kind of bridging the gap between the victorian and the modern. We're really transitioning and that's why these are the last authors that we'll focus on in this time period some of their philosophy some of the writing styles and things that motivated them. Most of his poetry especially towards the end if you look on the right there the grief and poetry era you know especially the last of his poems. Houseman can tap into that pain and that darkness and help you know other people and and help spread emotion through and through. To an athlete dying young is an article that i'm going to have you take a look at later. Look at what he says about that individual and how they you know can celebrate and reflect on that individual. The time you won your town the race we cheered you through the marketplace man and boy stood cheering by and home we brought you shoulder high today the road all runners come shoulder high we bring you home and set you at your threshold down. Early though the laurel grows it withers quicker than the rose eyes the shady knight has shut cannot see the record cut and silence sounds no worse than cheers after earth has stopped the ears now you will not swell the route of lads that wore their honors out runners whom renown outran and the name died before the man so set before its echoes fade the fleet foot on the sill of shade and hold to the low lintel up the still defended challenge cup and round that early laureled head will flock to gaze the strengthless dead. heart away give pearls away and rubies but keep your fancy free but i was one in twenty no use to talk to me when i was 1 and 20. Don't give your hard way don't fall in love you can spend money on them you can give them all this stuff but what ultimately don't you want to give them at this age don't give them your heart. "I know what's best i know what i'm doing you're not listening to the wise man or wise woman in that case" he had heard mention that okay so now he is crushed okay he's been defeated to some degree because when i was 1 and 20 i heard him say again all the heart out of the bosom was never given in vain to paid with size of plenty and sold for endless rue sorrow remorse in the footnote there. So giving it out okay it's you're going to be getting some pain and you're opening yourself up uh for a lot of sorrow and remorse and he gets struggled so you can see this kind of as the lover's lament which we haven't really done much of since the sonnets.