This morning we're going to carry on talking about Jeremy Bentham and classical utilitarianism. And I'm going to begin by making a few points about the measurement of utility, which we bumped into in a glancing kind of way last time. And then we are going to move from that into talking about utility and distribution in Bentham's theory. I think you'll start to see why classicalilitarianism became such an ideologically powerful doctrine in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. The idea being that if you think of, in this case, a very simple two-person society, and you Think of that as the status quo, A has that much utility, B has that many utility. rare case that you get it right about yourself. And it's the objective scientific calculus that's going to tell us what maximizes people's utility. Now, you might say, "Well, how is that actually going to work?" So there are two steps here. The first one is that he thinks all utility is quantifiable. It follows from that that utility is reducible to a single index. Money is going to be the measure of utility in his scheme, and that means that we could think of these units of utility as having a kind of dollar value. Professor: Diminishing marginal utility is the principle of diminishing marginal utility of all good things. If you don't have a car and somebody gives you a Porsche Turbo, your utility's going to go up a huge amount. But if you already have a Porsche, you're going to get less new utility from the second Porsche than you had from the first. The new utility you get diminishes at the margin. Each new Porsche is less valuable to you than the previous Porsche. Professor: Does it mean that rich people will care less about money? Student: Why is the answer is no. Student: What about other values like integrity? If you have a little bit of integrity and you get some more. Prof: Okay, so it's a possibility. Any other examples of where this becomes problematic? I mean, think about beer. So there might be some goods like integrity that are not easily capture-able in this logic. We should put that out there, but yeah, over here? Professor Ian Shapiro: Health. It's tricky to think about redistributing health, right? Although you'll see we will come up against some pretty bizarre cases. Every serious economist since the eighteenth century has assumed that the principle of diminishing marginal utility is true, including Jeremy Bentham. So the main thing is that the fungibility of utility and its expressibility in terms of money, although as was pointed out here, we shouldn't think that that makes you care less about money the richer you get. Professor Shapiro: When are we going to stop at the point of perfect equality, we're going to keep redistributing until they have the same amount. that the rich will burn their crops before giving them to the poor might not be true. And even if we get to less extreme circumstances like South Africa before and after the transition, this is what we see. Ronald Reagan comes in and says, "If we cut taxes, the pie will get bigger for all and they'll be actually more revenue," and so utilitarianism says do it. And you will find, if you go back now and look at what happened during the 1980s, perfectly credible economists will line up on both sides because they cut the taxes. oil goes up, or commodities collapse, or the dollar, or this, or that. Do or don't change the value of their currency. So that when it gets down to it, you're never going to get a definitive answer to the question what is the point of practical equality. You're getting to this very messy world of macroeconomic prediction, if you want to put some limits on the radical edge of classical utilitarianism. And as a matter of history, how it went was to rethink the analytical structure of utilitarianism in a way that completely defanged its radical redistributive edge. classical to what we're going to all neoclassical utilitarianism is a subject with which I will begin on Wednesday. See you then for the next installment of this week's Daily Discussion, which will focus on the role of utilitarianism in the development of the modern world. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from. Click here to read the first installment of the Daily Discussion. Follow us on Twitter @CNNOpinion and @jennifer_newton.