Professor Shelly Kagan: Would you want to live a life on the experience machine? Would you be happy or would you be unhappy, to discover that you actually have been living a life in a scientist's lab? Shelly: There's more to the best kind of life than just having the right mental states, than just getting the insides right. Different theories of well-being might answer that in different ways, Professor Kagan says. But if you're just spending your life floating in the scientists' lab, you're not actually accomplishing anything, she says. a variety of things you wanted. You wanted to know your place in the universe, but you don't even have that kind of knowledge either, because you think you're writing novels, finding the cure for cancer, climbing Mount Everest. You're completely deceived about all those things. So, we might have to distinguish between any old accomplishment and genuinely valuable accomplishments. But again, just put those details aside. We can say that there are certain things that are good above and beyond experiences--the right kinds of accomplishments, the right kind ofknowledge. thing to know what was the average rainfall in Bangkok in 1984. I'm not clear that that kind of knowledge gives a whole lot of value to your life. The crucial point is that it takes more to have the best kind of life than just getting the insides right. Having in your life not just experiences but the right kinds of goods or accomplishments or whatever term we use for it. So, we could still evaluate rival lives. My life would've gone better had I chosen to become a farmer instead. How good it is to be alive is a matter of adding up all of the--call it the contents of life. It's as though we've been assuming, and I have been assuming up to this moment, that being alive per se has no value. How valuable--how well off you are, how valuable your life is, is a function of the contents, the pleasure and the pain. Of course, these are "valuable container" theories, so we have to remember that the mere fact that I'm alive gives my life some value. subtract the ignorance and deception. Even if your content subtotal was negative ten, that doesn't mean you're not better off alive. Modest versions of the valuable container theory say, although being alive per se is good, if the contents of your life get bad enough, that can outweigh the value of being alive so that the grand total is negative. If you're a fan of the neutral container theory, you won't have anything extra to add, because life is just a zero. Bob Greene: It's bad that I'm going to die, but I'm not a monster. It makes me feel even worse that everybody else is stuck dying, he says. Greene: There's a great deal of variation in how much life we get. Some of us make it to the ripe old age of 80,90 a 100 or more, Greene says. He says we care more about being short-changed than we do about being, as we might put it, overcompensated. The story "good to bad" is the kind of story we don't want for ourselves. We want the bad behind us, not the bad in front of us. We worry that because of the unpredictability of death that our lives may not have the ideal shape. A lot of us might feel that a life like this, where we peak but then we stick around--you know, isn't as desirable in which we end with a bang. It's not as though you think, "All right, the dénouement must occur at the very last page" Without predictability you don't know where to put the peak. If you try to aim for peaking later, you might not make it to that. All of this suggests then that the unpredictability of our death adds an extra negative element. It makes it harder to plan what the best way to live my life would be. But then we have to ask, would it really be better to know? would you want the birthmark? Would you want to know exactly how much time you've got left? All Right. See you next time.