"The door is unlockable" means it can be unlocked. But the door is broken, "It's unlockable," means it cannot be locked. There's a suffix that changes verbs into adjectives. There are two "un-"s. "Un-" means something like undo the effects of, or change something so that it is no longer in the state that it would have been if the verb had applied to it, or something like that."I have this desire to put an extra oomph on "un-," if I mean the thing on the right. "untie" means "take something and do things to it such that it is no longer in the state that it was in after you have tied it" "Un-" is a reversitive meaning. "Un-" combines with adjectives and makes adjectives that mean more or less "not (adjective) " Unfamiliar, "unfortunate," "fortunate" are all "un-"s that mean not the adjective, whatever it is. "Undo" is hard to do, because it's hard to combine with. "Unlockable" is ambiguous because there are two "un-"s. "Un-" can combine with either a verb or an adjective. " unlockable" consists of three morphemes, a prefix, a root, and a suffix. The order in which these words are put together is also important to think of as being useful to think about in a bunch of sentences or more or less "unlockable," as we're going to see in the next few episodes of "This is Life With Steve" Theory of syntax divides sentences into three kinds. There are sentences that you've heard a zillion times before, like "We're going to class" And on the other hand, sentences you have possibly never heard anyone say, but that are fine. "Stop entertaining that hypothesis. Make it go home. It's not a good hypothesis. It won't do you any good," Richards says. "We have this distinction between grammatical sentences that are ungrammatical that isn't just a list of all the sentences that aren't grammatical" Sally Kohn: We can distinguish grammaticality, even in sentences that don't mean anything. She says we can have English sentences that consist of two adjectives modifying a noun and then there's a verb, and then an adverb. Kohn says we have this intuition that there are sentences that are OK and sentences that're bad. She asks: Do people have this feeling that they're meaningless, and second, that the first one is OK and the second one is bad? NORVIN RICHARDS: English speakers end sentences with prepositions every day. "Who are you talking to" where, without the "to," it doesn't have to be about redundancy, he says. "To whom" is part of this phrase that's at the beginning of the sentence, he adds. "Why does "to" have to come along, according to Mr. Richards? I don't know about you guys," he says to the audience, "but it's not my go-to way to say this" your English teacher? Yes? AUDIENCE: Is this another example because that's how it's done in Latin? NORVIN RICHARDS: Yes. Your English teacher told you to do that because Latin, actually, among many other languages, doesn't allow you to say this. You have to do this. English is quite rare in being able to doing this. Most of the languages of the world can't. Some time in the 15th, 16th century, a number of grammarians decided that English would be way cooler if it were more like Latin, and so they began declaring that it was. grammar. So prescriptive grammar is the study of rules that your teachers might have taught you in school about how to speak. So we're not going to try to improve your writing in this class, except insofar as the writing advisors can do that. So this is going to be a study of descriptive grammar and notPrescriptive. Yeah? AUDIENCE: So for that second sentence on the board, "What are you talking about?" NORVIN RICHARDS: Oh, this one? Yeah? In many languages, most languages, including Latin, you have to say, "About what are you talking?" In English, there's this distinction between the examples where leaving a preposition behind is what you prefer. "What did you leave despite?" and "Despite what did you left?" Is either of those acceptable at all? "AboutWhatAreYouTalking?" sounds fancy and snobbish, but still right. "To whom are you Talking?" sounds Fancy and Snobbish. a fruitful area of research here. English is happy to leave prepositions at the ends of sentences. But in which cases is it happy to do the Latin thing? And in some cases, it's happier than others. Another distinction to make is between meaningless on the one hand and ungrammatical on the other. That sentence can be both meaningless and un grammatical, but it can also be meaningless and grammatical. We've drawn a distinction between prescriptive and descriptive statements. We're just going to study what English speakers do. "This is the cough, ugh, puh." That's something I said. And I'm a native speaker of English. So there are two kinds of things we could say. One would be to say, we're developing a theory of all of the kinds of sentences that Native English speakers can say. And then there are going to be other things. Flies, sudden heart attacks, and then other kinds of thing that are maybe less clear to think what to say about them. people would be like if there were no distractions and no flies, and no sudden homicides, no falling asleep in the middle of your sentences, all of that stuff. So the distinction here is competence versus performance. We're imagining a speaker who's kind of like a frictionless plane, that there are various kinds of complications, and there's no air resistance or whatever else. Does that makes sense? That's how we're going to do syntax. Similarly, "It's raining" is a possible sentence of English. begin doing some syntax? Here's the sentence, "I will find the red book." grammatical sentence. It's clear what it means, although we've just said it doesn't matter whether it means anything. We're going to look for these units. And what we'll find is that there are various phenomena that care about whether something is a unit in that tree, a single blob of structure. "The red book" is treated as a single object that syntax gets to refer to. So "find the red," for example, is not a constituent. or we're getting to modify nouns that you can't hear, however we want to talk about that. So all this slide is meant to convince you of is that "the red book" and "find the red" don't have the same status. "The red book," we want it to be a substring that has certain privileges, can be used for these various types of phenomena. So it isn't just these are phenomena that pick out three-words substrings. It's these are phenomenon that pick out certain substrings and not others of the sentence. When we put together "red" and "book," what we get has properties that are determined by the fact that it contains a noun. If there were no noun, it wouldn't have those properties. Similarly, with "the red book," the things that can go in that slot, the things That can go after "find," we just saw in the last slide, can be larger or smaller. What they all contain is a noun, so we're going to name that thing after those kinds of units. We'll give it the label "noun" just contain a preposition, like, "I will look up," where, again, you can say, "Up?" (Why will you look up?) "I said I would look up, and up I will look"-- Maybe. "The day after tomorrow" sure looks like a noun phrase. It's got a noun in it, "day," and then "the" before that, but we know that can go at the beginnings of noun phrases. So there are probably-- so the word "adverb" can be used to cover a bunch of things, including things that we don't have any other word for. "I will wake up" is one of those prepositions that combine in an interesting way with verbs in English and a lot of other Germanic languages. "Up the cats" is not a prepositional phrase. We need different structures for these verb phrases, and we will develop them. "I work in the domain in which up and down can be the same thing. Yeah. If I were a physicist, then if NASA were to hire me, the spacecraft would have all kinds of problems" "I will walk the student up to her room" is different from all of these, actually, kind of interestingly. "Up" is modifying "to her room." We want there to be a constituent "up to herRoom" "Up to her Room?" suggests that that's a constituent. "Waking up or walking up" is not an adjective, it's describing a verb. It's like the opposite of "walking up" or "walking down" "I will take you home" is like "taking you to your room" "Waking the cats up" is a little bit like painting the cats red. We want "up" to not be a preposition that's combining with the cats. "I will walk her up" as in "I walked up the stairs" seems to be three different things that we need three different structures for. "Up" is modifying "to her room," but I don't think [? so. ?] NORVIN RICHARDS: It doesn't have to, does it? No. For "walk up them" we want "up" and "them" to combine to be a propositional phrase. But for these other two, we want something else. We're going to want to circle around and try to find out what that other thing is. Does anybody else-- yeah? AUDIENCE: I was going to suggest something else [INAUDIBLE] Even though you can't say, walk the-- "walk the stairs up to your room." NORVIN RICHARDS: "I walk--" the book in the garage," what we want to do is construct a structure for this that's sensitive to all of the tests for structure that we've been developing. It's going to involve putting things together via pairwise merge and creating labels for the things that we create. So when we merged "the book" or "the garage," we're going to create something we'reGoing to give the label "noun" to. Or when we merge "in" together with "the Garage," we'll create what I've been calling a prepositional phrase. Similarly, we'll combine "find the book" with "in the garage" and we'll end up with a structure. construct syntactic trees for strings of words. It's often the case that we get ambiguities like the "unlockable" ambiguity. There is more than one way to combine things. And what we'll do is develop tests that allow us to see which way we've combined words in different ways. And we'll find cases where, depending on in what order you combine things, you get different meanings, and our tests will combine with that. All right. We will do this again on Tuesday.