Professor Donald Kagan: Sparta is the most important of the early poleis. He says the only decisions made were questions of whether to go to war, whether to make peace. Kagan says when a question was put to the Spartans, they responded by shouting and banging on their shields. The only people who spoke at those assemblies were the kings, the gerousia, or a group of people I haven't mentioned to you yet, the ephors, the five ephor. Aristotle tells us that beginning in the early seventh century, the date he gives us, we are introduced to a new thing, magistrates are chosen from the aristocracy to do various jobs in the city. In Athens, the magistrates were called archons. It means, in the most technical sense, rulers, but it means really important magistrates in the state. Nobody in Athens holds office at this time, or at any time, as far as I can tell, for more than a year. The only thing in town that has continuity is the Areopagus. begins to engage in commerce to a greater degree than before. This leads to new wealth and new class distinctions, which are now based not on birth but on wealth. We hear new terms, not all of them new, a couple of themnew that come into the picture. We are talking about people of the hoplite class. At the bottom of the barrel we hear about people called thetes. They've always been around, they are the poor; they don't own land. They live at the mercy of chance; they work for other people. Another theory is that they were indeed named that, because they were hoplites. It hardly matters which of the stories you prefer or whether you choose both; we're talking about the same people. This new class of independent family farmer has arrived in Athens, and as in other states is not satisfied with his position in the state. We will come back to this story when we talk about Solon, but think about these changes as happening, as the next change that I want to tell you about occurs. opponents that he was defeated. The leader of the resistance was the family known as the Alcmaeonidae. They went up there, locked up Cylon and his supporters in the Acropolis, in a temple. They cut the cord and killed the Cylonians. That put an end to the Cylonian conspiracy but it brought something to AlcMAeonidae as well, a curse. They were declared accursed and driven from the city. Later on we will hear they're back again and they're very important. But the curse continues to be attached to the family. that there are the kinds of discontents that we have been talking about which find the leader in the form of a man who is an outstanding figure for some reason, who is willing to try to establish a tyranny. That it fails, I think, is an indication that the same forces haven't reached the power in Athens that they had reached in Megara, Corinth, Sicyon, and places like that. It's a warning about troubles ahead and I'll turn to those troubles in the next hour.