Jonathon Gruber: What stops people from just bingeing on everything? It's their budget constraint. He says the median American household has $400 in the bank. Grubers: We'll spend a couple lectures at the end of the semester talking about what happens when people can save or borrow. We'll then come to talking about how consumers make constrained choices, and then we'll end with an example of food stamps, he says. The course is taught at the University of California, Los Angeles. you as well. We write the budget constraint as saying that your resources, your income Y, can be spent on either pizza or cookies. You can essentially devote your income to some combination of pizza and cookies, but you have to consider how much they actually cost in doing that. The rate at which you can trade off pizza for cookies is minus 1/2, OK? That is every extra cookie that you buy, holding your income constant, lowers the amount of pizza you can have by p sub p. The more you spend on one, the less you get of another. By having more of one, we're getting less of the other. The opportunity cost of a slice of pizza is two cookies. And that's the sense in which you're transforming pizza into cookies or cookies into pizza. So essentially, by setting up this marginal rate of transformation in life, you can help with a lot of decisions with a little bit of help from your brain. It lets you set relatively relatively low relative prices and then optimize across those goods. Audience: How do you determine your marginal rate of transformation? How do determine your-- like say it wasn't just pizza and cookies. Like say it was more products. How would you determine that value? JONATHAN GRUBER: That's a great question, and we're going to actually answer that question next lecture very explicitly. Hold on to that question. Next lecture, we'll compare explicitly why income changes differ from price changes and what are the underlying mechanisms. Yeah? our indifference curves. We're simply going to ask what is the highest indifference curve you can reach given your budget, right? So let's consider the same utility from last time. Utility is square root of P times C, OK? And let's ask where can you go with that. And what we see is that point D is the furthest out indifference curves you can achieve while still meeting your budget. And, therefore, we say that the optimum, graphically, is the tangency between your indifference curve and your budget constraint is the optimal constrained bundle. is the optimum is going to occur when we set your marginal rate of substitution, which, remember, we defined as minus MUc over MUp. And this is the fundamental equation of consumer choice. If you understand this equation, you can solve virtually every consumer choice problem I'll give you, OK? That basically, at the optimum, the ratio of marginal utilities equals the ratio prices. That is the rate at which you want to trade off pizza for cookies is the rates at which the market will allow you to do so. The marginal utility is the derivative of the utility function with respect to the number of slices of pizza. The marginal utility of the next slice of pizza is 1 over the square root of 10. Marginal utility of cookies is 2.5 over theSquareRoot of10. Therefore, you should trade in your pizza for cookies, OK? That is a meaningful concept. Utils are not, but that is that, and we only care about it in ratios, so we need the ratio. Jonathon Gruber: You're willing to give up 2.5 slices of pizza for one cookie. He says the market is saying we'll let you have a cookie for half a slice of pizza. "That's what that number means. And that is a meaningful number," he says. "You basically want to trade pizza for cookies until these things are equal" "Eat less pizza. Eat more cookies. That will unambiguously make you happier," Grubers says. how we do constrained optimization. If you understand this, you're sort of done with consumer theory, OK? This is sort of the core of what consumer theory is all about. So that is how we think about constrained choice. Now I want apply it by looking at the example of food stamps. Now food stamps are not actually called food stamps anymore. It's basically a program the government has that provides money for individuals to buy food if they're low income. The poverty line is essentially a measure of what's a minimum level of resources you need to live in America. Economist: If you really just care what makes people happiest, you should give them cash. Jonathon GRUBER: We've run an experiment on this, OK? We're going to talk in this class a lot about empirical results in economics. We literally flip a coin. Heads, you keep your food stamps. Tails, we replace those food stamps with an equal amount of cash. Then we watch what happens. What happens is that people spend about 15% less on food when you give them money instead of food. stop there. We will come back on Monday, and we'll talk about how we actually go from this stuff to the demand curves we started the class with. Back to the page you came from. back to CNN.com home. Follow us on Twitter @cnnireport and @CNNOpinion. Follow CNN Living on Facebook and Twitter. For more, go to www.cnn.com/lifestyle and www.dailymail.co.uk/lpin.