Al shalot is the CEO of GT Sports. He is a member of the Olympic commission the international Olympic Comm. He has been advising in the background for a while now. He says it makes absolutely sense to pay respect and celebrate gaming by having a dedicated event. It's part of the agenda strategic agenda 2020 plus 5 to connect with the audience the youth audience where they are and to leverage gaming and Esports to do that so it was strategically cited and we're just part of a discussion about how to implement it. The Asian Games officially added League of Legend and other games on their list. The local authorities in in Saudi are very passionate and very supportive for eorts. PC always brought the idea to bring a property and events to a country to create some bridges. There's been a lot of criticism about Saudi Arabia as a host. Some LGBT players uh women saying that they don't feel like they'd be welcome. Are you expecting to have those kind of conversations with some of the national Olympic committees and at the very least is that something that came up? to use this platform to to be open to anyone I think that's the way they describe it um so I look forward to it uh what I would say is like as a team as a as as players as athletes we want them to to play in the the best tournaments the best teams and therefore want everybody to participate so you mentioned the Esports World Cup there uh it feels like we've got lots of big new announcements lots of tournaments are we in danger of having too many things going on I don't think so. The first edition of the Olympic Games will be held in LA in 2028. There will be a dedicated tournament for women and a full mix tournament for men. The Olympic Games it took them 120 years to get to that point Paris Olympics this summer will be 50/50 50% of the athletes will be women 50% will be male. There's a commitment to a for full par and that's super exciting. I'm very positive and affirmative that this will make a huge step forward and help the whole industry to to get better. "Everybody wants to see what a dennish team will do against Corin I I would love to see it too you know so um I've seen a lot of players making the the guess or what the team could look like so his aspiration to be part of is is clearly part of the discussion," he says. "You follow a bit like the conversation about but uh rocket league and OverWatch back in the days at the at the World Cup for for their game and and and League of Legend also often have this conversation about creating the Euro Cup or World Cup"