in this module of tools and equipment we're going to explore cookware and storage wear. There are five basic metals that are used in cookware aluminum copper stainless steel cast iron and carbon steel aluminum pots and pans are the ubiquitous pans that you'll find in most every kitchen. Additional cooking materials include things such as non-stick coatings like teflon terracotta which is used in cooking things like tangents glass such as corning ware enamel wear which is also used in things like crock pots. interchangeably in many ways but believe it or not though there is a difference between these two does it make a difference in your cooking if you use one instead of the other. A saute pan or satwa is one with the straight sides and has a larger surface area which makes it ideal for tasks like searing meat or reducing a pan sauce. A sawtooth or skillet has a slope side and is used mainly in sauteing the slope sides providing the ample and perfect angle for flipping your food or as it's referred to as saute or to jump a rondeau is a favorite staple in a chef's arsenal and should be in any home cooks as well. Polycarbonate and stainless steel containers called hotel pans are designed to be used to store small amounts of ingredients on a refrigerated make table such as a sandwich station. They come in sizes ranging from 4 6 8 12 18 and 22 quarts and they often come with matching or size lids to accommodate them. They wash well by either hand or dishwashing and can stand up to years of usage other food storage options include what is often referred to by polycarbonate's trade name lexan or by the company trade name cambro. from full size hotel pans two-thirds pans half pans third pans fourth pans six pans and ninth pans and various other sizes each size is available in six six inch four inch and two inch deep models the name of the pan refers to how many of each would it take to equal a full size pan for example the nine it takes nine of the one-ninth pans or ninth pans to make one full-size hotel pan here you can see various different configurations depending on the usage needs many of the configurations require the use of a spanner bar to prevent the pans from falling in. called a third pan because you can fit three to a hotel pan now there are also half hotel pans which are simply just half the size of a hotel pans still coming in a two inch four inch and six inch depth. Large sheet trays which can be used for any number of things roasting reheating baking whatever you want to use them for. sip top bags often referred by their trade name ziploc are an indispensable storage device for kitchens they allow the storage of dry goods and other small quantity items. Not all cookie medals are identical cheap cookware often translates into cheaply made and burnt product. specialty cooking surfaces allow for more versatility in the cooking process and different results. The right size storage bin is essential why store two quarts of stock in a 22 quart container it simply doesn't do the right job and it takes up too much room in your coolers. You can never have enough hotel pans no matter what size you have this presentation will attempt to give an overview of the different small wares and pieces of equipment that you'll experience in a restaurant environment.