Professor: Today I've got quite a lot of stuff to go through. So hopefully we'll get to the actual game playing, but if not, don't worry, you'll actually get to play the games. The games that we'll end up playing today are games from last year. A lot of them are actually the final semester-- the final project, which means they are not answering the same question that you're trying to answer with your very first project. But it should give you a sense of what the scope of this class actually is. Last week, a couple of you played the LEGO game, Block Party. you just wanted to make your car game, for instance? You can. That's no reason why you couldn't. What if you want to do a live action game where you actually move around with your body, that sort of thing? That's totally doable. I really, really hesitate not-- try not to put any live digital components in your game. By actually writing code, then the scope of this project just went through what I expected you to do. And the possibility of failure is-- go back please. a game? AUDIENCE: (COLLECTIVELY) The players. PROFESSOR: The players, right, not the designers, not you. But you when you actually play someone else's game. Then you're the most important person. If that person's experience is problematic or exciting or engaged or outright hostile to other players, or something like that, that's making it the way that they want to take it. And then you as the designer are are going to run through a number of different challenges trying to give them an experience that you're trying to create. A professor explains what it means to make a decision in a game that can be meaningful. He explains that if the outcome of the decision hasn't changed, it wouldn't be terribly meaningful. The professor also explains that a game's mechanic, the roll die, is a weird thing because it's something a player does but a player didn't decide how to do that. He says that in games like Yahtzee, you can still change the game state and the fact who wins or whatever happens. Candy Land was invented to keep kids from getting polio from each other, professor says. Professor: With polio, you can't do much of anything. There's a huge inversion from the get out and get some exercise. It's a serious game. It has health benefits. Let's play in the land of Candy. If you don't let the player know what changed the game state, is it that meaningful a decision anymore? You did something. Some numbers changed inside the system. But it's good to affect how things go out later. If you expect players to get very into your game, this is the stuff that you can leave with because they will understand it and figure it out on their own. In Dominion, oftentimes you can draw cards that don't help you just pointlessly causing a reshuffle. In Starcraft, you can't really see what your opponent is doing. You don't end up with a good mental model of how the game works. And so even though you make meaningful decisions, you don't know what the meaning is. When I do this one attack. And it's like, yes, because you saved the random number seed. So that is actually a problem because people have this concept about how the mechanics of what does 90% probability of success mean? So this brings me to the second reading, which is Don Norman's first chapter in the design of everyday things. The book used to be called The Psychology of Everyday Things, which had a nice little acronym him of POET. But then people had trouble finding the book because he was looking for design books. make a change and you iterate on it. In a board game, maybe in a card game,maybe in a visual game, that's telling me visibly, right now, that this might be the way I get to do that. It's depending on the design of the game. But visibility has something to do with the intent of the player of the user in Norman's case. But he's not talking about games. He's talking about the Psychology of Everyday Things. And what does visibility do in a syst-- in a design? It helps people understand the qualities of what they're doing. design of everything. And what the system can actually do, the actual operations of the system. So there are affordances and there are constraints. These are both words that are introduced in that reading. I think affordances is introduced in this reading. What's an example of an affordance? What about this thing tells you that you can sit on it? AUDIENCE: It seems sturdy, and it's got a place for your butt. PROFESSOR: OK, there's a little bit of cultural familiarity with other chairs that you've seen. handle on a door? PROFESSOR: What does a handle on adoor allow you to do? AUDIENCE: It's like-- it's a place for your hand. It's hand-shaped. If you hold your hand out in a natural way, you grab-- looking at the text. The design with the ground on the bottom is a bad idea because if something starts falling out that are too exposed to it, it will not be the ground one. So it would be better to flip it. British plugs, actually, have the pin usually on top and-- AUDIENCE: The British just have the eyes [INAUDIBLE] pin. PROFESSOR: When it's the other way around, it's actually a little more stable. You could stick your finger in a British pin, which means they have to design all kinds of protection mechanisms, plastic springs, and things like that. So they talk about materials like wood and glass, right? Glass is for looking through. Wood is for smashing. And wood is possibly for writing. about. It has this thing. Actually, what you do with this thing? AUDIENCE: Ring it. PROFESSOR: Slap? [BELL RING] Yeah, that's what it does. OK, all right, so now that you've seen what this thing does. What is one of the things that this-- not in the rule book completely. If you have this in your game, what is this thing good for? Audience: Getting attention, yeah. It's loud. You could use it to annoy people. comes with a bunch of cards. Ooh, whoa. What happened to these cards? Good Lord. OK, now the paint could rubbed off or something that. So don't worry too much about the text and the graphics. But just look at the card. What do cards allow you to do? What are the affordances of cards? Hm? You can hold a couple of them in your hand at once, OK. Because there's two sides. There's a side that you can put no useful information on, right? Carcassonne is a board game that involves moving pieces around a board. The pieces are called meeples and have a back that is not colored. The back of the board has a design on it that can be used to hide cards from other people. The board also has tiles that are identical with a back, which tells us about these tiles, something that we already know about cards. The fact that you've got a hidden back gives you quite a lot of different possibilities in the game. a whole bunch of ways that you can help people with these sorts of mappings. I guess Donald Norman would describe a lot of these as spatial, metaphors to use. Spatial mostly to describe things like driving in a car and you turn the wheel specifically toward the top of the wheel to the left. There are sort of bodily metaphors as well. Things that are high are either supposed to be good and happy, things that are low when you're feeling depressed. And you can't pick yourself off the ground, making you sad or bad. The tiles are designed in such a way that it makes it hard for you to hold on to do. You're not really supposed to have more than one tile at a time in Carcassonne. The cards are not very useful to you when you've got them face down. You are supposed to draw one, figure out where it goes, put it down. But if it's a large number, maybe you could remember what you had face down if it was a small number. of cards, like in Pit, you really want then held face up, facing you. When they're face down, they're not interesting to you. These are things-- this is another way that the visibility of the system can help you with those mappings. When it comes to Carcassonne, there is actually a deep, deep problem with this game despite how popular it is. It's a math intensive problem. It does largely map on to how many of the meeples that it's giving you. you have of your own color on large patches of things. That's worth something. And then that's the feedback that you get back from games when it's Pit-- the feedback you get when you hit the bell, right? There's a huge ding sound when you try to fit a piece that doesn't fit into something else. And there's a couple of board games where you have to put pieces together, and that gives you an idea of maybe those two pieces don't go together. your objectives from the player that knows the information. That's a big difference in Scotland. Donald Norman ends his very first chapter on why is it so hard to actually make something right? Anyone remember? Or anyone thinking of-- AUDIENCE: Doesn't the designer never really communicate one-to-one with the user? They're communicating through the object that either was designed or being used? PROFESSOR: That is definitely true. It is a second way to do things. It's a good game. order problem. You're designing something that then becomes this manifestation that somebody else uses. Market forces push you to add things, to do additive design in order to distinguish yourself from the competition. And that naturally leads to complexity in interface. So iteration is the reason why design starts off as being very clunky. But it can eventually become something that works well, communicates well, or something that people can learn and maybe even enjoy in the case of the games. And it's interesting because he described a phone that can only be used with two buttons, right? what he's talking about only, I doubt that actually imagined that this was something to be possible at the time when he wrote it. That was 1980. And cell phones obviously have gone through a lot of criticism. But it is it has been successful through a number of different reasons. But what I want you to think about now is actually the process of prototyping. Prototyping might be something we'll leave up to Wednesday. So that there'll be a little more time for you to work in your teams. to get all the Carcassonne bits back. So and then we'll pick this up in about five minutes. We'll be back with the rest of the story in a few minutes. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from. Click here to read the full transcript of this article. Back To the pageyou came from, click here to Read the Full Transcript of this Article. Backto the pageYou came from the page You were from, Click Here to Read The Full Transcript.