Marketing is about four things creating communicating delivering and exchanging value. Value is a function it's a function of the price the quality and the benefits so let's make sure that we don't think that value means low price. Marketing is about creating right excellent good job. It's about creating communicating and delivering value. It is about exchanging value that's in chapter one. marketing is about creating communication and delivering value. Marketing is about creating communicating deliver value and exchanging value that's capital n a. for something to be of a good value it doesn't need to be a low price it could be a high price but it's a very high quality and it has a lot of benefits do you agree who could explain that further good tell us your name albert alvin alvin  alvin albert i'm getting bad coaching here alvin go aheadTell us your items yes luxury items so if you purchase a 55-inch samsung 4k high-definition led monitor that has smart capability and 3d for 2500 you might very well consider that to bea good value. clothing yes go ahead like so like i find people saying like buying a pair of jeans and zara is expensive because there's like 65 but they last longer than buying these at all maybe unless so teresa is saying you could buy a pair. of jeans at old navy for 20 for 20 or you could. buy for 300 apair of torn jeans at diesel for 300. The way that we communicate the value is through the brand now the brand is what's wrapped around the product so all products in a given category have the same generic functionality. i think they kind of exceeded their brand promise that's not what people had expected go ahead what else so we have toyota infinity mercedes-benz audi bmw chevy lamborghini jaguar range rover tesla g porsche so all of those all those brands is what makes each of those products unique. What makes one car unique from the other is the brand and we're going to talk more about perceptual maps where our brand is positioned in the marketplace relative to our competitors. You want to have a commercial for example that's going to resonate with your target audience usually you're not going to be able to have one that resonates with everybody in your target market. So when you're showing a commercial do you think that those men that are seeing the commercial between the ages of 18 and 29 want to see somebody in the commercial who's 60 or 65 that's probably not something that'll resonate with them right unless maybe if it's coach or bruce willis or hulk hogan maybe they might still find the commercial of interest. Marketing is about creating and communicating communicating is really code for advertising we're gonna advertise so we could change the perceptions that the consumers have through marketing communications. The first thing is to identify an unmet need that consumers have so marketing when we talk about marketing the first activity is to determine a need that is not being met in the market. The order is important so when we say marketing marketing is about create communicating delivering and exchanging value so from 30,000 feet if you will that's a broad overview of what marketing is. being met so what would be a good example how about shampoo i know right but an unmet need is a shampoo that is safe for hair that's what that's dry or that that's curly oily that's perm. The way we identify the need is how guess guess oh you're not they're not good at guessing that's not good for exam day you got to be good guessers supply and demand right the way we're going to determine the needs is through marketing research we're gonna do marketing research. dollars that's tremendously valuable to do focus groups because we're going to get a tremendous amount of insight from those for example who bake those who cook those who um who use tablets or smart tvs whatever it is that we're researching it's very helpful to do that. What that's going to do is inform our quantitative research a form of quantitative research is what we're doing this semester which is a questionnaire. If 350 million people complete the questionnaire that's called the what census a census is when a hundred percent of the population participates in the research. For marketing research we need something that's statistically significant in the united states in most categories it really doesn't need to be more than 1500 and how much is that going to cost a hundred and fifty thousand dollars to do more intercept in multiple cities and get approximately 1500 respondents now when we do focus groups we also do multiple rounds of focus groups because each round is iterative so we learn from the first round of focus group and then we incorporate that in the next round before we do the quantitative research so we could do certainly qualitative research i recommend that do the focus groups.