JUDY HOYT: Hopefully everybody's recovered from their Thanksgiving feast. What I'm showing up here is the schedule to orient us. This is lecture 22. We'll talk about silicides, device contacts, and I've added in a new material this year on novel gate materials. And then we have one more lecture, which is on strained silicon and silicon germanium growth and processing. Next week we have two class periods scheduled. There'll be four speakers in each. And those will be the oral reports and the student reports given on Tuesday and Thursday. In this lecture, we'll talk about the formation of silicides. We'll also talk about local interconnects, which are used to connect different parts of a chip. The lecture is kind of the first link to the backend technology course. If you have any questions about the final project, just please email me or contact me after class. The notes for today's lecture are given in handout 36. The final project is 6.773, which is the back-end technology course in electrical engineering. is not considered desirable for making a good contact. An ohmic contact on the other side, or a tunneling contact, occurs when you can actually tunnel right through this barrier. And it tends to happen, particularly with aluminum and most metals, if you make the surface doping very high. And so if you look at the current voltage characteristics-- so current plotted on the y-axis, voltage on the x-axis-- you see it's very symmetrical, and you get a very, very high current for a very small voltage in either direction. it's got a units of resistance times an area-- and divided by the area of the contact. So if I make a smaller contact area for a given specific contact resistivity, you're going to have a higher resistance. And this is a problem if I'm scaling devices. As I make the area the current goes through smaller, the resistance of that contact goes up. Unless we do something to make better contacts as we scale devices, just because of this geometric factor. And we'll see some specific numbers on this. A Schottky contact is governed by thermionic emission. So it's a thermionic process emitting carriers over this barrier. So that's going to be a property of the doping in the semiconductor and what kind of metal you put on it. So for low contact resistivity, to get this number down, I need a small barrier. And you would choose a particular metal that gives you a relatively small barrier height. So you need, most importantly, very high doping. And then you will get an IV characteristic that is essentially ohmic. The contact passivity doesn't scale as we shrink technology. People are looking for new methods, new materials, whatever, some way of getting the doping up, or a new method of making contact. That's kind of a fundamental issue. In fact, here on slide 11, I show that this is really one of the concerns. This is a table that I took, table 71a, from the 2003 international technology roadmap for semiconductors. And just to remind you, in the upper right corner, this is what the MOSFET looks like. are going to be silicides, either cobalt silicides or nickel silicide. They're a contact between a metal and a heavily doped semiconductor, which is silicon. In 2003, they wanted to have about 2 times 10 to the -7th ohm centimeter square. In 2004, you want to lower it according to ITRS about 1.6 times10 to -7. That's all in yellow, which means their manufacturable solutions are known. They haven't yet been integrated. And when we get to 2008 in the red, there aren't any known solutions that are manufacturable. silicide sheet resistance in ohms per square, it needs to be in this range of 6 to 10 ohmsper square. That's not a problem. None of that-- that's all in white, which means people know how to do that. The real problem is making these really good low resistivity contacts to the silicon. I just want to show an example of how-- so you get a feel for how the numbers work of how one does a contact resistance calculation. This is for a MOSFET. So that's the area. If we go back to ITRS, assuming we are here roughly in 2002 and the contact resistivity is about times 10 to -7 ohm centimeter squared, then can calculate the resistance of just the drain contact itself. The resistance is just that rho C divided by the area of that contact. And you get 100 ohms. So we're talking about 200 ohms of the total resistance of the device just being due to the contacts because of the size. And that's a reasonably large resistance. figure 11-35. There's a reference to it in your textbook, a paper that an article that talks about it in much more detail on how it's actually made. And what you do is you have these dark regions here that are funny shaped are considered to be the N plus region that you want to contact. The dashed lines represent the metal. So that would be the metal level. So this is going to take at least three masks to powder. And these little square regions with the X's going through them are the contacts. Kelvin structure is a very common structure to measure contact resistivity. It uses separate probes to measure voltage and current. You don't want to have extra contact resistance, say, of your probes going down. So you just divide the voltage drop divided by the current. And that gives you a resistance number of 32 ohms, which is equal to rho C divided by area of the contact, L squared. The voltage drop is about 320 microvolts, and the current is 10 microamps. multiplying 32 ohms by the area of the contact. And you get 3.2 times 10 to -7 ohm centimeter squared. Still a little bit high. It's still about a factor of 2 too high. But it just gives you an idea. Typically you use several different dimensions. So you either use a 1 by 1, a 5 by 5, and a 10 by 10 square. And for different size areas, you should get the same number. If you don't, then you probably have current crowding effects. You don't want excess carbon or other things at the interface because that's going to cause an increase in your contact resistance. That's one thing to get low-contact resistance. The second thing you want is good thermal stability. After all, there will be subsequent thermal processing. Once you make those contacts, you still have to make all that multi-level metal. And those multi- level metal schemes involve annealing steps or deposition steps that could be in the range of 400 to 500 degrees. Aluminum has a finite solubility for silicon. The silicon actually gets sucked into the aluminum and causes this spiking effect. Today if you do this with any kind of reasonably shallow junction, when you go to heat the thing up to do the final forming gas anneal, you're going to spike the junction. The way people go today is to form what they call a barrier layer. It forms a barrier between this aluminum and the silicon. So this prevents the chemical interdiffusion between the silicon and the aluminum. In CMOS technology, a metal silicide is used to form a contact between the silicon and the source, gate, and drains where it's in contact with silicon. The first one that was used historically was Ti-silicide. Cobalt has a little less lateral encroachment over the oxide spacer. The latest silicide that people are exploring in research and development-- and at some point will probably be in production-- is nickel silicide. But nickel is a very fast-user, remember, in silicon. There are three resistances we really want to be able to think about. These back-of-the-envelope calculations are terrific because you can do them in five minutes in class or in 10 minutes in your office or whatever. There is another resistance called the spreading resistance. It's not something you can simply calculate by hand, but it can be a major contributor to test devices. There will be a little extra, which is spreading resistance, which you have to simulate in a two-dimensional simulator. That's how we make contacts. The traditional technology is polysilicon, which can only be doped so high. People want to replace the poly with a gate, with a metal gate. But poly is an extremely easy material to integrate. It's not reactive with SiO2. That's not the case for metals. So people are thinking of replacing poly, but it's got a lot of complex process integration. The FUSI process for the gate, you actually need to have two different siliciding steps. You need to cover them and protect them then, then use a silicide to try to fully the gate. So it's still tricky. The self-aligned silicide process, or also abbreviated salicide, has been the mainstay of technology for many, many years now. Silicides can also function as a barrier layer to prevent spiking, potentially. control the PT or adjust the PT a little bit. It's still a very tricky process. The reaction temperature or the thermal stability temperature is reasonably low. So you cannot take these and then take them to a backend process that is too hot. It was only published by IBM a couple of years ago. about your oral report or whatever, please get back to me. OK, thanks. About your oralReport.com. About. Your oral report. About Your Oral Report. Please get. back tome. about your oralreport or whatever. about. your oral Report or whatever,. please getback to me about.your oral Report. about Your OralReport.org. OK. Thanks, thanks, thanks for your report. You can send it to me via e-mail at jennifer@dailymail.co.uk.