Rebecca Sae: I think that when people talk about social cognition they do actually mean all of those things. Rebecca: Trying to get a coherent account of everything from your hand motions and your perception of other people's hand motions all the way to politics and sociology is daunting and, frankly, deeply unlikely. Rebecca: I'm going to take almost the opposite approach, which is say, there's one thing that's probably there a lot. Let's try to study that one thing in many different ways and contexts. In an experiment, I ask you guys to make a moral judgment of a character. Her name is Grace. She's on a tour of a chemical factory. She puts some of the poison in the coffee, and when the girl drinks it, she dies. Now how much blame does Grace deserve for putting the powder in the Coffee? The more wrong it was, the higher your hand goes. And everybody has to vote. In the story I told you, everything was the same from the beginning, the scenario where Grace was. been studied from kind of relatively simple perceptual phenomena like assigning intentions and goals to simple moving characters in an animation. This ability has been studied all the way to understanding some of the most complex, abstract ideas that we ever encounter. So to the degree that our minds let us make any sense of that at all, we're using our ability to make sense of other people's minds. And I'm almost exclusively going to talk about the first one, so how we think about what other people see, think, and know-- but not want or feel. The false belief task was set up as a litmus test for our ability to think about other people's minds in the late '70s. The reason why this task became so famous is that not all participants perform the same way. The question of whether this capacity is shared with other animals has gone on continuously since the late 1970s and has not been resolved. And so one class of participants who've become the focus of intense scrutiny is slightly younger kids, namely three-year-olds. FMRI has been both an incredible gift to our ability to understand the human mind and also imposes a huge number of limitations on what we can discover. And so one question is-- is theory of mind, the ability to think about other people's thoughts, in any sense its own problem? Or are we just studying the whole problem of human intelligence and capacity? So that was sort of the first question that we set out to answer. We and a number of people did this. And the way we did it is that we had people in an fMRI machine doing basically an adult version of the pirates task. belief. This is a very simple encapsulation of our ability to represent what somebody else thinks and separate it from the state of the world. We're using everything from your eyes to your fingers and most of the brain in between. And then the question is, the part that required you thinking about thoughts-- is there any sense in which that's special or different from the whole rest of the logical and cognitive capacity of your brain? To ask that question we designed a control condition in which you similarly read stories that involve something that was true and becomes false. The right TPJ is selectively involved in theory of mind, and so selectively depends on all the experiments I didn't show you. The signal is ridiculously strong and reliable. The difference between thinking about somebody else's thoughts and other logical problems is comparable to the difference between looking at gradings and not looking at gratings in V1. It's just this unbelievably strong signal, literally unbelievable. It should not possibly be true on any a priori story, except for maybe the story Ken just told you about how social cognition is the fundamental basis of everything. V1 is called V1 because information goes from your eyes to the LGN of your thalamus. It's the first cortical stop of visual information. One way that we know that it's very involved in vision is that if you're seeing visual stimuli, you get a big response in V1. But that's a selectivity type measure. What we want to know about V1 is what transformations over the information coming from LGN is V1 implementing. That's why theories like Marr's theory-- which say that there are receptive fields, that it depends on the contrast, the position, and the orientation of the information in the field. that prefer a different orientation. And so from the relative activity in those two voxels, we could still tell you the orientation. That was the intuition behind multivoxel pattern analysis when it was first proposed. And it's now sweeping the fMRI world, many different versions of these analyses. And I'm just going to show you two different ways MVPA is done concretely in my lab to try to get you more of a sense of what's going on. And we can come back to these more general issues of what it's measuring and what that means. If MVPA was ever going to be able to decode a feature of other people's mental states, we should start there. That was the idea. In this experiment, we make one tiny change. So we make, for example, a change from you had no idea to you knew. We change on average two to four words in this whole long scenario. It's a complicated stimulus, but the change we make is very small and totally changed the meaning of the whole.that judgment. story by just changing your mental state. Whether you knew or you didn't know about your cousin's peanut allergy is really important to the moral judgment of what happened. The right TPJ is tracking the important information about what you think. And so it's activated for both of these kinds of stories. So that's a univariate analysis. Now what's a multivariate analysis? So here's the key intuition behind a mult variables analysis. The idea is, think in a very abstract similarity space. And the intuition is, because in both cases it matters what you Think. person who wrote the essay was in the room when you said that publicly shaming thing? A different story is about demonstrating your karate skills and knocking out your classmate-- again, totally new moral scenario. But again, this one feature-- did you know or not know that your classmate was there when you did the kick? Now here's the idea. Even though each of those new scenarios is completely different, if there are different subpopulations within your right TPJ responding when you knew you were going to cause harm-- compared to when you didn't know. The amount of activity in the right TPJ is a big signal. The relative activity between one voxel and another is a tiny signal. And it's superimposed on a lot of noise. But if there's anything there at all, then you'll still be able to pick up a little more similarity for pairs that are matched on the feature of interest. That's the logic behind a Haxby style analysis. The first question is-- is that real, or is that a coincidence? That is the first thing you want to know when you see data. did it is, we said you knew about the allergy or you didn't know about the allergies. And what you want to know is, are you decoding the abstract thing-- that she knew she was causing harm or not-- or something less abstract, like whether the story has negation in it. And so in experiments B and C, we had done it this way. It's also in the third person, not the second person. So if we find the same result, then it generalizes across all these incidental features of the way the experiment was run. MVPA is a technique for getting more information out of the same data. It's an analysis technique, not a way of getting data. People are reading these stories, and they're making moral judgments. Some people tend to go more with what the person thought, whereas others go with what they caused. Everybody agrees that it's worse to kill someone than to not kill them. But the moral judgments of these stories vary across people. The right TPJ contains information about whether or not the person who committed the murder knew what they were doing at the time. knowingly murder than to unknowingly murder. But there is variability in how much worse. Some people think that basically what you thought you were doing is all that matters in these stories, whereas other people think both of those things matter. So there's individual variability. And one thing that we can look at is, how does the. individual variability in the behavior relate to the individual. variability. in the representation. Does that make sense? They're pretty correlated. The more that you represented knowing harm as different from unknowing harm in your right TPJ, the more you judged them as different when we asked you for moral judgment. Haxby style correlations were the first form of MVPA introduced. They were introduced by Jim Haxby in 2001, so actually a long time ago. The idea is, take a region you care about and ask this basic question. Is the correlation across neural responses more similar when the stimuli share that feature than when they don't? And so in the right TPJ, what we found is that stories about seeing are more similar to other stories about hearing than when you cross that feature. This particular method, using spatial correlations, is very stable and robust. But it's a special case of a much more general set. There's a whole bunch of limitations of Haxby style correlations. The answer you get for anything you test is that there is or is not information about that distinction. There is no continuous measure here. It's just that two things are different from one another or they are not different from each other. And so once people started thinking about this method, it became clear that this is actually just a special cases of a more general way of thinking about fMRI data.