The goal of this course is to give you the tools to interpret complicated phenomena. The vibrational problem is a way of understanding internuclear interactions-- nuclear motions. When we go to molecular orbital theory, we take what we know about atoms, and build a minimally-complex interpretive picture, which is sort of a framework for understanding complicated molecular interactions. Your support will help MIT OpenCourseWare continue to offer high-quality educational resources for free. To make a donation or view additional materials from hundreds of MIT courses, visit MIT OpencourseWare at ocw.mit.edu. every pair of electrons, not just two. In helium we just dealt with two, and that wasn't so bad. But when we deal with n electrons, what we are going to discover is that in order to anti-symmetrize the wave function, we have to write a determinantal wave function. When you expand an n by n determinant, you get n factorial times. And when you calculate matrix elements, you haven factorial squared integrals. The relationship between the effective quantum number and the ionization energy of a state then provides a hydrogen-atom-based structural model for everything you can observe. Structure is static. Dynamics is magical, and special, and hard. But if you understand structure in a way which is not the exact eigenstates, you can understand how one observable relates to another. And so the main obstacle to being able to do important stuff is to understand the matrix elements of operators that we care about, like transition moments, spin orbit, Zeeman effect. able to evaluate these matrix elements is the permutation requirement. And it turns out that there is a really simple way of dealing with the requirements for electron permutation, and that is to write the wave function as a determinant of one-electron orbitals. A determinant has three really important properties. One, it changes its sign when you permute any two columns. And three, if you have two identical columns or rows, it's 0. That's really fantastic. And that is the Pauli exclusion principle-- not what you learned in high school. MIT professor in physics. He invented these things in 1929. So basically what Slater did is showed, yeah, you can do the necessary algebra to deal with any atom. And there are two ways of doing this. One is the truth, and one is the fit model. Now the truth is really boring, because you lose all the insights. And a fit model also tells you what are the import the actors. And maybe they're in costume,maybe they're not, but we can deal with them. P permutation operator, operating on any two-electron function, has to make P 2, 1, which has to be equal to minus. So there's only two possible eigenvalues. You can have minus 1 or plus 1. And the minus 1 corresponds to fermions, things that have half-integer spin, like electrons. The plus 1 correspond to things with integer spin, such as photons, and vibrons, and other things. And actually, it's harder to construct a symmetric function than an anti-symmetric function.  spin orbitals are just the combination of the name of the orbital with whether the spin is up or down. And the reason for this is it's easier to do the algebra. There are rules that are easily described. For every kind of orbital, an orbital that is a scalar, that doesn't depend on quantum numbers, that has a selection rule delta SO of 0; and for something like a one-electron operator, that's a delta spin orbital of 1 and 0. The algebra for each is something you work out, and then you know how to do it. Sally Kohn: We want to be able to do something like what you did in chemistry in high school. She says we want to know the trends of things, and we know how to interpret them. Kohn says we have to use a different notation, J tilde minus K tilde, for the ground state of helium 1s squared. She explains how to remove the tilde from the notation, and how to get the right sign for the 1 over rij Hamiltonian, which is a Hamiltonian. Hund's rules is all about, of all of the states that belong to a particular configuration, which one is the lowest? One-- which one, not the second lowest. And why do we care? Because in statistical mechanics everything is dominated by the lowest energy state. So you want to know what are L, S, and J for the lowestenergy state of a configuration. And it's the one with the maximum L. And then the last step is, what is lowest J for that LS state? And that's kind of cute. L minus S, absolute value. If N is greater than 3, you have the lowest being-- the highest possible value of J is equal to L plus S. When you have a half-filled shell, the lowest state is usually an S state with maximum spin. So Hund's rules tell you how to identify, without knowing beans, what is the lowest energy state, and it's never wrong. Well, maybe sometimes wrong, but that's because of one of my things. Why is that? Well, the 4s sees the larger charge is less shielded. So it goes in. Then when you go from potassium to calcium, you put another electron in this. And that's true. Now you take an electron-- I'm cooking my own goose. If you take one of these electrons away-- this is not the way I wanted it to come out-- you find yourself in a 3d state. 3D penetrates a little bit under 4s. I can't explain it in a way that's going to make sense.