Michael Short: How do you know what, let's say, your dose distance relationship is? And how do you calculate all this stuff? So I've actually laser-cut out a little Geiger counter jig from a previous class. And you guys can all do this too. Who here has been to the IDC before? A couple. The international design center-- so they've got a laser cutter that you can sign up to use. And it's set to just take a Geigercounter and put your sources at some fixed distance away. dose and distance or measured activity and distance? Yeah, Luke. AUDIENCE: [INAUDIBLE] r cubed. MICHAEL SHORT: Close. It's, let's say, the measured activity would be proportional to 1 over r squared. Does anyone know why this formula would break down? What happens to our solid angle or our approximation for ourSolid angle is kind of the analog to regular old angle, except in 3D. So instead of looking at things in radians, this has the unit of what's called steradians. The class will be measuring the activity of one banana. One banana contains a minuscule but measurable amount of radioactivity. The ashes of 50 pounds of bananas will be used to boost your signal strength. The class will also be measuring how radioactive is it to work in a smoke shop. The final project is due Thursday, not Tuesday, because we have no class on Tuesday, but whatever. We don't get holidays-- just you guys. Back to the page you came from. Click here to read the full transcript. Most of the Boston area is 21, but once you leave Boston-- MICHAEL SHORT: It varies. From Poisson statistics, you can say that the standard deviation of that count rate is actually just the square root of the count rate divided by time. Let's say you were to measure some count rate in some experiment. How long would you actually have to bring a detector in and count in order to be sure that there's any sort of measurable difference? And so, without deriving all of this stuff about binomial, Poisson, and normal statistics, that's in the reading for today. The slower the count rate, the less certain you can be that the number that you're measuring is actually accurate. So by counting for longer you can decrease your standard deviation. This is going to take forever. It actually takes about 67 minutes, because we've already done this calculation, to get a 95% confidence on 5% uncertainty for this sort of background count. It's actually random. There is no correlation between when one particle leaves and the next particles going to leave. Because it's a truly random process, these errors in the background rate and the gross rate could add together or could subtract from each other. With enough statistics, if you count for long enough or you count enough counts, then these things, on average, are going to add in quadrature. So in this way, you're accounting for the fact that more error in each experiment does increase the error on whatever net experiment you're doing, but not linearly. If you go plus or minus 1 sigma away from your true average right here, you've filled in 68% of the area under this normal distribution. There's actually societies called 6 sigma societies. And the way that they get their name is we're so confident of things we can predict them to six sigma. radiation detector. How long do you have to be here, looking all weird? You want to have an answer. And so if you get some initial estimate of C g, you can tell him this is my approximate t g, at which point he or she will say yes or no, depending on how they're feeling. So why don't we just start, divide by 2, right? Divide by 2. 0.025. We can square both sides. And there's a C n there. Square both sides, and we end up with 0.000625 C n squared. the total uncertainty down to let's say 5% error with 95% confidence, you can't actually run that experiment. Because these uncertainties are added in quadrature, if you're trying to reduce sigma down to a value below that already, how can you do that? You can't have a negative standard deviation, right? So what this actually means is that when you're designing this experiment, even if you count for 67 minutes at 25 counts per minute, that might not be enough to discern the activity. activity in the smoke shop to within some confidence and some error. In New Hampshire, the background count's quite a bit higher, because there's a lot of granite deposits. You can use background counts as a radiation altimeter. One of my graduate students actually built a Geiger counter interface to an Arduino, where you could actually tell what the height you were flying at is by the amount of background radiation increase. So certainly it's going to depend where you are, right? But you want to make sure that you're in an area, to answer Sean's question, representative of where the smoke Shop is. Use this formula right here to estimate how much time you'd have to wait. So for example, let's say you go in there and you get a count rate of 100 counts per minute. You'd only have to count for an extra 28 minutes to nail that net count rate with 95% confidence to 5% error. So do you guys see the general interplay between confidence, percent error, counting time, and counting rate? Who here is built an NSE Geiger counter before? Awesome. radiation quanta or whatever that enter the detector, how many interact, and how many leave out the other side? That's we're going to be spending most of the next month on when we do ion, photon, electron, and neutron interactions with matter. So we'll find out-- what's the probability per unit length that each one undergoes an interaction, what kind of interactions do they undergo, and then we'll complete this actual picture. So you can take a source of, let's say, unknown activity, put it a known distance away from a known detector with a known efficiency, and back out what the activity of that source is with accuracy. on average. Then you can get to the actual activity of the source. Once you know the activity of this bag of bananas, you can then divide by either the mass of one banana, or the number of bananas. That's what we're going to spend the rest of today doing. So since it's getting on five out of five of, do you guys have any questions about what we covered today or what we are about to go do? AUDIENCE: You said that for solid angle you wouldn't do this. MICHAEL SHORT: Yep. thetas are actually subtended by your detector. And the value of that actual surface integral gives you the real solid angle. That's the super simple one if you just know the area of something and you know that you're kind of far away. But again, whenever possible, use the exact formula. So any other questions? Yeah, Sean. Sean, what are the units of cobalt 60 [INAUDIBLE]?? MICHAEL SHORT: It's just two gamma rays per atom. per disintegration. So you've got to know what material you're looking at in order to know how many gamma or how many betas or more that you're going to get. Follow me to the counting lab. These are three high-purity germanium detectors. They're hooked up through a little electronic box and go into the computer over there that does all the peak height analysis. The idea here is that, again, if you just add the errors up, you're probably overestimating the error and selling yourself short. out the thermal noise. Because you're looking for really tiny little signals here, so you cool everything down. And that way, it's not too noisy. These guys are OK warming up. It doesn't destroy the detector. The old detectors you had to keep cold all the time. And if they warmed up, then they were just paperweights. So this is just the counting lab. I've got an actual sample counting in here right now. We'll take a look at the spectrum in a minute. Tungsten 186 activates into tungsten 187. So you could, knowing how big that peak is, what the efficiency of the detector is for collecting that peak in that geometry, the half-life, the cross set-- that whole mess of parameters-- back-calculate how much tungstan is in the sample. So that's kind of how NAA works, which I assume you've explained. MICHAEL AMES: But that's not how I do NAA. When you're running NAA, you really want to avoid having all these fast reactions. There's usually an energy threshold for the fast reactions, like 1 meV or so. If you're near the reactor, you're also getting some fast neutrons, which can give you an n p reaction. And that's a pain in the neck, because if you've got iron, you've always got a little cobalt floating around-- you maybe need to do a correction.any questions for Mike on what you've just heard? Well-timed, because we were just talking about this stuff all week. that's how I measure nickel, using n p reaction. And I need to put the rabbits into where I've got a fast flux in the reactor. Other analytical methods have gotten a lot better, and so they've kind of caught up to NAA. So the environmental side of this has kind of quieted down. But it's still useful for a bunch of things. And so I do some work here now. I also work in the NCORE group. So that's a lot of my time, rather than just this lab. Fish samples that we actually did the fresh fish samples. And you want to kind of homogenize those. And we had this kind of titanium blender-- you remember the Bass-O-Matic? We had this titanium blender that we dropped the fish in. And then you completely homogenized the fish, and then you took a little sample of it, and freeze dried it. Then analyzed it for mercury. MICHAEL SHORT: [INAUDIBLE] MICHAEL AMES: Yeah, right. Because, I mean, the rabbits are only this big, and the samples I want are only that big. "This is just a fine powder. And it's fly ash from a coal-fired power plant. Fly ash means the ash that goes up the smokestack, as opposed to bottom ash which is what falls down. And so, they collect a whole hundreds of kilograms of fly ash, just homogenize it, sieve it, send it out to a lot of labs to analyze. And because we did a fairly short of radiation, after a while the activities died down and we gave the samples back. And we found that it didn't correlate with the well water or the time when the contamination was the worst" the reactor to the core of the reactor in the graphite. I usually run shorts. I'll usually irradiate for about 10 minutes. We usually let the sample sit in the reactor for a little while. So the very short half-life stuff decays away, and then it comes back out here. And then pop open the rabbit, and in that hood, pull the samples out. Iusually try to repackage the samples. Because then I can take it out of whatever it was irradiated, put it in a clean bag or vial. it on a detector, and we count it. When we're doing shorts, I'll irradiate two samples at a time, because I have two detectors. I'll do a fairly quick count-- five minutes-- right after I get the sample down there. The shortest half-life I look for is for aluminum. It's 2 and 1/4 minutes. But things usually have a lot of aluminum in them, so I see aluminum pretty well. I usually do a 10-minute irradiation for shorts. NAA is good for rare earth elements, which are hard to measure by other methods. By picking out various rare earths and the ratios, it can help identify where things are from in the world. Michael AMES: My usual description of what size sample I like is if it's a piece that you would pick up with a pair of tweezers. "We'll look at what comes in, and-- yeah, I might veto some things or not. But we'll see what we got," he says. working on and myself. The full size bricks-- like, that size, 2 inches by 4 inches, by 8 inches, weighs about 25 pounds. There's usually a bunch of them floating around. The dangerous thing is dropping lead bricks on your feet. And they move much bigger things in the reactor. And that's the other dangerous thing in there, dropping really big things. We've never dropped anything that big. I think somebody dropped a steel plate on their. And you know, these have been here longer than I have. foot once. That was about the worst of it. You know, like, four-foot, half-inch steel-- boom. That's what happened to my foot. The only way you can actually do these manipulations are if you're in my training program-- I'm the training supervisor for the facility. And the program you guys are in fits that definition. So I just want to show you the controls. To actually do this experiment, we need two licensed people in here, one at least has a senior reactor operator. The experiment is basically change reactor power by half a megawatt. We're currently at 500 kilowatts and we're going to bring the reactor up to 1 megawatts and then bring it back down. We have about nine different instruments that tell us what the reactor power is at all times. We'll show you the proper way to make the entries and then do the actual movement itself. And since it's linear, it'll be double that-- so 17.1 megawatts. The reactor is on autocontrol. When we do these manipulations, the reactor operator is going to take manual control. That'll cause an alarm to come in. And this will only happen for the first time. We're a factor of 10 lower than where we would automatically scram at so it would be very difficult for you to get to someplace where it would cause a problem without us being able to stop it. If, at any time, you don't feel comfortable doing something, let us know. up a valve and let more neutrons in. And when you get to the place where you want to be, you basically close that valve again. So you basically add reactivity and then stop that reactivity addition by bringing the absorbers back to about where they started from. When she's done, the shim blade will end up about at the same point where it started, the 13.42 inches out of the bottom of the core. It might not make it all the way back up to [INAUDIBLE].