As a nurse we will transfuse a patient who is low on red blood cells with new blood cells via a venous access of some type. Red blood cells are very vital for our survival and how our body works so in other words our body can't function very well without them. When is a patient transfuse well this really depends depends on what's going on with the patient their vital signs how are they tolerating that low blood level and recent guidelines by the American Association of blood banks recommends transfusing blood when hemoglobin levels fall to 7 to 8 grams per deciliter. Nursing lecture exams but you need to know it for the job okay the first thing before a patient is even transfused is a lot of prep work that is super important and essential because our prep work helps prevent transfusion reactions. Most hospitals require that you're a registered nurse in order to transfuse the blood so again follow your Hospital protocol with that so let's say you got an order for patient to be transfused with two units of packed red blood cells what's the very first thing that's going to be done. You'll want to get informed consent tell the patient what they're going to be receiving assess their understanding of it also this is a good time to ask about their allergies and if they have received any blood transfusions in the past. If you're giving a patient who is in fluid overload or congestive heart failure has renal failure and but they really need blood you need to be looking at that because they may be at risk for circulatory overload. You can access that and take a quiz that can test you on that but just a quick review who is the universal donor who can donate to all types. You typically want an 18-gauge or larger IV site. It takes anywhere between two to four hours for a unit of blood to transfuse. You use special tubing which is called Y tubing with an inline filter which helps filter some of those substances out of the blood before it actually goes to the patient. You never use any met other medications or any other fluids only saline because dextrose and red blood cells don't get along it can cause them to clump up together so only 0.9% normal saline. breath headache backache or nausea and vomiting and if this happens you'll immediately want to stop the transfusion. You want to minimize the amount of blood that the patient's going to receive in case they do have a possible transfusion reaction we can turn that blood off. We want to stay with them during the first 15 minutes because that's when most transfusion reactions occur. We're gonna be watching their bottle signs throughout so you're going to get bottle signs and again this is depending on your hospital protocol. If your patient says I have a backache all of a sudden or I'm having chest pain or my head is hurting that's a red flag c-4 chills t4 tachycardia especially if it's really increased from baseline I for increased respirations same thing with that increase from baseline. Watch the earring closely and then in for nausea GI issues like diarrhea then when the transfusions done your patients tolerated it well you'll want to flush that remaining blood out of that line with that saline. it in the back of your mind so the first thing what you want to do is stop the transfusion. You want to note mentally what time this occurred what time you stopped it because you'll be documenting this later on. The physician depending on what type of reaction they suspect the patient's having or how severe it is they may order some medication so it varies some things they can orders like corticosteroids which is going to suppress that immune response along with fluids helping flush out that free hemoglobin that's in the body. diuretics also some labs are going to be ordered they want to look at those claudine levels because remember if this is hemolytic type because a lot of times they don't know what type of reaction this patient is having. You'll be collecting urine urine on them looking for the free hemoglobin that's came from those red blood cells I have lysis and whenever you are disconnecting your tubing over here do not throw it away don't throw any of it away because you'll be sending that one with the leftover blood and any other documentation to the blood bank.