If you have a complex polyhedron, we found general unfoldings. We proved one of them. If you want an edge unfolding, that's the centuries-old open problem. For non-convex polyhedra, we know this is too much to hope for. But for general unfolding, we don't know. So today's lecture is actually mostly about these two open problems and different variations of it that we know how to solve, special cases, and changes in the model. In the case of a triangulated polygon, we usually call them ears. So cut edges until you can't anymore, so until cutting would disconnect. This means what you're left with will be sort of a tree of faces. There'll be no cycles because if there was a cycle, you could cut one of the edges, and it wouldn't fall apart. So obviously, there's a tree here. Now, trees have leaves. That's our favorite lemma lately. They have at least two leaves. Picture, or if you just have two maybe. Well, I guess-- Yeah, because then, these are both first-level ears. Or maybe just a Mickey Mouse because those are all-- Well, it probably works. But for these cases, I just need to check that I can find a facet-path. For each of those-- I guess this is still step four-- is I actually want to make cycles for these guys. We've probably seen this trick once or twice before, I think in the Mountain Valley assignment stuff. that's why you get exponential, in general. On the other hand, if your tree happens to be nice and balanced, doubling is not so bad because here you'll have constant. This will double everything below. Exponential number cuts is a lot, but it works. You can unfold every orthogonal polyhedron this way. I would love to see an implementation of this algorithm. You could only do it in a computer because you'd be splicing into all these little things, and it would fall apart. Professor: Grid unfolding is an edge unfolding of the grid. This only makes sense for orthogonal polyhedra. Do grid unfoldings always exist? Well, actually, it's not possible. The next best thing you could hope for is to refine. Professor: One thing you can do, with merely 5 by 4 refinement, is something called Manhattan Towers. This is not-- this probably is complete, but here, there, there. There are a ton of results about this. They're all partial. isn't too much doubling because there's only a single child, more or less, everywhere. But the unfolding looks something like that. Here is Manhattan Tower. So it has a connected base on the x-y plane. And I want to consider z-slices as I go up in z-coordinate. And in that case, 5 by 4 refinement is enough to unfold these things. And this is by the same authors, like a year before the general result. Let's see. I think maybe I have a movie. You can do vertex grid unfolding of any orthogonal polyhedron. You can generalize this to trees also, though, it's not totally known. As long as you have a tree of cubes with fairly long connectors in between the branch points, that works. We don't have anything where grid unfolding is definitely impossible. It's very hard to prove that there aren't unfoldings, accept by exhaustive enumeration. We've come up with lots of candidate examples, but eventually, we unfold them all. With folding, we're imagining we're given some polygon, and we'd like to make a polyhedron out of it. When is this possible? Now, the rules of the game here are different from origami. With origami, we showed from any shape, you can make anything if you scale it down. But here, I really want exact coverage. Every point here, or let's say every little patch here, should be covered by exactly one layer over here, not allowing multiple layers. This is Cauchy's rigidity theorem. If you have two convex polyhedra and they are combinatorally equivalent, they have the same way that things are connected together, and they have congruent faces, then, they are actually the same thing, the same polyhedron. If I want to make something convex, there's only one thing it could possibly make. Finding out what that one thing is is quite a challenge, but at least, we can prove that it's unique. The number of alternations is at least 4 times the number of vertices. We're going to count it in two different ways. We'll get two different answers, but we know they must end up being the same. We know because a number of alterations has to be even you can't get up to 2 k plus 1 alternations. So this is kind of obvious. If you have 2 k vertices, no more than 2 k alternations, slight, the place where we're making a little improvement is for the odd case. The average degree is 5? Slightly under 6, 4, 3, 2, 1? Let's see. Should be like 3 n minus 6 edges, so that should be 3. So most of the faces are going to have low degree. So 3 and 5 really matter, but out here, it doesn't matter so much. This is kind of a magical proof. It shouldn't be intuitive where it came from, but it's really beautiful. You'll see as it all comes together. conveniently relates vertices to faces, but it involves edges. If I look at every face and I count the number of edges, I will end up counting every edge twice, once from each side. So now, things are starting to look similar, and I want to get some cancellation going on. Use my cheat sheet here. I'm going to rewrite this formula as V equals 2 plus E minus F. OK? All I did here was decrease by-- well, because there's a half out here, I decrease each coefficient by 2. nothing surprising. So I took E, I subtracted F, just took away one of each. That's V. Now, I also know that 4V is at most, the number of alternations. Hm. I could get a formula for 4V here. 4V's going to be 8, instead of 6 and 7. We also have a plus 8. We don't know whether there any faces of degree 6 or more, so we can't rely on that, but we havePlus 8. This works as long as there's at least one face. compute the shortest paths between all pairs of vertices, something like this picture, except you don't know what it looks like in 3D. You know every edge must be a shortest path. So the edges are some subset of these guys. And so you've got lots of little convex polygons here. We know it must make a convex polyhedron. If it made two, Cauchy's rigidity theorem would tell you that they're the same. So even once you fix the gluing, you know that there's a unique convex realization.