Michael Short: Radiation damage and nuclear materials are the biggest research field in the department. He explains the different material properties and what they actually mean. Short: The basic mechanism of radiation damage is like you might imagine. The strength of the material is how much stress you can put in until it starts to either plastically deform or it hits its UTS, ultimate tensile strength, where it will just fail. The stiffness is more of a response function, so it's how much does it deform in relation to how muchstress you put into it. A measure called DPA, or displacements per atom, is a simple measure of how many times has every atom left. DPA measures the number of times that each atom has moved out of its original site, but it has nothing to do with where they end up. A lot of those atoms will get knocked away and then just move right back. Even though they were displaced, and would be counted as part of the DPA,. or the radiation damage dose, the net effect on the crystal material is nothing. the number of displacements done, for each one of these reactions. Temperature. Temperature determines diffusivities. It also can change phases or crystal arrangements, like for the case of anything iron-based. The dose rate, the rate at which those neutrons come in can change the speed at which the defects cluster up. And all of the presence and density of all those different defects can be quite strongly influenced. And there's evidence for this. And it's the stuff that happens here that can tell us will our materials fail in nuclear reactors. Nuclear materials data looks something like this. Would you be bold enough to draw a trend line through a single data point? No. What about three where it doesn't actually match up with one of them? Or is there any reason why you think they made this parabolic instead of a linear line? I can draw a line that would fit between the error bars of these two right. They're not readable because they're not important. What I do want you to know is what's the quality of this data set you see? The best we can do right now is to stick them in a reactor called BOR-60 in Russia. Russia's got a fleet of sodium cooled fast reactors that can get you 25 DPA per year. And if your reactor is going to go to 500 DPA, you have to know whether or not your materials will survive. So what investor isgoing to be like, all right, here's $10 billion, but I can wait 20 years for a return on investment? No. I can. wait 20 years to start building the reactor, which means 40 years for a return on investment. Chances are, if someone's got $10 billion to give, they're going to be dead by the time they get a return. So what we really need to know is what is the full population of every single type of defect in an irradiated material? That's what I mean by damage. Did I show you guys this movie yet? The orange one? We've talked about vacancies in an abstract sense, but this is a movie of one of them actually moving about on the surface of germanium. case scenario, but that is indeed what happens in the end, and I'll show you some pictures of that actually happened. A void is nothing but a bunch of vacancies or a pocket of vacuum or gas in a material, and it all has to start with these single vacancies. As they cluster together, they reached this threshold in terms of free energy where putting a few of them together is not quite energetically favorable, but it's not so unfavorable that it never happens. The other problem too is that most materials generate helium when you irradiate them with neutrons. When you apply radiation to a material, you can just create dislocations. Normally, you would have to deform a material to create and move disLocations. You create what's called this network forest of dis Locations that makes things a lot harder to deform. The trick that we didn't talk about yet, is when dislocation from different directions collide, they get stuck. And when they can't move, you shift them away from each other and away from the source. Stiffening is an increase in the Young's Modulus, which means it takes more stress to impart the same strain. Dislocation movement is irreversible. You can't just snap it back when you relieve the stress. By making something stronger and stiffer, you make it more difficult for those dislocations to start moving. And what it ends up leading to is a strong loss in ductility. At the same time as things get stronger and stronger, they tend to get much less ductile. Most of Kazakhstan's radioactive materials came from a reactor that shut down in 1999 on one side of Kazakhstan. So they hired the cheapest truck drivers to go on the bumpy roads. Only they knew that all of the metal that all those guys thought was going to be ductile like metal was more brittle than glass. And any sort of bump would cause just complete shattering of this metal and catastrophic release of radioactive material. And luckily, there were no accidents on this trip. It took them 13 days because they went slow. In nuclear reactors, dislocations move on the easiest planes. This means that something will deform a little bit before it just shatters like those channel boxes from the Russian reactor. What actually causes this embrittlement? Well, there's a few things. If you don't push too hard, you can actually see these perfectly symmetrical slip planes at 45 degree angles to the axis of compression, and you know every one of these pillars you see this happening. This is what you want to happen to nuclear materials because you're really trying to balance this between slip and fracture. When you make something colder, it tends to be more brittle. This is the property that people worry about for reactor pressure vessels. The way you test ductile-brittle transition temperature is what's called a Charpy impact test. It's probably the highest tech, lowest tech test I've seen. You simply hit things with a hammer. And you can actually measure by turning this dial and letting it turn as it moves through the material, you can see how much energy was absorbed by the material. Temperature curves, is this not just this part that you're worried about, it's that part. So even at high temperatures, things get less ductile. It's a combination of temperature and number of defects. If either one of these criteria fails, if you become too brittle at low temperature, or your total ductility at high temperature goes down too much, that's the end of life of your reactor vessel. This is one of the biggest problems in life extensions of light water reactors. Michael Short: Can you make Charpy coupon or coupons that are similar to the status of the ones most recently taken out of the vessel, and then just put them in? Short: That's what they're doing. So they're taking these Charpy coupons, which this is bigger than actual size. They break them, so let's say this region's all garbage. Then they cut a little miniCharpy coupons out of last piece, and they're putting those back in. You've just probably recreated a year's worth of licensing work and ideas and in a class. There's a way to know how many defects there actually were in a material. It's called differential scanning color imagery. We're doing this process on nanograms of material and seeing if you can irradiate something and measure its stored energy. If you could, you could take a tiny little razor blade, take out the smallest sliver of the vessel-- smaller than a grain of sand. Not enough to cause a crack-- enough to measure its storage energy. And I want to show you guys what this process looks like. Snipes are real. You pretty much have to be British to know it, because they hunt them there for sport, and apparently, they're delicious. If you can shoot that bird with a gun, you are an expert marksman and deserve the delicious and tiny treat that you've then blown apart with your bullet. So you can you know rain bird dust on whatever meal you've already prepared. Most of the defects that cause these reductions in material properties are too small to see, even in. A memo between Eugene Wigner and Leo Szilard said that radiation stores energy by neutron collisions. When you irradiate something, we predict that it stores about 2% of its energy in radiation defense. The problem is that DSC induces a lot of artifacts in the signal that we couldn't separate from the noise. So our solution was to go nano. To use a nano a DSC, or nano differential scanning calorimeter, that can heat about 10,000 times faster than a traditional DSC. The DSC chip is made of aluminum. We irradiate the whole thing, and then finally put it in the nanocalorimeter. What happens slowed down by a factor of 1,000. That whole thing just went from zero to 450c a millisecond. That little pulse of heat actually released some of the defect energy. We were able to see very clearly, the first time we heated the sample, this extra area corresponds to some sort of energy release. We then heated that same sample a whole bunch of times, and made sure that it was always the same, which meant we had a relaxed material. The heating is so fast that the defects don't even have time to find each other, annihilate, and release their stored energy. So we need to repeat the experiments at some lower temperatures, see what the peaks are, but if you go too low, you end up getting a lot of noise in your signal. So there's going to be some sweet spot that we haven't yet found in order to see this stored energy, he says. "After doing simulations for a year that probably no one believes until you do an experiment, including me," he adds. "For now, it actually shows some sort of a trend" we keep our reactors running in about two hours. I think that's the most compact introduction to nuclear materials I can possibly give you. So any questions on what you've seen today? AUDIENCE: Is that roughly the trend you would expect? MICHAEL SHORT: Yes, I would expect an up. That's the best I can say. As far as is it actually a line? Is it a curve? I am not as brave or stupid as some of the other folks that will draw an arbitrary shaped line through a single data point. it will in the material, and will react with all the other defects nearby, decimating the population of that defect and slightly depressing that of the others. As you go higher, and higher in temperature, the slower and slower defects start to move. If you heat the vessel too much, it's no longer a code stamp vessel. Pretty tricky spot that we're in, huh? But we're trying to science our way out of it. It's a couple minutes after. I don't want to keep you longer, but I'll open on Thursday with a little story about how mass attenuation coefficients can get you out of apartheid South Africa.