William Wordsworth along with the next person we talked about Samuel Samuel Taylor Coleridge probably the two of the most influential of this particular era. William Blake from earlier is very important as well. These names that I've been telling you are people that show up on Jeopardy from time to time especially if there's a Romantic era or British literature type thing it's usually a good stab in the dark if you don't know to kind of throw out one of these names very interesting individual. such you know it's about that emotional feelings and that powerful feelings and he was one that really was pushing pushing and pushing for those to be in his writings and that why he stands out that's why you've such a visionary of the time and the building background on the next page gives a little bit more insight into that same premise so that's something to remember about this era and about Wordsworth to help out growing up his past to talk about his past. He talks about having two tragedies the loss of his parents which would be a tragedy for anybody but also the division of his family after the death of hisParents. You know throughout his upbringing even though he was away from his sister at the school he developed this passion for poetry and this observation of nature and such and we will see that played out in the piece today. He falls in love with a woman but he becomes broken so he has to take off and go back home and so for years it talks about there that he's feeling a sense of abandonment and loss for leaving the woman that he loved back in France that I can't stay and you keep the cause going any longer. The Rime of the Ancient Mariner for Coleridge was as we'll read here and for the intro for that you know Wordsworth worked with him on that it was going to be a dual credit both of them were going to get credit for it. Wordsworth had to drop out of that but some of the most famous elements of the piece still are in there and they're still a focal point so we still see his kind of finger prints on that masterpiece áwillá will take care of in the next couple days. different than the typical every line it's kind of its own little thing and so when it's read in a different way it's it might see a little Jill at times button jamming is something very easy to visually identify a once you understand oh that's in JAMA it's a piece of cake okay. It might give you a little bit of reservation here and there but it shouldn't okay what I want to talk about first is a 786 lines composed a few miles above Tintern Abbey on Abbey you know a religious building. This is probably one of the most difficult readings that we have throughout the semester I don't think it's impossible but you're going to have to you're gonna have to work a little bit ok so just kind of grab onto those moments those moments of nature and such but also as this is kind of like a monologue where he's going on all of a sudden we find out at the end that he's actually talking to somebody and based on his history can we guess who that might be and why this moment is interesting? he talks a lot I mean just describing you know leaning against the tree and looking out amongst the field on looking at the orchard with the you know it talks about the all of the which at this season with the unripe fruits are clad in one green hue. He almost has kind of a teleportation back to some degree of when he was a child okay he goes into great details about when I found through around the river like a like a row like a deer and I would play and when I was little I was having a great time. He says that the memory of the woods and colleges offered tranquil restoration to his mind and even affected him when he was not aware of the memory. While he was away thinking back to this it helped calm him and help restore him if he mentioned that when I was off in a city whether I was alone or far away or with some people you know I would think back to these place. It brought me a lot of peace it brought meA lot of comfort ok do you remember a certain trip that you took at some point in your life maybe five to ten years ago and you distinctly remember a visual image have you ever gone back to that same place and like oh yeah this is the place one of my earliest memories was I was like two or three and I went to Disneyland on California. in California and watch the train go across and was like this is the same spot I stood when I was three you know and so it's kind of a nice little Wow think about how I've changed in my life. You can think back to this this for me I didn't look back to Disneyland and think hey that was awesome but you look back at certain things in life and that brings you some calm those are you looking forward to spring break or summer are you going to some place you've gone to before. steeped in nature and such okay he mentions the river you know meandering through the the trees and through the fourth that's why looking at that picture before we started you know that river is the same river that he was looking upon and quoting and talking about here. We see these elements of nature we see remember we talked about in the introduction the child and the common man the innocence of children and such this isn't a story about or poem about children but yet through his childhood memories we are able to make that connection to those passion emotion feelings about nature. a little maybe some of the footnotes you know that's why a second exposure as always is always beneficial yeah we don't know that there's anybody with him okay anybody with them until he says my dear dear sister they're at the bottom of 790 and such let me see here. Even if he did not feel this way about the nature or understand all the things he would still be in good spirits for this day even if I didn't have those previous four pages you know the previous hundred lines of thoughts about nature. like I said we first started this particular piece talking about it you know that memory if I am dead if I'm gone think back to this time sister if you can't hear my any longer just remember what my feelings are for you. "This is one I probably say the top three or four most difficult pieces not that it's crazy hard but it's just it's a lot more difficult than reading those pulp" "My voice and my spirit will continue because you'll be experiencing all of these things and thinking in the same mind frame that I was thinking"