Christine Hayes: Deuteronomy describes God's choice of Israel as the chosen one. She says the privilege of being chosen or singled out entails obligations and responsibility. Hayes: Israel was chosen by Yahweh in an act of spontaneous love--;it does not imply her perfection. She argues that the idea of a superiority complex is a moral danger involved in the notion of election, and that Israel was not chosen by any special virtue or merit, but by God's initiative. and is no cause for Israel to boast. drive you out just as he drove out the Canaanites. That's a theme in Deuteronomy. God's providential love and care for Israel is expressed through various metaphors in the Bible. So we have a lot of sort of love and marriage imagery, husband and wife imagery, used for God and Israel. But we also have this parent and child imagery that appears.… It almost seems to play on the idea that God is not perfect, but that is their choice. They favor them. At the end of Deuteronomy, the promises still are not fulfilled. The people are still outside the land. Some have suggested that this is quite purposeful. It points to an exilic date for the work's final composition. When it was finally redacted, the redactors were in exile. And the Deuteronomist wants to make it clear that it is fidelity to the Torah, rather than residence in the land, that is critically important. But in any event, it's also the first part of a much larger, longer literary work. There is a great deal of ideological baggage that is involved in the dating of the sources. Anti-priest, anti-cult sentiment is apparent in the history of biblical scholarship. P espouses a communal ethic, and post-exilic priests are going to turn to an individual ethic. Many sections of P do not seem to assume a central sanctuary. The idea of the central sanctuary really took hold in 622, Josiah's reform: that the central reform was Josiah and not Israel. the Bible is divided into two parts we refer to as the "Former Prophets" and then the "Latter Prophets." The Former Prophets will concern us for the next few lectures. The Latter Prophets is a collection of books, each of which bears the name of the individual whose prophecies it purports to contain. These prophets delivered their oracles at critical junctures in Israel's history, in the nation's history. So their words are only going to make sense if we first understand the particular historical crises that they are addressing. redaction of these books, would put the materials together by inserting verses and speeches that would frame the older sources and link them together. The whole unit, as a whole, was redacted after 622: that's clear. It assumes and insists upon the centralization of the cult. The last dated event that is mentioned in 2 Kings is something that occurred in 562. So the work was probably concluded shortly after that date: so in exile or towards the end of the exilic period. There are key features of Deuteronomistic thought that are evident from Joshua through 2 Kings. In the past 4000 years more wars have been fought for the possession of the tiny strip of land known as Canaan. Canaan is about 150 miles long and 70 miles wide, about the size of Rhode Island. Control of these international highways brought a great deal of wealth to the area. In times of peace it would bring prosperity, but, of course, in times of war the land was perpetually invaded as armies would crisscross the land going off to do battle with the great powers.. Israel boasts great geographical diversity, says historian. Three main geographical subdivisions run in strips from north to south, he says. Being somewhat isolated, inhabitants of each region developed distinctive economic and cultural character, says Shmuley Boteach. "Within this relatively tiny area there are radically diverse regions, and this fact held important implications for Israel's history," says Shuley Botesch. "We call this the wilderness, the wilderness of Judea between Jerusalem and the Dead Sea," he adds. city dwellers. You have merchants and traders who are handling the commerce on the trade routes. So that's the geographical setting for what we are about to read in the Book of Joshua. The structure of Joshua is really somewhat simple. We can really divide it into two major parts. The first 12 chapters form a unit that conveys the invasion and conquest. The story of the Battle of Jericho is really a composite of two accounts that have been woven together into a single narrative. The account of the conquest in Joshua 2 through 12, is concerned to express the idea that Israel's victories would not have been possible without Yahweh. In Joshua, military skill is much less important than ritual preparation and purity. Why the claim of the utter destruction of the Canaanites when evidence points to close Canaanite origins? This practice, which I mentioned before and is known as herem or the ban, is not unique to Israel. The imperative of preserving a distinct identity--based on giving up the worship of other gods or older gods--is reiterated in Joshua's farewell address in Joshua 23. And the central idea is that there is only one proper response to God's mighty acts on behalf of Israel.