Taxes are one of three different kinds of tax we're gonna have aggressive so with our regressive tax as people earn more income base they are attacked a smaller amount of smaller percentage of the rounding. It's not the dollar amount it's gonna be obvious that everyone is must and a larger dollar amount in taxes their income goes up it's nothing down it's the percent of their income that you're spending that's what determines put the tax is regressive and what we see here is taxes. 17,000 Orlando will go to top Bill and Hillary will both oh eight thousand each so our total BAM attacks if we put this way 19,000 if we tax the household this goes back to this idea we discussed the horizontal language all right we want to treat people that are in similar circumstances. If we tax them as a family they're both a 20-3 if we Tax them individually they're paying 16. If they're married and they're not they'repaying 16,000 these people are paying 23,000. That's the American penalize people for being married. was in this year spec's 383 three point eight trillion dollars when we spent almost three point nine those caught 329 Troy and we had parameters seeds we have revenue three point three trouble nice we have seven under six hundred billion dollars and we can engage in types of policies here too. We're under the change and your demand as we can have learn called spam canary fiscal policies. We can have contractionary order restrictions physical follows so if our expansionary fiscal policy here we're seeing the decrease in taxes or an increase in government spending and if you have a deficit the deficit is going to get larger. on the progressive income tax does the exact same thing because if people's income is $50,000 right and then for some reason it falls to say $20,000 if you have progressive taxes they're going to pay their tax burden their average tax rate is going to automatic. When you've got the expansion apart you're going from time here t2 to t3 people theoretically don't need food stamps and Welfare right so spending on these guys is automatically reduced. You're automatically seeing reductions in government spending automatically.