Professor: We're going to start with a short review problem on rugged landscapes. And then we'll get into the core topic of the class, which is evolutionary game theory. We'll discuss why it is that you don't need to invoke any notion of rationality, Professor says. Then we'll try to understand this difference to know what a Nash equilibrium is in the context of game theory versus an evolutionary stable strategy in this context. And we'll say something about the evolution of cooperation and experiments that one can do with microbial populations in the laboratory. Professor: We're going to start in the 0, 0 state with 1,000 isogenic individuals. And the question is, what's going to happen eventually? And in particular, what path will be taken on this landscape here? Professor: You can start thinking about it while I write out some possibilities that we can vote for, and I'll give you a minute to think about it. If we wait long enough, the population will get there, and the 1, 1 genotype will fix in the population. the other of them. The probability of getting both mutations in one generation is going to be 10 to the minus 12. And then there's another question, which is, will 0, 1 actually fix in the population before you later fix this population? And actually, I think the answers to all these questions are in principal already on the board. And really, this is in some ways a very simple problem. But in another way, you have to keep track of lots of different things, and which regime we're in and so forth. a group of D's and a group of B's here, which means that everybody-- AUDIENCE: Let's fight. PROFESSOR: All right, so everybody thinks that everybody agrees with them, but you just need to look a little bit more long distance. So turn to a pseudo-neighbor. You should be able to find somebody there. It's roughly even here. So I don't see much in the way of vibrant discussion and argument. You guys should be passionately defending your choice here. Professor: In order for this individual to fix, he has to survive stochastic extinction. And the 1, 0 individual has to go extinct, which happens 90% of the time. So this is, indeed, answering the question that if you had one copy of each of these two mutant individuals in the population, that's the answer. But that's a slightly different question than if we ask, we're going to start with an entire population at 0, 0, and now these mutations will be occurring randomly at some rate. In a chemical reaction, where we have some chemical state here, we have two rates. There's the k going to 0, 1, the k to 1, 0. And that's everything we need to know to calculate the relative probabilities of taking those states. In this case do we have to worry about going backwards? No. It's very unlikely. In practice, it doesn't actually matter, because this acts as a ratchet. Because all these mutations are non-neutral, once you fix this state or this one, you can't go back. big number is our problem. So we should be able to figure this out, though. Because this new r is 1/1.02. OK, so there's less than a 1% probability of it fixing. Is this believable? AUDIENCE: It's about right. PROFESSOR: Yes, sorry, I was just saying this doesn't-- so this is why I'm saying you always check to make sure that your calculation makes any sense at all. So it's not this. But it's tiny, right? fixation of a neutral mutation. This is a deleterious mutation. It's not even nearly neutral. So it has to be much less than 1 over N, right? So this whole thing is 10 to the minus 10, or something like that? OK, 4 times 10 to minus 8? Well, OK, whatever, it's something small. So this times the probability of fixation, which is 10 minus 9-- this is how you would calculate the rate of going backwards. rate, you don't even do successive fixations. So it may be that neither state ever actually fixes, because it could be that the 1, 0 state is growing exponentially, but is a minority of the population. Instead, you simply have mutations that sample different strategies. And then you have differences in fitness that just lead to evolution towards the same solutions of the game. It's evolution to the game solutions, so the Nash equilibrium, for example. And we'll see how this plays out in a few concrete examples. it can happen. But then it's easy to then go back to the lab and forget that it's true. The basic insights are all intact. In practice, you basically get the categories of outcomes that we saw there. So maybe what I'll do is-- so what we're going to do is think about competition between two individuals A and B. And often, we talk about these things in the context of the two-player games, where we have A, B, C, D. In a symmetric game, everybody interacts with everybody else with equal probability. Depending upon the strategy that these guys are following, you get different payouts. The Prisoner's Dilemma is the standard model of cooperation in the field of game theory. If you set up these jail sentences in the right way, then it could be the case that each individual has the incentive to confess, even though both individuals would be better off if they cooperated. In these questions, they're actually allowed to lie to the person being questioned. is indeed the Nash equilibrium. It's to do this strategy D that we're saying here. All right, now the question is why? And part of the challenge here is just understanding how to read these charts. Now, if you look at this chart, you say, well, gee, that is a shame. Because 1 is just not the biggest number you see here. And indeed, the important point to note here is that if both players had followed this strategy C for cooperate, D for defect, then both individuals would be getting fitness 3, or payout 3. In a population, if you have genetic A's and genetic B's that are each giving birth to their own type, then you evolve to some coexistence of genotypes. So long as you have some members of both A and B in the population, you'll always evolve to the same equilibrium. Whereas the mixed Nash equilibrium-- this is a situation where you have, in principle, genetic homogeneity. This is a single genotype that is implementing phenotypic heterogeneity. And indeed, one of the things that we've been excited about exploring in my group is this distinction. If the population or the opponent is playing this Nash equilibrium in these games, then it just does not matter what you do. You can do A, actually, in any fraction. So since A and B have the same fitness, you can choose between them at any frequency you want. So that's saying it's a Nash equilibrium. It's not a strict Nash equilibrium, but it's equal to. The condition it has to be greater than or equal to, which means it is a Nash. equilibrium. not the definition of that. But this thing is true, which means that it's a Nash equilibrium. And if you have questions about this, I'm happy to answer it. It's explained in the book as well. We are out of time, so I should let you go. But good luck on the exam next Thursday. If you have Questions and you want to meet with me, I am available on Tuesday. So please let me know. I'll be happy to talk to you.