Jeffrey Grossman: We're going to talk about energy storage. He says the planet is kind of a storage device for that thing over there. Most energy storage needs are going to be around a year or less, he says. Grossman says electricity is more and more important in our lives. We'll go into batteries and then talk about the chemistry of batteries and throw in a couple of, why this matters, he writes..com/jeffrey-grossman/energy-storage-technique. would be like, I've got energy storage technology and it's got this much density, this much power-- well, then it's going to last if I use it at that power for 41 days and so forth. That sounds like a good thing, right, so shouldn't we be pumping water up hills all over the place? Well, obviously, if you think about it, you don't do that in your phone. You don't evenDo that in a town. Why? Because pumped hydro is extraordinarily limited. It's very low energy density, right. The relationship between electricity and chemical reactions is called electrochemistry. Electrochemical energy storage isn't just one type of thing, it's not just one battery. It's this broader definition, but we're going to talk about batteries today. We're getting to the point where we're electrifying everything. We need electricity almost everywhere, even in your combustion car. You need electricity a lot more than you used to, than 20 years ago, than even a few years ago. The second law of thermodynamics makes you pay a penalty of energy if you convert it into heat. energy storage is so appealing, because you don't really pay a penalty. I can go back and forth without the second law hurting me. Entropy is about accessibility to states. It's about how many states you have to be in. Electric cars, for example, have a very high efficiency depending on the car, but upwards of 90% in terms of converting that electrical energy back and back. These are the things that matter in batteries, but so many other things matter, and this is why this is a complicated problem. change not going from your computer to your phone but from your car to a grid. And so the needs are all going to be different, and then which ones of these things you care about is going to depend on what chemistry you think about. It all comes down to the chemistry as we're going to see. It's all about the chemistry. And just to put a few numbers down, the cell phone has a few watts of power. Light bulb is 10 to 100. A AAA battery has 1.5 watt hours of storage. Needed to drive a car 200 miles, 100 kilowatt hours. In the 1800s, a scientist tried to make a connection between things that move and electricity. He hooked up a frog to a lightning rod and the frog went crazy. He deduced that the motion of a frog, and all motion of all living creatures, generates electricity. The story of Frankenstein was written because they went around and electrocuted things and showed that they moved, and often they weren't alive, and so Mary Shelley, I think, saw that. And I don't think they ever used humans, but still, people's imaginations and so forth. There's over a billion people who can't read at night because there's no access to electricity. $25 billion liters of kerosene are used to meet the basic lighting needs in a lot of these places. You've got to store energy to make these things actually useful, right, and I really like this program so I wanted to make that one of my, why this matters. And we'll go big on the next one, but let's get to the chemistry. It's Volta's two different metals. lots of metals. That's what he did. And he showed that the frog moved with most of them, so it's the metals. So let's take these two classic metals and show what happens. You've got copper and you've got zinc. Now, in this case, I'm just going to have a zinc. This is the zinc piece of metal, and this is a piece of zinc. And I put it in a solution of copper ions. And what happens is there is a transfer of electrons, right. The Nobel Prize was given to the development of lithium ions as a storage technology. A lithium battery works much the same way in the sense that you have the separator here. That's the electrolyte. But now it's rechargeable. All the chemistry is the same. You're shuttling ions back and forth. You've got that external circuit. And there's a whole bunch of chemistry. So what has exploded in the last-- well, that's a bad word for batteries because that is a danger with lithium batteries. The growth in solar and wind has been incredible over the last 10, 20 years. The problem, as I think I've shown you, is the variability. And so here's the question. How do you fix this? You got to store it. There's no way to use renewables at large scales unless you store it, and we're at essentially the tipping point.go in everything now, all the way up to the grid. And that was my last Why This Matters in the last 2 and 1/2 minutes. This is the grid now. But as they add more and more of this renewable to the grid, its price goes down when it's available. In fact, it's now not economical for them to add more PV unless they can add it with storage. You can't solve renewables at the scale of the grid without storage. And no option exists today. It might be batteries. It may be batteries, but there's nothing that actually does it today at the scales that we need. So that's a real challenge for chemistry.