The goal is to understand solar cell conversion efficiency, which is the ratio of output to input energy. For most solar cells, this breaks down to the following progression, from the solar spectrum to charge collection. And we're going to be focusing on charge separation, incorporating elements of either side. The total system efficiency is the product of each individual component. If any one of these is low, the efficiency for the entire system is low. If you can see the absorption spectrum of chlorophyll, of the different types of chloropterll here, you'll see large portions of the sun's spectrum that go underutilized. on the same page and redo it this class right at the beginning because it's that important. For those who are still struggling, let's make sure that you get this sometime between now and, say, the next two weeks because this will feature prominently on the exam. So if you would not mind working directly with your partner, the person who's sitting directly next to you. Let's walk through the diode in the dark. I'll walk you through it as soon as you've done. Maybe I'll give you three minutes to complete that. a little confusing for some folks. So just to be totally clear, in a device like this one, if it were subject to illumination you would have light coming in from the side, right, either from the p side or from the n side. To transfer this into what we've seen so far with the solar cell devices facing up toward the sun, you'd have to rotate this by 90 degrees, right? We're essentially forcing current coming from this side into this side because we're using a battery. PV researchers will report a current density, in other words, a current per unit area instead of the actual current coming out of a solar cell device. At the y-intercept, there is maximum current flowing through the circuit but no power because voltage is equal to 0. The opposite happens over here at this point called Voc, which we'll call open-circuit voltage. This is the point at which the solar cell is producing the maximum amount of power, and it would be a negative number. The conversion efficiency determines the area of solar cells needed to produce a certain peak power. Many costs scale with area, including glass, encapsulants, the absorbent materials within the solar cell devices. The aluminum and racking and framing materials that go into holding the panels up in the field either on a roof or out of the field. So efficiency affects pretty much everything but the inverter and possibly some of the soft costs of the project. The material costs might end up whopping you, but it might not. pay more for a high-efficiency cell because I'm using less area, you can use this type of calculation to get to the answer quickly. This is a really back-of-the-envelope envelope engineering approach to estimating costs of a solar system. So I think this is a great place to stop. And if anybody has an idea, a fun idea, for a class project, I'd invite you to give a pitch up here at the front of class, or you're welcome to send it on an email to the class listserv.