Alberto Riva is an instructor at CHB. He will talk to you about the most important resources for finding and using biomedical information, especially information connected with the study of the human genome. Most of them will be websites, where you can find information, and to talk about how this information is stored and represented, how it's accessible, and what it can be used for. You're going to see a long list of references to sites, websites, with URLs. Don't worry if you can't remember all of them because, of course, I'm going to distribute the slides. The genotype is digital, because each base pair in our DNA can be exactly represented using one of four symbols, A, P, G, C. The phenotype is analog, because most phenotypes are qualitative in nature. They cannot be measured exactly or precise, they cannot even be defined precisely in most cases. You always have to take into account the effect of environmental factors that, again, are very hard to describe in a quantitative way. How is all this information represented? What are the different ways that we can store and describe this information? Where does it come from, where is it stored, how do we find and use it? The first thought is of inherited traits date back to Mendel in 1866. It took over 80 years for this concept to be proven. The definite proof that genes are made of DNA dates back to 1952. And finally, the Human Genome Project, that was officially declared a success last year, brought us to the point where we now know the exact base pair sequence of our genome. So we're going to talk about the role of DNA in genes in a way that we haven't done before. There are differences between the DNA of two any human beings. These differences are due to polymorphisms, like single nucleotide polymorphisms. Microsatellites, repeats, insertions, deletions, translocations, these are all things that can happen to your DNA sequence that can modify in ways that, of course, are not enough to turn you into another animal. You're going to find approximately one difference every 1,000 bases. This is one of the most interesting problems in current bioinformatics and molecular biology. The process of transcribing the DNA sequences into RNA is, of course, at the basis of expression analysis. Differentiable analysis, clustering, and so on, these are all the usual things that can be done using microarrays. Starting homology and conservation of proteins across different organisms can give you a very good idea of the importance of some proteins. And finally, something that is very challenging, and it's receiving a lot of attention lately, is the automatic construction and analysis of metabolic pathways and regulatory pathways. try to build, in a computational way, the kind of pathway maps that biologists have been drawing by hand for decades. Of course, we're still very far away from being able to do this in the general case. But these are all very challenging problems that, of course, are still very much open. And finally, we get to the phenotype then, we could put a very long list of things here, but could talk about population genetics, about association studies. Association studies are studies that try to correlate the presence of a certain genotype with an observed phenotype. GenBank is the largest repository of DNA sequence data. It accepts direct submissions from researchers. GenBank is at the basis of the NCBI cluster. NCBI is a branch of the NIH, that has the task of assembling the largest possible number of databases of biomedical information. The most recent data that I could find from one year ago. It contained more than 22 million sequences and 100,000 distinct organisms. With a total of almost 30 billion nucleotides. And this is the URL for GenBank. If you have enough sequences from the same organism, you can try assembling them, putting them together, and trying to reconstruct the entire genome. This is what was done to assemble the human genome, for example, and all the other genomes that are being sequenced. You start with-- you look at the sequences you have, and if you can find overlaps, then you know that these two sequences are related in some way, and you proceed from there. And in the end you're going to build a map that tells you where all these fragments should be positioned. six times for validation. So and the details of how this process has been implemented and CVI are here. And in addition to the human genome, of course, we have a lot of other genomes that are completed, or near completion. These numbers are probably higher by now we have over 1,000 viruses. And then many other organisms from different domains of life. Of course, eukaryotes are the hardest organisms to sequence. The human genome is considered finished by now. It's hard to go above this level of accuracy. Golden Path was the first site to provide something like this. It gives you the absolute position of all the known elements of our genome. It provides arbitrary DNA sequences-- so you can ask for any region of any human chromosome, you'll get back the exact DNA sequence for that region. There's another way of looking at the genome using the NCBI map viewer. It's a graphical browser to look at genomes and annotations of genomes. It can rely on the whole set of NCBI databases, so basically everything that could possibly want to know is in there. SNPs are the most common form of variation in our genome. They're important because for example, they can be used as genomic markers. If you have a SNP that introduces a change is beneficial, then you will see that the frequency of the SNPs increases in the population. If a SNP is neutral, then there is no selective pressure, and it will either go away by chance, or will stay at a certain basic level of frequency. The largest database of SNPs that we have again, is at NCBI, it's called the dbSNP. is known about it. And if you have a SNP that affects one of them, that SNP, in turn, might cause a protein to work-- it can change the function of a SNP-- of a protein. So I'm just reporting here a list of all the domains that contain that location, but they are important because they do something. And we get so many because all these domains are overlapping. And so you see for example, this first domain covers almost all of the protein. LocusLink is a curated directory of genes from 13 organisms. LocusLink provides a nomenclature of genes. UniGene is an automated system, so it's actually an automated procedure that looks at the GenBank sequences that refer to a region of the genome where a gene is known to be. And I think that one year ago, this number was something like 14, and now it's growing very fast. This one is probably the only one that could be affected by the presence of a SNP. So don't get confused by this place. Just a list of Swiss [INAUDIBLE] domains that include that location. a software system for the automated annotation of genomes. It's basically means it's a system that discovers genes and tries to find as much information as possible about these genes. So it's essentially a combination of LocusLink, dbSNP, HomoloGene, and a few other things. It has a very powerful data access interface. So you can do queries on this huge database in a relatively simple way. But of course it's not-- they don't necessarily match very well. is a consequence of the fact that there is a very complex machinery behind it that determines which genes are active or not, and how much, in different conditions. This is actually a system that integrates a lot of different factors that might include the following, in no particular order-- The tissue, we know very well that the set of genes that are expressed in one tissue is very different from the set that is expressed in another tissue. External signals, of course, all response to external stimuli. And it also depends on the expression state of any number of other genes. The first step, again, we're moving the first steps. The first thing you need to do is need to be able to reliably identify which transcription factors bind to a given gene. And that, in turn, will determine the spatial, temporal, dependent expression of the target gene. If a method like this, if you have a meter to detect binding sites that works well, then you can think on a large scale, looking for all the binding sites for a certain factor for a human gene. This is one of the things we are working on in our lab. GEO is a database of gene expression and hybridization array data. The Stanford microarray database, again, is a repository of all the-- of a large number of micro experiments performed at Stanford. Other resources for gene expression are found in different PGA projects, PGA are programs for genomic applications, they are are large projects managed by the NIH. The [? tracks ?] PGA, for example, offers 565 microarrays from mouse and rat models of sleep, infection, hypertension, pulmonary disease. The protein world is much more complex than the DNA and RNA world for the reasons that I've explained at the beginning. The biggest database is SwissProt, 120,000 sequenced centuries, 9,000 human proteins in SwissProt. OMIM is a catalog of human genes and disorders by the NCBI. The Hopkins PGA, again more than 500 microarrays from several human diseases. Cardio genomics provide microarray data on mouse models of cardiac development and signal transduction. And finally, human gene expression index. Gene ontology is to build a dynamic controlled vocabulary that can be used to describe biological concepts. It's organized in three taxonomies that try to describe everything that is known about molecular functions, molecular biological process, and several components using a standardized nomenclature. It is a work in progress-- still very far from being complete. It could find exact definition of all the terms that people use, especially in this field is very hard. But this is where they are now, and it's aWork in progress, so it will keep growing in the future. a view of taxonomy, for example, for biological process. If you are talking about site communication, then response to external stimulus is a subclass of communication. And if you want to talk about the immune response, you can cite this biology term, and everybody will be able to go to gene ontology. OK, I think we're out of time. Well, just a conclusion slide that I'll just let you read, because I think it's just repeating what we're saying so far that we are drowning in data and converting this data into knowledge is not easy.