Ka-Yen: "I walked into MIT not knowing a single thing about nuclear energy" "I was like, I wish someone could have told me these things" "We're just kind of like-- it's a refresher. A couple of fun facts" "You guys are going to be starting up full cycle on Friday with really cool topics like stopping power" "There won't be a lot of crazy intense math because we just want to give you guys a break" "It's a very brief history in a nutshell" Most of this development happened between 1939 and 1945. In 1951, the first nuclear reactor to produce electricity was the experimental breeder reactor. The first nuclear powered submarine, the USS Nautilus, was launched in 1954. But the real heyday of nuclear was between 1960 to 1975, when Westinghouse created the first 250 megawatt electric nuclear power plant. Unfortunately, all good things have to come to an end, though. From 1975 to 2002, you can see a massive decline in nuclear energy. China, India, and South Korea are the main players in this game. Nuclear creates 75 times less carbon emission than coal does, and 35 times less than natural gas. One of the good things about nuclear is that it can serve as a good baseload source of energy. Other alternative forms of energy might be better for the environment, it might be safer, and things like that, but it's not really able to do this. So this is why we kind of want to replace coal and natural gas with nuclear. About 21% of the reactors that are located and working in the United States are boiling water reactors. Light water reactors, or LWRs, are mostly broken up into two subcategories: boiling water reactor and pressurized water reactor. So how you guys can think about reactors is that honestly they're just kind of glorified steam turbines. So it's a really, really simple mechanism and we can walk through that right now. About what I've mentioned? Awesome. So now we'll talk a little bit about reactor types. BWRs comprise about 21% of the reactors in the United States. They are functionally essentially the same, and it's just slightly more complicated. With BWRs there is a higher chance of leaking radioactive material into the environment. The next kind of reactor that falls under the light water reactor category is the pressurized water reactors. PWRs are actually more important, if you will, than B WRs. They have two separate loops with the nuclear fuel being more isolated from the environment, which mitigated violent fission. Heavy water reactors use deuterium oxide instead of light water. Deuterium is cheaper than light water, but it also has a higher water cost. Breeder reactors are essentially the same thing as light water reactors. They were most popular between like the '50s and the '60s-ish in the very beginning of creating nuclear reactors and they're a really cool idea, but they're not very practical. They have to change out their fuel more often, and that means the fuel gets spent more quickly. Fissionable material is material that is willing to undergo fission with a thermal neutron. fertile material is just material that absorbs a neutron and then is able to become a piece of fissile material. Breeder reactors are adding extra chunks of uranium 238 and thorium 232 into the reactor. They're able to work at a higher fuel efficiency because they don't need to add as much fissionable materials as you would for a normal light water reactor. And then we're going to move on to the next generation of reactors. The main reason why we're a little bit hesitant to start using more nuclear power is because of safety issues. None of us can argue that nuclear is like 100% safe. It actually does have some dangers associated with it. After a nuclear accident you can see a pretty steep decline in the amount of nuclear reactors that are being commissioned. And again Fukushima, once again, with the number of reactors being commissioned after the accident just declines dramatically. The main things that are holding us back is just social, economic, and therefore like government hesitance to use nuclear power. The Three Mile Island reactor underwent a core meltdown in 1979. Chernobyl exploded in 1986 because the control rods were displaced too much, causing the first explosion. To this day, we can't pinpoint the cause of the second explosion at Chernobyl, but it could have been like helium building up or a helium-filled building up, or just a building up of helium or helium or something like that that blew the whole reaction apart. But there's a second explosion that blew just this entire core apart that kind of stunk. Next reactor accident that we were alive for, which is cool, was Fukushima Daiichi. This is a very similar problem, as you can see that in all these instances of the reactor incidents, it's just kind of like the fuel core was misbehaving and we weren't able to get enough coolant water to it. So following the earthquake, these coolant pumps broke. They're like, oh, that's OK. What we can do is we have backup generators to continue running the pumps. We're all good. Reactor accidents are actually pretty rare. There's three main accidents that have happened. But because these are the things that people get ingrained into their mind, people think that nuclear reactors are incredibly dangerous. That's why we have this social hesitance, which is why we aren't able to get enough government funding. And that's why nuclear power isn't more of a thing. Makes sense? Yeah. So what in the world do we do with it? So first of all, the main thing in nuclear waste is spent fuel. After undergoing a bunch of fissions, these uranium particles get transformed. The main issue is what do we do with all this material? So this material that comes out is pretty radioactive and it's also incredibly hot, so it can be dangerous if someone decides to come and eat it. The primary way of disposing of the spent fuel is putting it into spent fuel pools. This is an OK solution, except for the fact that, again, we just have way too much spent fuel to be able to do this. The next solution was something called dry cask storage. Yucca Mountain is located in Nevada. People in Nevada weren't happy about this. There was a lot of opposition. Because of the social opposition there was government opposition and many loopholes we had to jump through. They also realized that it wasn't as geologically sound as they had hoped. There's a lot more groundwater running through and seeping through Yucca Mountain than they thought there would be. So there's a huge debacle. Basically the costs are rising, nothing much was happening. And then 2011, under the Obama Administration, he just called it quits. The economics of nuclear power is actually a really complicated topic and it changes depending on who you talk to. If you look at this chart, yellow is nuclear power, the gray is coal, and the blue is the natural gas. But basically, anyone you. talk to, you can see that nuclear is not nearly as economic of a source of electricity generation as. any other of these ones I mentioned. Unless you talk. to UK. UK thinks it's OK. But everyone else is saying that it's not as money efficient. other forms of electricity. People buy the electricity that's cheapest, not necessarily the Electricity that's best for our grandchildren or something like that. Yeah, so that's why nuclear power isn't more of a thing. So do you guys have any questions about anything I mentioned? If you guys are interested about any of these topics, I recommend going to NRC.gov. They have a lot of really cool information. That's basically where I got the majority of my information for the slide show. It might just be skewed a little bit pro nuclear.