Professor: The plan for today is as follows. We're going to look at this unitary time evolution and calculate this operator u, given the Hamiltonian. Then we will look at the Heisenberg picture of quantum mechanics. The Schrodinger operators acquire time dependence, which makes the relation between classical mechanics and quantum mechanics more obvious. So we'll discuss that. We'll find the heisenberg equations of motion and solve them for a particular case today. And we'll go through three cases. the right. It cannot be to the right of U0 though, because this is a matrix, a constant matrix that we've put in here as a possible thing for boundary condition. So so far we've taken this derivative, and then i's cancel, the h bar cancels, and you get H. But this whole thing is, again, U. So try this. And it works. So having this solution we can write, for example, that U of t t0 is going to be e to the minus iHt over h bar. A little time dependence is an idea, the sign to make it possible for you to solve the equation. So you could have Hamiltonians that are time dependent, but still have a simplifying virtue. So if you have a magnetic field that is fixed in one direction but change in time, you can have a situation where your Hamiltonian is time dependent. And you will discuss such case because it's interesting. But later on as we do nuclear magnetic resonance, we will have the more interesting case in which the Hamiltonian does not commute. Time dependent Hamiltonian that actually commutes. U of t t0 is given by a natural extension of what we had before. R dot depends on H, R is an integral of H as well, but the H at different times commute anyway, so this must be true. There's no place where you can get a contribution, because R dot is like an H, and here's anintegral of H. But here is the claim R dot commutes with R. Claim R dot and R commute. something that makes sense. U of t and t0. I'll write the answer and explain how it looks, and then you will see that it's OK. It's interesting. But it probably is not the most practical way you can solve this problem. There's an acronym for this thing. T it's called the time ordered exponential. This operator does something to the exponential function. So it's a nice thing that you can write it, and you can prove things about it. But when you have a practical problem, generally that's not the way you solve it. But in terms of completeness, it's kind of pretty in that you go from the exponential to the time ordered exponential. And I think you'll see more of this in 806. So that's basically our solution for H and for the unitary operator U. And what we're going to do now is turn to the Heisenberg picture of quantum mechanics. Yes, questions? AUDIENCE: Why does R dot [INAUDIBLE]? PROFESSOR: Because that's really a property of integrals. solutions? PROFESSOR: Yes, pretty much. Because at the end of the day, this is a first order matrix differential equation. So it's a collection of first order differential equations for every element of a matrix. It's pretty much the same as you have before. If you know the operator at any time, initial time, with the differential equation you know it at a little bit time later. So the operator is completely determined if you knows it initially and the differential equations. So I think it's completely analogous. The Heisenberg picture of quantum mechanics is not something that you necessarily invent from the beginning. It all begins by considering a Schrodinger operator As hat, which is s is forSchrodinger. The time dependent matrix elements of the operator As or the matrix element of this time dependent operator between the time equals 0 states. This operator is sufficiently important that this operator is called the Heisenburg version of the operators s. Has time dependence, and it's defined by this equation. It is obtained by acting with a unitary operator. whole thing is the same. So this is something very useful and we'll need it. One more comment, expectation values. Comment number four on expectation values, which is something you've already-- it's sort of the way we began the discussion and wanted to make sure it's clear. So we say that the Schrodinger expectation value is equal to the Heisenberg expectation value. We right it in the bottom, but we mean the top equation. And we use it that way. difficult sometimes. So what we try to do in order to simplify that is find an equation that is satisfied by the Heisenberg operator, a time derivative equation. We want to calculate ih bar d dt of the He Eisenberg operator. And so what do we get? Well, we have several things. Remember, the Schrodinger operator can have a bit of time dependence. So let's take the time derivative of all this. So you would have three terms. ihBar dU dagger dt As U plus U dagger As dU dt plus-- with an ihbar-- U dagger ih Bar dAs minus dt and U.