Okay folks let's get started how's everybody doing pretty good Santa Claus has come to town and you know Santa does with naughty kids Hees them finals he gives them finals. He gives them very evil finals is what he does okay so look out for Santa Claus he's really a really a bad guy. Let's see let's think about a couple of things in terms of announcements and we have a couple surprises today one of which is standing in front of you with all this on and there's more surprises as well. I've written the exam it has 150 points it has um the first section which is the short answer has 75 points that's half of the exam. The second section is the problem solving section has 36 points and the last section which are the longer answer has 39 points now it hasn't been duped yet so there may be some changes. One of those changes I'm kind of got to decide today is will we have an extra credit question or not I don't know so maybe you guys can help convince me today. I think this looks like a like an average exam in that respect if you did not get a note card on uh Wednesday when I passed them out uh I don't have them here you'll have to come to my office to get them from me I will remind you that with the exam you have to turn in a note cards that you got from me. If you don't or use a different card or something you will lose points and again I need to make sure that you're using these cards and you're not passing them on to your roommates because that's that's important. Glycogen phosphor is U an enzyme that's regulated in several ways. It exists in two forms it exists in the glycogenosphor a form which is the form that has the phosphate on that people describe as the more active and it has the form without the phosphate known as the glycogens phosphor B that people say is less active. Def phosphorilation involves a kise or phosphatase right the r&t involve allosteric affectors okay all right okay so that's where we start now. There are a variety of what are called glycogen storage diseases and these diseases arise as a result of efficiency of certain enzymes. The one I think is the most interesting is actually mcardle's disease gunite. A person lacking glycogen phosphor in their muscle loses ability to do strenuous exercise. The person with McArdle disease sees ADP levels go high and then it falls meaning that the cells are catching up and making ATP now for that last chance at a CD my question to you is what's making this possible. the Cory cycle right what does the Corey cycle do glutose the liver has a normal enzyme right and so when the muscles start running out of energy what happens oh wow we need some glucose they can't get glucose from breaking down of glycogen but the liver sure as he can do that and the Cory cycle kicks in okay so in essence it's a a backwards thing to the lactate that you talked about but it's the fact that the phosphor in the liver is perfectly normal that makes sense.  heard before okay so um you guys know I like the Beatles I write a lot of stuff to Beatles music and you know the Beatles were like this but I really think they should have been like this. Let me introduce the next bees that are going to turn the music world upside down through the bio comical choir please come down I have some people to help me sing today so they're going to drown me out yes Applause is appropriate yes thank you thank you let me introduce our participants including one person in the class starting with Santa on the end this is Bonnie. Valeria and Linda so uh thank them all for uh thank you all for coming to help me with this I thought about you know introducing them you know we think about flash mobs I thought maybe we could just call these guys the world's first flush mob you know but that might be a little mean so I didn't do that so okay so we're going to do some of Britney's favorite hits we're oops we'reGoing to do it again and you guys know the rule about singing loud right okay. 5m I'll have my car pack with information so I don't have to memorize it and I'll feel like aart with my party just one to go and then ho I'll be all right I think you got it thank you. [Applause] oh yes thank you thank you [Music] sh if if if you're too crowded for the final and I don’t get a chance to say it I hope you have a great holiday and I will see you next time thank you indeed you too study hard.