Expectations play a huge role in economics, says Ricardo Caballero. Expectations about future conditions play a big role in the decision of all economic actors. This is going to be a very compressed version, adapted version, of chapters 15 and 16. But in terms of material mapping into the book, those are the relevant chapters. The main idea here is that the IS-LM model as we have described it up to now really overweights the present. It's quite clear that the reason firms invest is not because of the current condition. Milton Friedman: What really matters to you in a consumption decision is not so much your current income, but it's what you expect to get on average during your lifetime. How wealthy you are will pin down more or less the consumption you have more than yourcurrent income. And the very rich often often have no income at least at least labor income. All the returns on assets come from the return on assets, again, they mostly borrow against that. You have a lot of human capital, so that's also a very important concept. Investments that give you a return, a quick return, are worth more than things that have a pay-off in the very long run. The decision, for example, of buying a machine needs to look at the price of the machine right now and then at the expected present discounted value of the cash flows. The market doesn't need to have expectations, about the interest rate it needs to decide whether to invest or not, RICARDO CABALLERO says. But I said, but there is something that I could look at and that I really know that I can't really know in the market. In principle, a better investment function-- remember, we wrote an investment function as investment, a function of output, current output, and then the interest rate. The higher is V, the higher is the expected present discounted value of buying a machine given the price, the larger is the investment. In practice, current cash flows also matter a lot, OK? So in the same sense as in the case of the consumption function, we said, in principle, it's only wealth that matters. But in practice, there's lots of consumers that are financially constrained. So current income also matters. much or is not as optimistic as the firm is and so on. So it may not borrow-- the firm may not be able to borrow as much as it would want. The bank may say, you know, I'm going to be more conservative here since I'm lending you the money. And one way that firms use, actually, to get around financial constraints is simply by returning-- retaining their earnings, meaning they generate a cash flow, and they save. So if current activity is high, sales are high, firms are less likely to be financially constrained. More realistic model. So you go back to IS-LM and put this type of consumption function and investment functions, and they're going to make a lot of sense. Again, the concept of something persistent-- persistent things should matter a lot more than temporary things. And the same is true for interest rates. If I expect-- since interest rates are high today, but we expect them to go down in the near future, then that's not going to affect a lot the discounting of future profits. If the Fed cuts the interest rate but doesn't persuade anyone that this rate will remain low in the future, then it is going to get very small effect on output. However, if we convince people that there will be future changes, that the rates will remain lower for a long time, that means that this IS now will shift to the right. So again, for central banks, it's a lot like-- it's mostly about expectations management. It can be quite tricky here, actually. It may be a big cut in interest rates that may be an anticipation of expansion. example is abused by almost anyone that wants to cut taxes and things like that. But there are experiences. There is a whole spectrum of experiences. But in situations that are as extreme as this one, it clearly proved to be very effective. So that's that. So the role of this lecture was to say something that I sort of should have said earlier on, but I would have been a bit confusing. But it's very important. Expectations plays play a central role in economics. In particular, expectations influence aggregate demand. was expansionary. That was contractionary. But it was overwhelmed or offset, more than offset by the improvement in the outlook that you had. And that also happens with monetary policy. Countries that have high inflation problems and so on sometimes get-- and they have to go through dramatic tightenings. Yes, most of them get very short-lived recession. But sometimes they are veryshort-lived recessions because eventually the reduction of the instability caused by high and unstable inflation sort of ends up dominating any direct contractionary effect.