Professor Martin: Fluorescence is the emission of light not associated with heat. Luminescence is the general term; fluorescence is a little bit more specific. There are different types of luminescence, and you'll get to see some of those varieties. Professor Martin will give you one that has even more imaging in it-- you'll sort of really get to understand where these pretty magical reagents come from, he says. He'll also talk about how protein engineering was done to make these macromolecules. Bioluminescence is a biological reaction that causes luminescence. The first thing to learn about fluorescence is how to spell fluorescence. It actually is fluor, F-L-U-O-R-E-S. The important part is the first part. So make it look like you know what you're talking about and spell it correctly. It's one of those-- there's two or three amazingly amazing things that happen in the ocean at night, says the professor. common typos in people's slides. One of them is spelling fluorescence wrong and the other one is spelling complement wrong. fluorescence is a key point. It's the absorption of light energy by a molecule. Once that molecule has absorbed light, there's a very transient period until the molecule lets out energy in the form of light. And then we'll talk about the application of antibody reagents with respect to fluorescence in the electromagnetic spectrum. And we're going to look at some fluorescent dyes in a little bit more detail in a minute. DNA ethidium bromide is a dye that can get into cells. We need to be careful of it because if it gets absorbed through our skin, it could get into our cells. And it could interfere with replication and other cellular processes. Because of this, there's been quite a revolution in the work done with DNA binding agents that bind a little differently and are way less toxic. The new dyes are known as DAPI and HOECHST, H-O-E-C-H-S-T. cyan blue. So that's at a shorter wavelength from the ethidium bromide. We know intercalation is perpendicular to the axis of the DNA. So where, looking at this, do you think these bind? A while ago when I was talking about the structure of DNA, I like to think of DNA as having two grooves, two places where things combine to it. And so these compounds would be known to bind in the minor groove. And in fact, they bind in particular regions of DNA where there's AT, not GC. Professor Martin will focus on the technological side of antibodies. antibodies are agents of the human adaptive immune system. They have been exploited intensively to study biology. In two or three lectures time, Professor Martin will talk about the nuts and bolts of the immune cells. And how it mounts a response to disease and other features. The lectures will be held at the University of California, San Diego, in the evenings and in the weekends. For more information on the lectures, visit the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services website. The adaptive immune system is an amazing system where you can do combinatorial biology and basically recognize any target entity you're interested in. There are a bunch of different cells that are produced from the pluripotent hematopoietic cells. But what we're going to focus right in on are the B cells. These are the cells of the immune system that produce soluble antibodies. And when you challenge a B cell population with a foreign entity, the B cell populations will go into gear to produce antibodies that very specifically recognize that foreign target.