CASEY RODRIGUEZ: We proved these two theorems last time, and we used them for-- and we had a couple of applications of them. So the first theorem, simple theorem, was that a sequence converges to x if and only if the limit as n goes to infinity of the absolute value of xn minus x goes to 0. And then we also had the squeeze theorem, that if you have three sequences-- a sub n, b sub n,. and x sub n. to n of n choose k, x to the n minus k y to the k. And here n chooses k-- this is equal to n factorial over k factorial divided by n minus-- times n minusk factorial. So using that, we can then define how to take a real number to a rational power-- although there needs to be something that's checked to make sure this is well-defined, because you can always write a rational number not uniquely as one integer over another. positive real number to a positive real number or to a real number of power doesn't require the introduction of the exponential or logarithm. We're just going to use the basic properties of exponents throughout all this, so we don't-- we haven't even talked about continuity, or derivatives, or anything like that. So for the first one, we'll prove this actually just using the definition of the limit, which, remember, means for every epsilon positive there, we should be able to find a capital number. the binomial theorem. Let xn equal n to the 1/n minus 1, which we note is bigger than or equal to 0 for all n. So my goal I want to show is limit as x as n goes to infinity of x sub n equals 0, because then that proves that this converges to 0. And since this is equal to its absolute value, that means that n to  1 over 1 equals 1. And we'll use that inequality to get a little bit of a different inequality that we'll used for number 3. they're always non-negative as well. This sum is always bigger than or equal to 1 term from the sum. So it's bigger than  equal to k equals 2 [INAUDIBLE] y2-- you'll see-- x sub n squared. Now, the limit as n goes to infinity of 2 over n minus 1 is 0. Square root of that also converges to 0. That's a fact we did from the end of last time. So this whole thing converged to 0, by the squeeze theorem. And that completes the proof. Convergent sequences are bounded, so-- and they have convergent subsequences. Limsup and liminf are also two important objects that arise in analysis. If they exist, there are going to be certain limits, so it's not clear that they exist at all to begin with. But we'll show that they always do exist. We define limsup x sub n, and sometimes I'll write n goes to infinity underneath. And the liminf is similar, except it's now with infs. The smallest thing in a set is a lower bound for this set, so if you like the Archimedean property, you can always find something from the set less than that. So let's look at two examples of what's a little bit and let me just make a few remarks. So we're looking at now the set 1 over k, where n is-- where k is bigger than or equal to n. So the limsup of minus 1 to the n is 1. The liminf equals 0. The supremum is equal to 1/n. So as n goes to infinity, the limit of the supremum here is 0. To get your hands on something, it doesn't require you to show something as strong as showing there is a sequence converging to that. It says that what you really need to do, and which is much more straightforward, or simpler, or impossible really, is to show that that sequence of inputs that you put into your machine to get the outputs is a bounded sequence. So that's enough of that bit of rambling about why this theorem is so useful. It's also useful in the study of PDEs, which is what I study. than or equal to 1 simply by how this is defined as a supremum, and by the exercise from assignment 3. a sub 1 minus 1 is not an upper bound for the set a sub k's. Therefore, I should be able to find an element from this set strictly bigger than that. Since a sub 2 plus 1 equals the supremum of the x of k, there exists an n sub 3 bigger than n sub 2, such that a sub n sub 1 plus 1, minus now a third, is less than x sub nSub 3.