Last week we looked at the we first saw our first magic formula which you've probably forgotten because it was a wonderful weekend. The Machinery I provided you is powerful enough to solve pretty much any kinematics problem because it's based purely on Geometry angular velocity is a kind of a madeup concept that just simplifies the math. The rotating Theta Dot multiplied by you know the Le lever arm right gives you a velocity but you can see how it kind of slaughtered into place so we introduced the angle of velocity like this.  angular velocity is the angular of velocity frame B with respect to frame a right okay so we saw that for the first time now a little bit on the low of angular velocity that you've seen in previous classes but we we Plunge in anymore um the first thing is can of Point have an angular velocity now can a point have a velocity yes can a frame have a Velocity kind of no because if a frame's rotating some point different points will have different velocities so yeah a frame can have aVelocity but doesn't really mean much. Sam: If I rotate about one axis a certain amount 30° and then rotate about another axis 30° right if I reverse the sequence they don't add up but if I rotate. about oneaxis like a tenth of a degree and then rotated about another. axis a ten of adegree and then I reverse. the sequence actually come pretty close all right so it turns out that infini dismal angles do add up so while in general rotation about different angles right it doesn't different axes doesn't adding up infini. dismal rotations do. the final you know in terms of that initial frame get it and W so we introduced the the velocity and then the next thing we did last last in the last class was I revealed to you this magic formula I said if you have a vector let's call it n and you want to take its derivative with respect to the frame a now if you the way we did it was we would rewrite the basis vectors of frame a right interms of A1 A2 a lot of math lot of derivatives that's how we didIt uh but and actually it was Andrew asked he said isn't there a nice way to kind of simplify the derivatives here it is. Let's assume I have a vector let's call it n and that's that it's given to us for some reason naturally. Let's assume n is equal to sum U1 which is not a constant time B1 + U2 * B2 now what I'm trying to prove is this formula how would I go about doing it someone wake up everyone's asleep wake up wake up yeah let's Express exactly we're going to express B. We're looking for a d by DT of N and look n is expressed in terms of B1 and B2 that's really not nice. here so will you please expand it for me what does that come out to be this is the left hand side of that formula right and we'll do the right hand side separately and show that the two are the same I'm trying to prove it to you right so I'm not you know I'm doing just very boring stuff but we need to do it just establish it. U1 do cosine Theta right minus U Theta do sin Theta and Below what do I get mhm Theta one here this should be a Theta dot right yeah okay so these are the terms. Let's just imagine I'm doing it right I'm standing at this and spinning a basketball on my finger the room the world the Earth is a frame the basketball is another frame the kind of the U you know you guys need to be like Neo in Matrix have you seen that movie right it's very very important if you understand Matrix algebra you need to see Matrix all right so go see Matrix and you know how Neil kind of you know he when he's totally you know after Lawrence fishburns you know kind of trained him Etc he goes down and he can see he stops seeing buildings and he sees these characters you know flowing instead of the building right he sees right through all the video game right so similarly so what others see is a is a basketball spinning what you see once you're done with the scores is you will see an embedded V embedded basis frame. can are you following me here can you see it right anyone not see it I'll it's basically all I'm saying is that here's me this is my finger right here's the basketball okay my hand here're the basketball it's spinning what you guys should see is these embedded vectors basis vectors sticking out so you'll only see kind of the surface you know sticking out right and then you see these two rotating like that right but that guy stationary. So in your mind there's an angle of velocity that that basketball has with respect to the ground got it now if I was spinning it this way which I couldn't. yeah okay using um frames uh using angle of velocity so the problem was we have the ground, the spider and the Frisbee. We characterize this situation with three parameters okay and the parameters are the positions of the center of the frisbee and the distance of the spider. We're using three parameters but in the end the SP spider is only going to have two degrees of freedom right but that's okay because when you get the velocity of theSpider it'll have only two components when get the acceleration only have two components so it'll work itself out. can kind of do it that way but the simple way to do it is to simp well you know it doesn't matter we can just write this as B take the whole term d by DT of lb1 plus what quick hm I'm hearing a hesitant murmur not the yeah I was mumbling something a moment ago I'll tell you what I mean what I was trying to say uh cross lb1 what is a Omega B so we can rewrite a Omega b as Theta dot B3 and so this whole thing comes down to I'm going to write the answer here to save a Blackboard. We're going to derive a very general formula for something moving on something that's moving get it no seriously it's going to be a general formula. If one of you invents a new term we'll name it after you okay and so far I've used these words coris and all that I kind of called them out without telling you a lot more about them right so what we'regoing to do now is take a break in the following way I'm going to show you some videos showing you the coris force when I'm when you're done with these videos um you will a totally understand what the cholis not effect sorry not force cholis acceleration is. The Coriolis effect is a phenomenon that occurs when an object is deflected by the Earth's rotation. This video shows what happens when four kids sit on a merry go round and then someone starts spinning the Mero around. The path of the ball appears straight to someone sitting on it but to an observer on the rotating Earth the path of an object appears to curve to the left. This exemplifies the Corola Force. The videos are the work of two dudes who went to a high school and they put a bilard a pool table on top of the mound and they did some experiments. totally into it so they don't stop but the real the funny thing is that the kids actually can't see all this because they're below the level of the pool table so they're like jumping off you know okay so let me explain what's going on here so it turns out and then we're going to do the super magic formula in about a minute right. With respect to someone standing in space and not rotating with the planet earth right so if you're standing above the North Pole and you're looking down at the Earth rotating it's like a mer around. Water rotates in One Direction or not in the northern hemisphere another Direction on the southern hemisphere is that right is that valid yes or no why not yeah it's turns out that in that scale in fact there is a Coriolis effect but the slight deviation angle is so slight it's like a fractions of a degree per meter at that scale that it doesn't build up enough to really impact the direction in which the vortex takes place. The vortex is created far more by asymmetries in the sink or by rotation that was created earlier that can of remained right. Theta Dot and an l dot term get it then there is a deflection in the B2 Direction in the way we've written it now I'll give you the general formula and you know B2 what it is ETC it become more clear any questions about coris by the way in the last class I told you this anecdote I said that artilleries artillery guns right in the 1700s 1800s um they would have to compensate for directionality because of the coris effect it turns out that that is true. What is the force that the astronaut feels you know or what force must the astronaut exert in order to move in a straight line with respect to a spaceship or a space shuttle or something? That's the question we seek to answer. What we're going to do is basically generalize the Frisbee problem. We will Define as usual and you'll find this all repetitive because really it's all the same stuff over and over again just getting more and more compacted with more insights kind of teased out of it. around Etc they use this method they use the symbology a b and all that right very few undergraduate courses on the planet uh learn teach the mechanisms that you've learned and understood right this is it that's all there is to on the kinematic side now Kan also has a way of doing Dynamics which I won't tell you I'll do the Newtonian approach uh but you certainly have it okay so the problem we seek to solve now is a your frame a a I'm actually trying to derive a general formula that captures what we did for the frisbe you have a frame B. Andrew: I'm going to write out the super magic formula actually this is it okay the super Magic formula is this and I'll name the terms and we'll finish it next time a acceleration of Q is equal to the acceleration of Point P which is the fix point plus b a Q Plus. A is kind of my guardian angel if I make typos or he catches me a just a PhD student is getting his PhD in U in wiress sensing oh oh sorry sorry sorry Simone I'll be out in a minute one more excuse huh just one minute sorry thanks Andrew next time set your watch 3 minutes fast like mine. yeah sorry and plus this thing okay we'll end now because Professor Socrates needs to take over this is it this is correct acceleration of P acceleration of Q with respect to B Oiler coris centripedal and you know why it doesn't go to zero because I'm not taking a Omega B cross a omeg B. I'm taking a omega B cross this whole term which is at 90° to a OmegaB got it got it? Yeah sorry and Plus this thingOkay we'llend now because professor Socrates need to takeover.