Professor: In almost all cases when you address atoms, you do two photon courses because a photon is scattered. In reality, it is a two photon process and not two single photon processes. If you would not do any rotating wave approximation, how many terms would we get? Audience: Eight. PROFESSOR: Eight? I think it's multiplicative because we have four processes involving one-- oops. I wanted to say 16, 4 times 4. But now I would say in the first step, which is to the intermediate level, four at frequency, which makes eight. just tell you what is special about two photons. I focus now on a situation, and that's the most common situation in the laboratory, where there is a near-resonant intermediate state. If this intermediate state is resonant with omega 1, then we only want to consider now the process where the first step to the intermediate step is driven by the field e1. So therefore, we have now a transition rate, which is Fermi's Golden Rule. This is the delta function. I called it the function f because I want to discuss the spectral profile a minute. photon is emitted in a stimulated way and not absorbed. And therefore, our detuning is the detuning from the Raman resonance. If you're unlucky and don't choose your lasers wisely, the two laser photons could get you high up into an electronically excited state. And this may have some detrimental effect, depending what you want to do. But in general, I would say if you have more than one process, there is no interesting interference term. You just get two different rates. They're not leading to the same final state. coherence. We can say the photon omega 2 cannot be absorbed by the initial state. omega 1 mixes in with a certain probability, the state k into the ground state. And from this admixture, we can absorb omega 2. The real state k is somewhere else. And so it looks like, actually, now a two-level system, where we go from the dashed line-- called the virtual state-- to the final state b. But in this kind of picture I just suggested, I start with a dress state a. But what is relevant is only kind of this admixtures. Two-photon processes are the most important in the field, says MIT physicist. Raman process involves one photon stimulated, one photon spontaneous. When we simply want to change the momentum of an atom, we are not changing the internal state of the atom, he says. "We are going back to the same state, but it may have a different internal state," he adds. "It may be important for a lot of research within the CUA research group," he says of MIT's accelerator program. cycling transition. Well, when the atom goes up and then emits a photon on a cycling transition, there is recoil involved. So actually what you're doing is on the cycling transition,. You cycle it through many, many spontaneous Raman processes. So this is the correct description of resonant fluorescence and Rayleigh scattering. Any questions? Good. I've just mentioned that when we do Reyleigh scattering, we have to consider that the photons have momentum, and this takes us to another state. well, you give the atom an infinite mass by tightly connecting it to the laboratory. And this is what tight confinement in an ion or atom trap does. But now, we are kind of going beyond this restriction. We are now saying, OK, now we allow the atom to move. And we can deal with that by simply saying when the atom has a velocity v, we can transform-- we can just use the Galilean transformation and say OK, the physics is the same. However, the atom, due to its velocity, sees a slightly different frequency. Two-photon absorption or Raman processes are like single-ph photon transitions. If you arrange for the two photons to be absorbed from opposite directions, we reach the situation where the Doppler shift is really zero. So this is one of the handful of methods of practical importance for eliminating the first order Dopple effect. But once you have completely eliminated first order, you are then limited by the second order effect, which comes from relativistically speaking, the clock ticks differently. line, which is sufficiently sharp, sufficiently narrow, and also insensitive to magnetic fields and electric fields. This is the case for hydrogen. And, actually, with some advance in the numeric calculation of wave functions and all that, it may also be possible to do it with helium. But this sort of tells you what the choices if you want to test fundamental physics or determine fundamental constants. In all atoms other than helium and hydrogen, you would be limited by the infeasibility of many electron calculations. If you allow in your head any picture of first absorption then emission, that's where all the wrong answers come from. Photon in, photon out-- should be described together, unless you have some form of de-coherence which decouples the two processes. But that's a wonderful opening to our next chapter, namely coherence. To what extent-- we just discussed one aspect of it and we come back to this in this chapter-- to what extent is the photon a two-photon? Coherence is an important technique and important tool for measurements. Coherence exists if there is a well-defined phase. It can be two amplitudes describing two different atoms, or it can be the amplitudes of two states within the same atom. When we observe an interference, that means we obesrve-- and this is how we read out of a coherence. This is actually intricately related to the fact that we can obtain more precise information about the energy levels of systems. KR: There is a certain randomness in spontaneous emission when we go to the laboratory and look at the spontaneously emitted photons. KR: What is really the information-- the phase information-- which we have in a photon, which has been spontaneously emitted? KR: Is it always the fundamental reason or is there no fundamental reason? It's only a kind of reason of ignoring information, taking a partial trace?KR: If you ignore the position where the atom has scattered the light-- if atoms scatter light and they are wavelengths apart, then you have optical path length. driven by the operator-- the dipole operator, e-- and e, the electric field, has the phase of the laser beam. After the laser pulse is over, the photonic part of the wave function is a vacuum. We have no photon in our cavity. And now we wait and we allow spontaneous emission. And spontaneous emission is nothing else than the time evolution with the operator I just discussed with you. It's a completely coherent Rabi oscillation. I just allow half a cycle to evolve. And the result of that is, well, nothing happened to this part. the atom has been perfectly matched. Perfectly mapped onto the photon field. And the one thing we have to discuss on Wednesday is the whole of the phase phi. Phi-- we started out by phi being the phase of the laser. And if the laser is in a coherent state, I will talk about on Wednesday, in a homodyne measurement we can measure phi to any accuracy you want. And this is what I referred to as the fundamental limit of spontaneous emission because we have not lost any coherence.