Professor: Today we're going to talk about a variation, although related to generic rigidity. The idea is we think about rigidity-- does a linkage move or not-- to the first order. If the motion exists, surely you can take this derivative and evaluate it. You need some smoothness. But if there's a way to get started moving, that doesn't actually mean you could actually move. The notion will, stated in terms of motions-- you can think about this in the absence of a motion. with motions, we were supposed to preserve edge lengths. In the book, we take the derivatives. We work out all the details. But I'll just tell you what the condition is, because ultimately all we need is this condition. I'm just defining an infinitesimal motion to be a velocity vector for every vertex, such that this property holds. This is a dot product between two vectors. If you have two vectors, a and b, you take their dot product, this is just something like this. general, we want this thing to equal that thing. If you rearrange terms, that's the same thing as this property. I just take this one minus this one, and set it equal to zero, and you get that. OK, so this is some intuition. Maybe it makes sense, maybe not. In the end, this is all I care about. And it's useful to realize that it's a first derivative of a motion, because what that implies is that if there's a motion-- a real, honest to goodness motion-- then there's an infinitesimal motion. This is the idea of a rigidity matrix. So we have a whole bunch of these constraints, one for every edge. And whenever you have a bunch of linear constraints, you can write them as R-- some big matrix-- times the velocity. And what we care about, what we're trying to solve for, is d. We want to know how many-- this is basically the number of degrees of freedom in infinitesimal land, which is not quite reality, but it's close. so important, because it's so easy algorithmically. Things become a lot easier. Let me draw you one example just to show what happens at non-generic points. So these two points are pinned relative to each other. And then this thing is taut, so it can't move. But to the first order, it can move. And it's allowed to move straight up or down-- anything perpendicular to this segment. That's always true. And if you perturb this example, infinitesimal rigidity will give you the right answer. reverse holds. If there's a motion, there's always an infinitesimal motion. If you're infiniteimally rigid, you're always rigid. In the ideal setting, we're going to have d n columns-- so let's say 2 times n columns in two dimensions. And we're supposed to have 2n minus 3 rows. So it's close, but in general, they should differ by about this much. So they're almost square, actually. So maybe go over here. I don't need the rigidity matrix any more. Tensegrity is a generalization of a linkage and where we allow three kinds of edges. It's a space of all possible configurations where these three things hold-- give you desired lengths for each of these things. A path through that space is going to be a motion, just like before. The only way to move the square or in fact in any generic configuration is to move it in any convex or convex direction. The other one will get shorter, but one of them will get longer. dot product, and I claim this is really measuring-- it's a number, and it's measuring the sign's change in length of that edge. So if C of v minus C of w dot product with d of v plus d of w is greater than or equal to 0, that's the property I want for struts. That says it gets longer or stays the same to the first order. Now of course, in reality it might get slightly shorter, but not in the first derivative. All you need to know is it there are fast algorithms to solve this, also. In a rigid structure, the edges can prevent a motion. This is the notion of being in equilibrium. Let me draw a picture. Here's a rigid linkage. I'm not going to say yet which edges are struts and cables. But assuming I've got this right-- and I didn't. I got it backwards. All right, now, it would be nice to say if you have an equilibrium stress and only rigid if this is true. But that's not true. This goes back to 1981, 1981. There's been a lot of excitement about origami tesselations since the mid '90s. Chris Palmer revitalized them, and then tons of people are looking at them. And there's this cool algorithm for building them. So you take some tessellation like these squares, and triangles, and hexagons-- some collection of polygons. And then you twist them a little bit, all the same amount. Then you just connect the dots. But when does it work? There is a new result from the summer that it works for some choice of angles. So I had some flexibility-- how much do I shrink and turn? But this will work for some choice of turn and shrink amount, if and only if your graph or your initial tessellation is a spiderweb. So that's kind of fun-- a little bit origami out of linkages and tensegrities. All right, then we move on to another characterization of stresses, which is polyhedral liftings. A polyhedral lifting is going to work if I have a non-crossing configuration. Because I forbid crossings, I end up decomposing space. In general, you're going to have a lot of non-triangles. Those should all remain planar. One thing you can do-- there's some freedom here. If you have any lifting or, for example, you could not lift them at all. Set all the z-coordinates to zero. That's fine. You could also just lift everything onto some other plane, and generally have a rigid motion of freedom. You can't translate around, but you have one two-degree two-rotational freedoms, I think.  Maxwell proved this, or claimed it in 1864. Theorem is there's a one-to-one correspondence between the equilibrium stresses and polyhedral liftings. So far we've been allowing crossings, except for this very last theorem. Now we begin this section where I forbid crossings between the edges, just like what that picture was. Prevent this, and this is a constraint on the configuration space now. I'm going to use basically everything I proved today to prove a big theorem-- the Carpenter's Rule Theorem. configurations where no two edges cross. This is a smaller version of our old configuration space. It's still defined by polynomial inequalities. Two edges either share a vertex or not. And that's it. But they're not allowed to touch anywhere else. And now what we care about is something called a locked linkage. And a linkage is locked if its configuration space is disconnected. If I have some configuration here, I can move to any other configuration here. And same over here, but there's no way to get from this configuration to that configuration. If we have a linkage, and say we take a configuration of that linkage, let's say it's of maximum degree 2, there's a motion that straightens out. So if I can straighten all the paths, I can definitely get from anywhere to anywhere. There's one catch which I didn't say here. I need to add outermost. When you have nesting like this, you're in trouble. This guy is not going to get straightened out. It could be super long. It may not have room to straighten out inside that convex chamber. Tensegrities-- struts-- will force things to be expansive. If initially you're non-crossing, you will be non-Crossing forever. This lets you not worry about crossings. You just have to worry about distances. We use just, is this thing rigid or flexible at all? And that's the power of all this rigidity stuff, just telling whether something can move a little bit, and then just doing that over and over again, you can actually go all the way, and get to straight or convex. to show that it's flexible. But it's rigid if and only if this is true. This will actually always be true-- the corresponding linkage is rigid. If I turn them all into bars, this thing's not moving at all. So fact, this second condition doesn't really matter. What matters is the stresses. Now stresses always exist. But I claim actually pretty much all the stresses have to be 0, at least on the cables and the struts, which is what I care about here. Carpenter Rule: In four dimensions, you can't get locked in things like valleys and other things like that. If everything's a valley, something's going to go wrong at the top picture, because you've got to have mountains, like, turn around. The only way the whole thing can't be flat is if your polygon is already convex, and then we're done. The Carpenter Rule: Next, we're going to talk about the other situations, and what happens with degree 3. still buy them at the hardware store. That's it. You can't buy them online. You have to buy them from the store. They are not available online. They can be bought at the store, but you have to pay for them in cash. They're not available on the internet. You must buy them in the store to get them. You cannot buy them on the Internet. They must be bought from the hardware stores. That is it. They have to be bought in the stores.