The two-level problem is one that's exactly solved. It's one of our favorite exactly solved problems, although it doesn't seem to have any physical relevance. So we can take a two by two Hamiltonian and exactly diagonalize it. And that's done using a unitary-- or actually, in the case that we looked at, orthogonal-- transformation. And so it's a rotation in state space. And the rotation angle is an explicit function of the parameters in the Hamiltonian. by two and does transformations. And it keeps doing that until the off diagonal matrix element is small. So that means that it doesn't matter how big the problem is. You just have to have a computer that's patient or fast and it will crank out the results. Now you need to know how to use the t matrices, or the t dagger matrix. These things enable you to solve basically any problem in time independent quantum mechanics and a lot of problems in time dependent quantum mechanics. So there is another way, and that's going to solve an n-level problem. We're not allowed to determine the wave function by any experiment. But we are able to observe the energy levels and properties of the Hamiltonian. And from that, we can calculate everything, everything that we could possibly observe, including things we didn't observe. So it's really powerful. It's a way of taking the totality of observations that you're going to make and saying, yes, I have looked inside this molecule. And I've determined everything that I'm allowed to. determine. you the tools to be able to take any arbitrary spectrum and extract from it the crucial information. In the last lecture, we talked a little bit about matrix mechanics, and that involved linear algebra. And there is notation. And the notation is unfamiliar, and you have to learn how to use it. And so we have for example-- the analogy to the Schrodinger equation in matrix language-- where we have the Hamiltonian, an eigen vector, and this eigenvalue. And our friend is this unitary transformation where t dagger is equal to t inverse. the most common, doable problem, and it's also something that one does in experiments. You can set up a problem so that, with a short pulse, you prepare the system at t equals 0 in something that's not an eigenstate. With perturbation theory, it doesn't matter that the computer could solve for the t and t dagger matrices. But there's no insight. You just get the numbers. I like to say that spectroscopy is not about creating archival tables of observed transitions. It's about understanding how things work. bunch of problems-- I'll go over here-- that are related to the particle in a box. And so one of the things that you might do is round off the corners because physical systems don't have discontinuities. And we have to work out the matrix elements of the Hamiltonian that correspond to these extra things and then figure out what to do to get the eigenvalues and eigenfunctions. So the particle-in-a-box is a whole family of problems that you could solve using perturbation theory. n atoms, there's 3n degrees of freedom. There's 3 translations and 3 rotations. And so that leaves 3n minus 6. And all of that is vibrations. So we have many normal modes, and it's not too surprising that, if you stretch one normal mode, it'll affect the frequency of another. So perturbation theory is really valuable for polyatomic molecules. And that's the bulk of the examples that I worked in the non-lecture notes for this lecture. a mind numbing, formal derivation. So we start out with this rotary equation. And we say, well, let us expand the Hamiltonian. And let's put a little thing here. This is an exactly solved problem. And what you're going to do is now use the psi n 0 and en 0 to do everything else. And so that means we can deal with all of the interactions among the non-degenerate levels in one fell swoop. Now we can write this as a linear combination of the zero order wave functions. When we do that, we end up with this formula. energy levels that we're sampling in our experiment. So the molecule more or less tells you how to focus on the part that you care about and to get rid of the stuff that is of no trouble whatsoever. And it just contaminates the wave functions a little bit. And if you wanted to know what that contamination is, you could deal with it. So this is the tool that you can use to solve, basically, any problem involving molecules with a potential like a harmonic oscillator at the bottom. levels are that some of the energy levels for the two independent oscillators and the wave functions are the products. So these then turn out to be the zero order states that you use to evaluate all the integrals here. And we have these and A and A dagger operators, which are enabling us to-- we have the operator for coordinate x is proportional to A plus A dagger. So we like these things because we don't have to do any integrals. They're all done for you. Q2 cubed, and those terms usually are not important because they mostly are dealt with under here. Now there's an interesting other thing. The first-order correction to the energy is equal to a diagonal matrix element of the correction term to the Hamiltonian. All of the second-order terms involve squares of matrix elements. The second- order terms you don't know the signs. If there is a first- order correction, you get the sine. And sometimes you know you want to know: is the perturbation like that or the perturbing like that? Is there a barrier or an extra barrier? Non-degenerate perturbation theory works when the energy denominator is large compared to the coupling matrix element. And accidents occur when you have, say, a situation where omega 1 is approximately equal to 2 omega 2. And so you want to really know how to do these sorts of things. So you want the algebra that combines all this horrible stuff according to selection rule that leads to simplification of the formulas. And then once you've got everything sorted according toselection rule, then you can calculate what happens. isn't just blowing smoke. This happens an amazing number of times because stretches are higher frequency than bends. And it's very common for the bending modes to be roughly half or one third the frequency of a stretching mode. And so you get a resonance. So this is special because now it's violating the fundamental approximation of non-degenerate perturbation theory. But it's a two-level interaction. And these resonances have names. There is a Fermi and there is a Darling-Dennison. and extra lines. This is called a spectroscopic perturbation. And so you can learn about some of these coupling terms because, instead of hiding in the forest of these small corrections, you get a big effect. For big molecules, you have a resonance with a dense manifold of levels. All of these levels share, say, the character of the dark state. and so they can all interact with this guy. Now you can get the information you want from this because the width of this thing is related to the number of dark states and their average coupling matrix element. There is this dichotomy between small molecules where the vibrational density of states is always smaller until you get to really high energy. And bigger molecules-- now they're not very big for this sort of thing. And there is the question.about that later. So I think there's a pretty good place to stop because what I try to do is to show you, yes, it can be really complicated. But it's something that you can do, and you can project out the coupling constants that you want. names that any educated physical chemist will know to say, oh, that's the Bixon-Jortner. And they're still alive. They're still doing beautiful stuff. But anyway, that is all I want to say today. I will do details on one mode and Morse oscillator in other sorts of things next time. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from. Back To the pageyou came from, Back to thepage you came From. Back into the page.