If certain amount of output can be produced by given amount of inputs, then the same combination of input puts can also be used to produce less amount ofOutput. The key word is feasibility technology represents the feasibilities that the combination of inputs and outputs, that can be achieved in this world even the current level of technology fine. The second is no free lunch. At least 1 input is required to produce some output, or more than you know more than 1 kind of output. Third is non reversibility, what it means is that a production process cannot be reversed. in the process and labor hours spent in the process back. So, in that sense all the production and processes are irreversible. If we have reversibility in the production process, then it would violate the laws of thermodynamics. To produce 1 kg of rice ok, you need either let us say 100 grams of fertilizer or 50 liters of water. To write a software code 1 software code of course, we will have to define what do we mean by 1Software code. It requires either 2 man hour, and this is also not a good example. 200 grams of fertilizer. 2 and 25 liters of water of course, we need land, but that is fixed those are fixed, we are not talking about it only these 2 are variables. So, what I am saying here let me write it in this term this is 100 grams and this is 50 liter and, here it is 200 grams and 25 liter. Student: Should not, has be 2 like 1kg of rice gives 1 and 2. No not give this is 1 kg of price is output. If it is technologically feasible to produce let us say y amount of output. And it is also technologically possible to produce y 1 amount ofOutput. If this is the combination it is feasible to combine them in this way and get some output. If we decrease all the inputs in the same proportion, then output will also decrease. This is example of convexity; let us talk about additivity first. What is additivity? Let us say that a production plan y means, that it gives certain combination of input and output that is feasible. 1 unit of input 2. So, 100 units we can produce by replicating this process 100 times. What we are using basically 150 units of both the input. And what is happening there, we can say 100 units of output we can obtain using t not 1 comma 2 plus 100 minus t not 2 comma 1 and this is where additivity kicks in, we are able to add these to up. Now we will use the divisibility to get the same result for each number. property, we will say that on average if we are using you know 100 times like this on average, we want to produce 1 kg and divisibility is allowed, then what will happened if we divide it by 100, what we get t not by 100. And this will give us 1 kg or 1 unit of output. So, basically t 1 comma 2 1 minus t 2 comma 1 will given us again 1 units of output and this exhibits convexity. The combination is all given here, y is taking care of not only inputs but also output.