The configuration of a particle is given by, or described by, a wave function psi of x. In 3D, the wave function would be a function of all three positions x, y and z. If there are two possible configurations the system can be in, it's possible to find the system in a superposition of those two psi is equal to some arbitrary linear combination alpha psi 1 plus beta psi 2 of X. The superposition principle is an important challenge for us in the next couple of lectures. Professor: Any reasonable function psi of x can be expressed as a superposition of more equal wave functions, or more precisely easily interpretable wave functions. Fourier theorem said look, take any wave function-- take any function, but I'm going to interpret in the language of quantum mechanics. Any function, we're saying, can be express as a. superposition by summing over all possible values of k, all possible different. wavelengths. Professor: There's no such thing as an infinite number of ways to express a function. Any given vector can be expressed as a superposition of some pair of basis vectors. There's no God given basis for the universe. We look out in the universe in the Hubble deep field, and you don't see an arrow going x. So there's no natural choice of basis, but it's sometimes convenient to pick a basis. And similarly, this is an expansion of a function as a sum. And you could have done this in any good space of functions. We'll talk about that more. Professor: Which particle has a larger momentum? Think about it, but don't say it out loud. If it has higher momentum, what do you just intuitively expect to know about its energy? It's probably higher. OK next one. Compared to the wave function psi of x, it's Fourier transform, psi tilde of x contains more information, or less, or the same, or something. So let's vote. A, more information. B, less information. C, same. OK, good you got it. of length l, 0 outside of that region. f has a single well defined wavelengths. Or f is made up of a wide range of wavelengths? Think it to yourself. OK, now before we get talking about it, I want everyone to close their eyes. Or close the eyes of the person next to you. That's fine. And now and I want you to vote. A is f has one well defined wavelength. B isf has a wideRange of wavelengths. It's closer to true. A sine wave is continuous, and it's continuous everywhere, right? It's also differentiable everywhere, because it's a cosine. So how would you ever reproduce a thing with a discontinuity using sines and cosines? Well, you'd need some infinite sum of sine and cosine where there's some technicality about the infinite limit being singular, because you can't do it a finite number of sines or cosines. That function is continuous but its derivative is discontinuous. So it's going to take an infinite number to reproduce that little kink at the edge. question. The question here is look, there's two different things you can be talking about. One is arbitrarily large and arbitrarily short wavelengths, so an arbitrary range of wavelengths. And the other is an infinite number. But an Infinite number is silly, because there's a continuous variable here k. You got an infinitenumber of wavelengths between one and 1.2, right? It's continuous. So which one do you mean? So let's go back to this connection that we got a minute ago from short distance and high momentum. features, I'm going to talk about it as something with large momentum. And that's because in a quantum mechanical system, something with short wavelength is something that carries big momentum. In order to do that, we need to define uncertainty. So that's the optional problem 8 on problem set 2. Other questions? PROFESSOR: Cool, so that's it for the clicker questions. Sorry for the technology fail. So I'm just going to turn this off in disgust. That's really irritating. quantum physicist: Average age is the sum over all possible ages of the number of people with that age times the age divided by the total number. Average need not be an observable value, professor says. Average value of the square of ages is, well, I'm going to do exactly the same thing. It's just a squared, right? 14 squared, 15 squared, 16 square, 16 squares, 16 squared. The expected value of a is equal to the sum of a times the probability of measuring that value. in this fashion or this fashion. And the notation for this is delta a squared. Different probability distributions are going to give me different delta a's. So one thing that's sort of annoying is that when you write delta a, there's nothing in the notation that says which distribution you were talking about. So really it should be parentheses [INAUDIBLE]. PROFESSOR: Yeah, it's just this is notation that's used typically, so I didn't put the parentheses around to alert you to the stupidities of this notation. couple of ways to improve this notation. One way is to write the expected value of x in the state psi, so you write psi as a subscript. Another notation that will come back-- you'll see why this is a useful notation later in the semester-- is this notation, psi. And we will give meaning to this notation later, but I just want to alert you that it's used throughout books, and it means the same thing as what we're talking about given a particular state psi. This is a thing with dimensions of what? Length, right? But over on the right hand side, we have a length and a probability, which is a number, and then another length. So why are we getting something with. dimensions of length, not something with Dimensions of length squared? And the answer is this is not a probability. It is a probability density. So it's got units of probability per unit length. And so what we're doing is we're summing over all such domains the probability times the value. The expectation value of x in the state psi, or psi x psi, can be pronounced one of two ways. It's the same idea, but they have different flavors, right? So whatever your native language is, you've got some analog of this. This means something in a particular mathematical language for talking about quantum mechanics. And this has a different flavor. It carries different implications, and we'll see what that is later. Yeah? Why is there a double notation of psi? Roughly speaking, it's because in computing this expectation value, there's a psi squared. have chosen some other definition of uncertainly. So why this one? And one answer is, indeed, the uncertainty relation works out quite nicely. But then I think important to say here is that there are many ways you could construct quantities. This is a convenient one, and we will discover that it has nice properties that we like. There is no God given reason why this had to be the right thing. I can say more, but I don't want to take the time to do it, so ask in office hours. Professor: It doesn't make sense to say that our particle has a definite position x and correspondingly a definite momentum p. Being in a state with definite position means being in a superposition of states with arbitrary momentum and vice versa. So what we want is we want some good definition of p given that we're working with a wave function which is a function of x. We have a couple of hints. Hint the first is that a wave-- we know that given a wave with wave number k, which is equal 2pi over lambda, is associated to a particle. a wave, a plane wave e to the iks, how do I get h bar k out of it? Note the following, the derivative with respect to x. Multiply by h bar, divide by i, derivative withrespect to x e to ikx. That's suggestive. And I can write this as pe to the ikX. So let's quickly check the units. What are the units of h bar? Momentum times length divided by length number momentum. question slightly differently. We've followed the de Broglie relations, and we've been led to the idea that there's some relationship between the momentum, the observable quantity that you measure with sticks, and meters, and stuff. So if this is supposed to be true in some sense, what is momentum have to do with a derivative? Momentum is about velocities, which is like derivatives with respect to time, right? Times mass. Mass times derivative with respectto time, velocity. So what does it have toDo with the derivative withrespect to position? And this ties into the most beautiful theorem in classical mechanics. algebra, looked at the problem and was like I don't even know what it means in classical mechanics. So she went back to classical mechanics and, from first principles, came up with a good definition of momentum, which turns out to underlie the modern idea of conserved quantities and symmetries. Noether tells us the following statement, to every symmetry-- and I should say continuous symmetry-- to every symmetry is associated a conserved quantity. OK? So in particular, what do I mean by symmetry? Well, for example, translations. x goes to x plus some length l. This could be done for arbitrary length l, but these are translations. These are conservation of momentum. Less trivial is conservation of energy. translate by L. And what translate by L does is it takes f of X and it maps it to f of x minus L. So this is a thing that affects the translation. And why do I say that's a translation by L rather than minus L? Well, the point-- if you have some function like this, and it has a peak at 0, then after the translation, the peak is when x is equal to L. OK? So define this operation, which takes a function of x and translates it by L but leaves it otherwise identical. A derivative with respect to a position is something that tells you, or controls, or generates infinitesimal translations. If you exponentiate it, you get a macroscopic finite translation. In quantum mechanics, momentum is represented by a specific operator, i.e. i times h. And when you work with the rest of the postulates, including what's coming next, you reproduce the real physics of quantum mechanics. And we're going to see these pop up over and over again. a priori did the world have to look like. Physics tells you this is a good model. And to the degree that it doesn't fit the data, it's wrong. This isn't something we derive. This is something we declare. We call it our model, and then we use it to calculate stuff, and we see if it fits the real world. Out, please, please leave. Thank you. [LAUGHTER] I love MIT. I really do. We live in a world governed by probabilities. the momentum. And these coefficients are going to turn out to contain all the information about the probability of the system. This is the probability when norm squared that will measure the system to have momentum k1. So I think the current wave function is something like a superposition of 1/10 psi pirates plus 1 minus is 1/100 square root. To normalize it properly psi no pirates. And I'll leave you with pondering this probability. See you guys next time. [APPLAUSE] your memory. Gainst death and all oblivious enmity shall you pace forth. Your praise shall still find room, even in the eyes of all posterity. So no judgment arise till you yourself judgment arise. You live in this and dwell in lover's eyes. May your day be filled with love and poetry. Whatever state you're in, we will always love you. Signed, Jack Florian, James [INAUDIBLE]. [LAUGHTER] PROFESSOR: Thank you, sir.