Lipids are rich in carbon-carbon and carbon-hydrogen bonds. They are molecules that are mostly hydrophobic. Some of the lipids are what are known as amphipathic, and they include Hydrophobic and hydrophilic components. In this phospholipid structure, they have long chain fatty acids attached via esters to this glycerol unit, so there's one here and the second one here, and then what's known as the polar head group. Semi-permeable membranes are made up through the non-covalent, supramolecular association of phospholipid monomer units. They are self-healing, so if you poke them, you poke a hole in a cellular membrane. Most commonly, things like oxygen or water and other small hydrophobic molecules can pass readily in and out of cells. But other things, things that are charged, Things that are big, need a different mechanism to get into and out. The building blocks of your protein macromolecules comprise 50% of all of the macromolcules. Proteins are too big to dissolve in that membrane through passive mechanisms, so we're going to have to figure out how to get proteins in and out of cells. Neurotransmitters, such as this, this is GABA, or gamma aminobutyric acid, are charged. It just can't get through without a transporter of some kind, and it's actually proteins that end up doing the heavy lifting of the transport processes that we'll see. The amino acids that are encoded in our proteins are known as alpha amino acids. The amino acids are also chiral, but you'll learn more than you ever wanted to know about chirality in 512, so I won't weigh you down with any of those properties. Alanine has a methyl group, for example, where I've shown the R, that would be alanine. And they get increasingly big. Some of them have quite extended size chains. Other ones have side chains with rings with double bonds in them. Amino acids are assembled in a unique linear polymer of defined order, and we designate that defined sequence the primary sequence. The primary sequence determines the fold, and it's the fold of the protein that mandates its function. The fold, the three-dimensional form, defines the function, OK? So that's very important. And I think it's absolutely amazing that with a relatively limited set of building blocks, we can define so many different functions of all the proteins in our body. limited set of building blocks, OK? Now, let's now talk about peptides because one gets a little frustrated looking at single amino acids. They don't tell us so much about the peptidic structure. OK, so this is a dipeptide, two amino acids, and there are some characteristics I want you to remember. When we write out peptides, we always write them N to C. So in that peptide, this would be the carboxyl terminus. Everyone that we always write from left to right, the sequence of peptides. Many of these bonds show free rotations. All of these show freedom of rotation. But the amide, or peptide bond, is unique in that there's restricted rotation about that bond. So it's as if you've got a linear polymer, but every third bond has kind of stuck in a particular orientation. Once you know that, the next few slides will make a lot of sense as we talk about higher-order structure of proteins. Figure out what the one-letter code spells there. Just take out your table with all the amino acids. It's appended to the back of your P-set. All right, I don't want you working it out while you're here. You've got to listen to me for the time being. OK? Not just yet. Now, one little clue that people will-- you might see and you might be confused, but instead of really showing it in detail, they might show it as a cylinder. in place due to the side chains of amino acids interacting with each other or with the backbone structures. When you fold up these motifs, when the secondary structure is in place, a lot of the side Chains are near each other, and they can engage in long-distance contacts. So for example, I'm going to show you interactions between side chains, between side Chains and the peptide backbone, or side chains and water. But what I want to do is take a look at this and see, can you put any of those potential interactions on the drawing on your handout? CNN's John Sutter shows you how to fold a protein in a simulation. He also shows you the structure of a protein that holds reversibly under appropriate conditions. Sutter: Protein folding is a puzzle that can be solved computationally by maximizing thermodynamic interactions. In the next segment, Sutter will talk about quaternary structure, a structure that holds up to quaternARY elements in the same way as a helix or helix-like structure. He'll also talk about how to make a protein into a fluorescent light-emitting device. A single amino acid change in the primary sequence of collagen can destabilize the structure, so it is no longer viable. The disease type I'm going to talk to you about is a set of diseases known as collagenopathies, and the particular one is called osteogenesis imperfecta. A lot of babies with this defect can't even be born through the birth canal because it would crush the bones, and many of them don't survive very long at all. Some survive with different kinds of cases, but their lives are greatly impacted. extended, and I show you three strands in this polymeric structure, a yellow, a red, and a green. And these rolled together into a three helix bundle that has a fibrillous structure, and then all these structures come together to make the macromolecular structure that is collagen. And there are many genetic defects of collagen, and what's so important to think about is if you have a defect in one strand that defect will propagate through every single strand. well-aligned as the rest of the structure. And then that defect gets propagated into all the fibrils and results in the weakening of the bones. Either the collagen fails to form properly, or the collagen, when it forms, it has much less mechanical stability. So I think that's a good place to stop and I'll pick up next time with hemoglobin. There's a great link on the website to the Protein Data Bank to see how enzymes work. These slides are posted with these reading assignments, and they're posted in color if you want to look at them again.