sunset law contains two requisite components: an "action-forcing"mechanism and a framework for the systematic review and evaluation of past performance. Undersunset, agencies "fade into the sunset," unless, following oversight review, the legislature actsaffirmatively to continue their existence. Since 1997, RepresentativeKevin Brady and others have supported the creation of a federal sunset commission, modeled on thesunset commission in Texas. In May 2006 the House leadership announced plans to bring sunset legislation quickly to the House floor. absent congressional action, as would occur under H.R.3282. Although technically inaccurate, both bills are often referred to as sunset measures. Supporters of the measures suggest that there are too many overlapping and ineffective federal programs that contribute to the growing federal deficit. Congress lacks time for thoroughoversight of all existing agencies and programs, and that the commissions would assist. All Democratsvoted against both bills. One Republican voted with the minority on each bill: Representative ChrisShays on H. R. 5766, and Representative Todd Platts on H R. 3282. Congress inperforming its oversight function, thereby reducing fraud, waste, and abuse. Critics of the measurescounter that the bills would cede too much power to the executive branch and the majority politicalparty. H.R. 3282 would create a Federal Agency Sunset Commission (FASC) toreview the efficiency of and public need for federal agencies. The bill would allow the deadline for abolishing an agency to be extended for an additionaltwo years by legislation enacted by a super majority of the House of Representatives and the Senate. the House andSenate are time-consuming, and do not guarantee that a given measure or type of measure will beconsidered in a timely fashion or at all. As introduced, amended incommittee, and ordered reported favorably, H.R. 5766 specifies fast track procedures onlyfor the House of Representatives. With respect to the Senate it reads: "[Language to be provided]." Ordinarily, Members of either house may choose to introduce legislation at any time that theirchamber is in session during a two-year Congress. There are no parameters in the language contained in H.R. 5766 regarding a timeframe for the total duration of the reviews. The provisions suggest multiple ad hoc commissions, with each coming into existence pursuant to an executive order or joint resolution. The bill would require the President to submit to Congress a schedule for establishment of FRCs to review all federal agencies and programs. In contrast, H.r. 3282 envisages the sunset commission as an ongoing institutional body (with rotatingmembership) commission frameworks might arguably engenderresistance. To the extent that some are concerned with the bills individually for ceding too muchpower from Congress to the executive branch, enactment of both bills would serve to compound thepower transfer. Table 1. Selected Features in H.R. 3282 and H.r.5766. Table 2. Highlights of the Bill for consideration by the House of Representatives and the Senate for consideration. Table 3. The Bill for Consideration by the Senate and the House for consideration in the Senate.