Employers have been the driving force behind the growing move to compare health care providers and plans on the basis of their performance. Health plans have been publishing reports comparing their performance to their peers or to a national standard. State governments have published comparative information, often focused on specific procedures performed in hospitals. Although the federal government was responsible for the first widespread public disclosure of hospital performance data in 1987, it discontinued this practice in 1993. As a payer of health care services on behalf of Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries, the Health Care Financing Administration (HCFA) lags behind others in making performance data public. In 1989, a group of employers initiated one of the most significant efforts to identify uniform and standardized performance indicators. This effort resulted in the creation of a performance measurement system known as the Health Plan Employer Data and Information Set (HEDIS) Using HEDIS as a base, some employers have begun to distribute to their employees educational materials that include outcome measures. The California Public Employees’ Retirement System (CalPERS) recently distributed to its employees a performance report about the health plans it offers. Some employers are using third-party health care accrediting organizations to measure health plan performance. Employers are requiring the health plans they contract with to be accredited by organizations such as NCQA and the Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations. Health plans have published comparative information intended to assist individual consumers in their health care choices and health care providers in their quality improvements. For example, in 1993, Kaiser Permanente Northern California. For. example, a consortium of employers has elected to exclude a Florida HMO from new business with. its employer-sponsored health plans because of the HMO’s failure to obtain accreditation. Health plans have been exploring new ways to make information readily available. Kaiser was one of the first health plans to publish this kind of information. HealthPartners, Inc., will initiate a consumer-oriented program using touch-screen computers. The program will allow employees to obtain details about any of the plans’ primary care sites, such as its physicians’ credentials, on-site services offered, and specialists to which its physicians refer. (See fig. 1 for more information on this program) HealthPartners will furnish data about each care system to help plan members make a decision about which one to join. Currently these data include preventive screening rates and patient satisfaction measures. HealthPartners anticipates expanding the availability of touch-screen computers to more public spaces, such as shopping malls. The states have also been active in providing information about provider performance to the public. For example, Pennsylvania has released four report cards on the hospitals and physicians in the state performing coronary artery bypass graft surgery (CABG) since 1992. In 1987, HCFA initially publically released hospital mortality information, but did so only in response to a request under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552) The published information included the observed and expected mortality rates for Medicare beneficiaries in each hospital that performed CABG surgery. HCFA published the information annually until 1993, when the HCFA Administrator discontinued the reports. He cited problems with the reliability of HCFA’s methods to adjust the data to account for the influence of patient characteristics. HCFA has been participating with NCQA and the American Public Welfare Association on behalf of the State Medicaid Agencies Directors Group. In July 1995 the work group released the first draft of Medicaid HEDIS and is expected to release a final version of the document in Fall 1995 after considering comments received. The Foundation for Accountability (FAcct), created in June 1995, is a more recent public/private initiative that includes some of the major employers involved in developing H EDIS. Like HEDis, many of the most recent initiatives to provide data involve a partnership between private and public players. nation’s largest employers and HCFA, together representing more than 80 million people, agreed to combine their expertise and purchasing power. This action grew out of employer frustration with current performance data that focus on plan and provider structure and process rather than outcomes of care. FAcct intends to recommend measures of health care quality that can be easily understood by the general public so that people can make informed decisions when choosing a health plan. It also hopes to encourage the common adoption of these standards to establish uniformity and minimize health plan reporting burdens. information consumers would actually use. Employers have been the primary users of information comparing quality of care; little is known about the extent to which this information is meeting individual consumers’ needs. In 1994, we reported that while performance measures or report cards could be a useful tool to educate consumers about the health care that plans provide. In 1995, NCQA reported that almost all consumers participating in focus groups stated that they would use better evaluative information if it were available to them. those we interviewed told us they are not using the information because they are unaware that it exists, they have not been able to find it in some markets, or they believe the available information does not meet their needs. Further, they stated that the information would be more useful if their concerns about the reliability and validity of the information were addressed. “We’d like to get some kind of value-based decision for purchasing health care. The pure pricing arrangements, the deals . . . have not really been a complete answer for us,” one said. Employers use comparative data as a “red flag,” signaling a possible decline in quality. Employers use data to influence providers and plans to improve quality. Consumers, both corporate and individual, questioned whether procedure-specific data were properly adjusted to account for differences in patient characteristics that might contribute to adverse outcomes. Experts have varying beliefs about what information should be included in a report card because of acknowledged difficulties with the reliability and validity of data sources and systems designed to measure quality, authors say. “It is up to the patient to place that value. Is it more important that I be alive but it’s okay if I’d rather die than be ?” “I think that a big part of the problem, and we’re guilty of it too, is imposing our own tastes or beliefs on other people,” he says. “In health care we do a lot of deciding of what's good for people on the basis of our own beliefs, and the issues that a $9 an hour person are not the same ones that I'm contending with.” Individual consumers questioned the objectivity of the health care data produced and distributed by the provider or plan. One individual stated that “an unscrupulous provider could make sure they hit home runs on all of these particular items [the quality measurements]” These respondents saw the purpose of the reports as a provider’s public relations effort to “blow its own horn” or use the report as a “marketing tool” rather than to provide information to the consumer. Both employers and individual consumers want information that emphasizes outcomes rather than process or structure measures of quality. Few employers are sharing unpublished data with employees, and they differ from one another on whether or not they believe their employees would use it to make decisions. Consumers are asking for a measure that allows them to select providers who will improve their health status or that of their employees. For example, in describing the need for outcome data, one employer stated that they want information on the outcome of health care provided. that rather than just knowing how many women received mammography screening for breast cancer, he wanted to know if the number of women who died or were incapacitated from breast cancer was being reduced. A major northeastern food manufacturer used outcomes to relate quality assurance in health care to its manufacturing quality assurance program. A large West Coast employer stated that what the company really wants is information on health status. “We’d like to know that the plan has improved the health status of the population served,” the company said. for quality and you’re looking for value, so maybe more of a functional analysis. There is some subjective information that needs to be obtained along with the length of stay and cost of stay. You need to do a kind of functional analysis as well, to say 30 days after that angioplasty was that patient back at work, and were they working 40 hours per week? How’s your quality of life after you've had this?” “The number one thing people ask . . . when they're considering an HMO is ‘What if I get sick, am I going to die, are they going to take care of me?'” individual consumers stated that the way the information was presented was very important to them. Some wanted to have providers or plans compared side-by-side on one or two pages. Consumers using the procedure-specific reports uniformly praised the table format that provided this kind of direct comparison. Some said the government should prescribe some standards and force providers to adhere to these standards in the publishing of information. It is very difficult to know whether outcomes result from quality of care or factors such as the patient’s condition or lifestyle choices. individual consumers wanted the information to cover a wider geographic area. Some Pennsylvania consumers stated that the report card for that state pertained only to providers in Pennsylvania. Consumers living in Philadelphia would like to have had this type of information for surrounding states because their providers, while close to their homes, were located in other states. The same concern came up in a midwestern city that bordered two states. “I want to have a tool for the employees to make that decision. If the employees are making that decision, they are going to change the marketplace,” one consumer said. alter their practices because of the information that has been gathered and is presented and understood by employees. “I’ve been in health care benefits for 15 years. I don’t know how to make the choice. What happens to poor Harry the Huffer working on the shop floor when you give him . . .” “If we are going to have value-based purchasing, we have to involve consumers who make the ultimate choice. Therefore the information has to be relevant for them.” Employees disagreed with those employers who said that employees would not use the information. Most of the individual consumers who had requested the published reports found them to be easy to understand. Data comparing health care plans and providers helped the consumers we interviewed make their health care purchasing decisions. Consumers said they needed more reliable and valid data, more readily available and standardized information, and a greater emphasis on outcome measures. We are sending copies of this report to interested congressional committees and other interested parties. We will make copies available to others on request. To obtain information on how consumers use data comparing the quality of health care providers or health plans, we interviewed both employers and individual consumers. We interviewed officials at over 60 businesses, ranging in size from under 5 employees to over 100,000 employees. We also interviewed a major private sector management consulting firm that supplies comparative health care data to employers. To obtain the views of individual consumers who had received a report card, we conducted telephone interviews during January, February, and March 1995 with 153 consumers. more than one health insurance plan to choose from when making their health care insurance purchasing decisions. The number of participants in each group ranged from 8 to 10 and included employees with varying marital, family, and age status as well as employees enrolled in both indemnity and managed care plans. Medicare: Increased HMO Oversight Could Improve Quality and Access to Care (GAO/HEHS-95-155, Aug. 3, 1995). Employer-Based Health Plans: Issues, Trends, and Challenges Posed by ERISA (GAE/HE HS-95/167, July 25, 1995) The first copy of each GAO report and testimony is free. Additional copies are $2 each. Orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent. To receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days, please call (301) 258-4097 using a touchtone phone. A recorded menu will be available on the GAO's Web site at www.GAO.gov. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. provide information on how to obtain these lists. For more information, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/29/politics/top-10-most-cnn-lists-by-country/story.html?storylink=cpy. Follow us on Twitter @cnntop10 and @CNNOpinion for updates on this story. For other stories, see: http: //www.dailymail.co.uk/features/2013-01-29/top 10-countries-where-you-can-get-a-list-for-free.