We were unable to express an opinion on IRS’ financial statements for fiscal year 1994 for the following five primary reasons. The amount of total revenue of $1.3 trillion reported in the financial statements could not be verified or reconciled to accounting records maintained for individual taxpayers in the aggregate. IRS continued to be unable to reconcile its Fund Balance With Treasury accounts. We could not determine from our testing of IRS' gross and net accounts receivable estimates of over $69 billion and $35 billion, respectively, whether those estimates were reliable. could not substantiate a significant portion of IRS’ $2.1 billion in nonpayroll expenses included in its total operating expenses of $7.2 billion. IRS has made some progress in responding to the problems we identified in our previous audits. However, IRS needs to intensify its efforts in this area. IRS must develop a plan to deal with its $5.1 million in payroll expenses, the report says. It says IRS has fully implemented only 13 of our 59 recommendations. Inadequate internal controls, especially the lack of proper documentation of transactions, resulted in IRS continuing to report unsupported revenue information. In some cases, IRS did not maintain documentation to support reported balances. In other cases, it did not perform adequate analysis, such as reconciling taxpayer transactions to the general ledger, to ensure that reported information was reliable. We found several internal control problems that contributed to our inability to express an opinion on IRS’ financial statements. The sections below discuss these issues in greater detail.detailed plan with explicit, measurable goals and a set timetable for action. IRS has invested over $2.5 billion in TSM since 1986. It plans to spend an additional $695 million in fiscal year 1996 for this effort. Through 2001, it is expected to spend up to $8 billion on TSM. TSM is key to IRS’ vision of a virtually paper-free work environment where taxpayer account updates are rapid, and taxpayer information is readily available to IRS employees to respond to taxpayer inquiries.. IRS did not have a comprehensive business strategy to cost-effectively reduce paper submissions. IRS’ strategic information management practices were not fully in place to guide systems modernization. IRS had not established an effective organizational structure to consistently manage and control system modernization organizationwide. The accountability and responsibility for IRS’ systems development was spread among the Modernization Executive, Chief Information Officer, and research and development division. We made over a dozen specific recommendations to the IRS Commissioner in our report to enable the IRS to improve its software development capability in key process areas. The report was based on GAO/AIMD-94-115, May 1994, and our Strategic Information Management (SIM) Self-Assessment Toolkit. IRS to overcome its management and technical weaknesses by December 1995. The House Conference Report on IRS’ fiscal year 1996 appropriation notes that legislative language “fences” $100 million in TSM funding. As of March 4, 1996, the Secretary of the Treasury had not reported to the Committees on TSM. We are assessing IRS' actions and will provide a status report to the committees by March 14, 1996. I would be happy to answer any questions you or Members of the Subcommittee might have. Report and testimony is free. Additional copies are $2 each. Orders should be sent to the following address, accompanied by a check or money order made out to the Superintendent of Documents. VISA and MasterCard credit cards are accepted, also. Orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent. To receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days, please call (202) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone. A recorded menu will provide information. on how to obtain these lists. For more information on how to get these lists, see the list below. The list is sorted by country of origin, then alphabetical order. For a list of the world's most famous people, see list of world's top people. For an list of famous people from around the world, visit listofworlds.org.uk. For the full list, visit List of World's Most Famous People, click the link below: List of People from Around the World.