The main purpose of a foreign counterintelligence investigation is to protect the U.S. government from the clandestine efforts of foreign powers and their agents. Many of the foreign powers’ clandestine efforts may involve a violation of U.s. criminal law, usually espionage or international terrorism, which falls within the federal law enforcement community’s mandate to investigate and prosecute. To provide a statutory framework for electronic surveillance conducted within the United States for foreign intelligence purposes, the Congress, in 1978, enacted the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act. The FBI is the lead federal agency for protecting the United States from foreign intelligence, espionage, and terrorist threats. The FBI’s National Security and Counterterrorism Divisions are the units responsible for countering these threats. For intelligence and counterintelligence purposes, electronic surveillance and physical searches against foreign powers and agents of foreign powers in the U.S. are governed by FISA. FISA permits surveillance only when the purpose of the surveillance is to obtain foreign intelligence information. FISA also requires prior judicial approval by the FISA Court for surveillance and searches. between the FBI and the Criminal Division. We interviewed DOJ officials to determine the pertinent coordination policies, procedures, and processes in effect and their views on their effectiveness. To determine what actions DOJ has taken to address identified coordination problems, we reviewed certain legal requirements. A key factor impeding coordination of foreign counterintelligence investigations involving the use or anticipated use of the FISA surveillance and search tools has been the FBI’s concern about the possible consequences that could result if a federal court rule that the line between an intelligence and a criminal investigation had been crossed. Attorney General in July 1995 established policies and procedures for coordinating FBI foreign counterintelligence investigations with the Criminal Division. In January 2000, the Attorney General promulgated coordination procedures, which were in addition to the 1995 procedures. These procedures were promulgated to address problems identified during its review of the FBI’s investigation of the Los Alamos National Laboratory. According to DOJ officials, following the conviction of Aldrich Ames, OIPR believed that the close relationship between the FBI and Criminal Division had been near to crossing the line between intelligence and criminal investigations. OIPR, FBI, and Criminal Division officials have continued to strongly differ in their interpretation as to when the Criminal Division should be notified of FBI intelligence investigations. The issue revolved around the officials’ different perceptions of how restrictively the FISA Court might interpret Criminal Division notification or any subsequent advice the Division may provide. The Attorney General had not approved the memorandum, the working group’s recommendation to clarify language in the 1995 procedures was not implemented and, therefore, that issue remains. The language indicating when the Criminal Division is to be notified remained an issue. Some FBI officials continued to use the significant threshold and that there were still disagreements as to its meaning. No matter what impediments remain, the question exists as to how and how often has the lack of timely coordination adversely affected DOJ prosecutions, the authors say. They say it takes time to prepare for prosecution because it takes more than 2 or 3 days at the last minute to prepare an investigation. Such concerns indicate an oversight mechanism to ensure that an investigation is being informed of an investigation, they say. notification of the Criminal Division and the subsequent advice it provided. On the other hand, by not ensuring timely coordination on these cases, DOJ may place at risk the government’s ability to bring the strongest possible criminal prosecution. A decision is needed to balance and resolve these conflicting national security and law enforcement positions. Such actions could facilitate the coordination of DOJ's counterintelligence and prosecutorial functions, the authors say. They recommend that all FBI memorandums sent to OIPR contain a section devoted explicitly to identifying any possible federal criminal violation. The report notes that the timing of the information sharing has been an issue. notifications tended to occur near the end of the investigation, with the Criminal Division playing little or no role in decisions that could effect the success of an investigation. The Department wrote that all relevant Department components agree that information sharing is usually appropriate for all felonies. The Criminal Division has been the primary stumbling block to better coordination, the report says. The report says it is probably more accurate to divide the concept of coordination into an information- sharing component and an advice-giving component. potential subsequent prosecutions. Even with the later procedural changes to coordination, the Criminal Division still had concerns about the timeliness issue. As agreed with your office, unless you publicly release its contents earlier, we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days from its issue date. We will also make copies available to others on request. If you should have any questions about this report, please call Daniel C. Harris or me on (202) 512-8777. See “Agency Comments and Our Evaluation” section. we did not review specific cases to try to identify instances of compliance or noncompliance with the coordination procedures. Given that since 1995, this issue has been studied by three high-level DOJ working groups and the Attorney General’s Review Team, we believe that DOJ is in the best position to address any changes to its procedures. The Department suggested that we emphasize to a greater extent throughout our report the sensitivity and complexity of the issues. We agree that the issues discussed are sensitive and complex, but we believe the report adequately conveys these points. revise our report to address the Department’s suggestion. DOJ suggested a factual correction to recognize that two decision memorandums were submitted to the Attorney General; one in October 2000, and a second in December 2000. On pages 22 and 23 of our report, we discuss the submission of both Memorandums. We did not adopt the suggestion that we note the options that these memorandum presented, as DOJ had opted not to provide us with the details of its options when we met to discuss them.