When legislative, administration, and agency actions, including those in response to our recommendations, result in significant progress toward resolving a high-risk problem, we remove the high- risk designation. The Department of Defense (DOD) Personnel Security Clearance Program and the 2010 Census were removed from the High-Risk List. We will continue to monitor these areas, as appropriate, to ensure that the improvements we have noted are sustained. If significant problems again arise, we will consider reapplying thehigh-risk designation. We are removing DOD’s personnel security clearance program from the High-Risk List. DOD officials have demonstrated a strong commitment to, and a capacity for, addressing security clearance reform efforts. Continued congressional oversight and the committed leadership of DOD have greatly contributed to the progress in addressing the problems with the personnel clearance process. We will continue to monitor DOD's efforts because security clearance Reform is ongoing, and DOD needs to place a high priority on ensuring that timeliness improvements continue and quality is built into every step of the process. Census is constitutionally mandated program used to apportion and redistrict the U.S. House of Representatives. Cost of enumerating each housing unit has escalated from an average of around $16 in 1970 to around $98 in 2010, an increase of over 500 percent. Census design is no longer capable of delivering a cost-effective headcount given ongoing and newly emerging societal trends, authors say. Research and planning activities need to start early in the decade to help ensure the 2020 Census is as cost- effective as possible, they say. it is collecting its share of revenue from oil and gas produced on federal lands. Interior continues to experience problems in hiring, training, and retaining sufficient staff. Interior is currently engaged in a broad reorganization of both its offshore oil andGas management and revenue collection functions. There are many open questions about whether Interior has the capacity to undertake such a reorganization while continuing to provide reasonable assurance that billions of dollars of revenue owed the public are being properly assessed and collected. Federal oil andgas resources provide an important source of energy for the United States. Federal oil and gas production is one of the largest nontax sources of federal government funds. The explosion onboard the Deepwater Horizon and oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico in April 2010 emphasized the importance of Interior’s management of permitting and inspection processes. Government regulators lacked the authority, the necessary resources, and the technical expertise to prevent the Gulf oil spill, the National Commission on the BP DeepwaterHorizon Oil Spill and Offshore Drilling reported in January 2011. In fiscal year 2009, federal oil production accounted for about $9 billion. Interior recently began restructuring its oil and gas program, transferring offshore oversight responsibilities to the newly created Bureau of Ocean Energy Management, Regulation and Enforcement (BOEMRE) Interior has commissioned a study in response to GAO’s September 2008 report, and the study is expected to be completed in 2011. GAO has reported that BLM and MMS have encountered persistent problems in hiring, training, and retaining sufficient staff to meet its oversight and management ofOil and gas operations on federal lands and waters. Interior must successfully address the challenges GAO has identified, implement open recommendations, and meet its routine responsibilities to manage federal oil and gas resources in the public interest. Interior recently began implementing a number of GAO recommendations, including those intended to improve the reliability of data necessary for determining royalties. While there has been some progress on nearly all of the issues, the agency has yet to fully implement some of the recommendations, the GAO says. Interior must also address its long-standing human capital issues. GAO designated Medicare as a high-risk program because of its complexity and susceptibility to improper payments. Medicare covered 47 million elderly and disabled beneficiaries and had estimated outlays of $509 billion in 2010. Medicaid, the federal-state program that covered acute health care, long- term care and other services for over 65 million low-income people, was also designated as high risk. Addressing high- risk problems can save billions of dollars each year, GAO says. The nation cannot afford to allow problems to persist. people in fiscal year 2009, consists of more than 50 distinct state-based programs that cost the federal government and states an estimated $381 billion. In its fiscal year 2010 Agency Financial Report, the Department of Health and Human Services estimated that federal Medicare and Medicaid improper payments were more than $70 billion. New directives, implementing guidance, and legislation will impact the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services’ efforts to reduce improper payments in the next few years, the authors say. They say it is too soon to determine whether the activities called for in recent laws and guidance will achieve their goals of reducing improper payments. The federal real property portfolio is vast and diverse. It totals over 900,000 buildings and structures with a combined area of over 3 billion square feet. Progress has been made on many fronts, including significant progress with real property data reliability and managing the condition of facilities. However, federal agencies continue to face long-standing problems, such as overreliance on leasing, excess and underutilized property, and protecting federal facilities. The Department of Defense has made progress in better aligning its missions and facilities and disposing of unneeded facilities. process, the Department still has a significant amount of excess infrastructure. Senior Defense officials have stated that further reductions may be needed to ensure that its infrastructure is appropriately sized to carry out its missions. Federal agencies also have made limited progress and continue to face challenges in securing real property. As a result, the management of federal real property remains high risk, with the Department of Homeland Security at the forefront of efforts to protect the nation's real property from attack. In 2010, GAO found that limited information about risks and the inability to control common areas pose challenges to protecting leased space. Over the next 5 years, the Department of Defense expects to invest almost $343 billion (in fiscal year 2011 dollars) on the development and procurement of major defense acquisition programs. Defense acquisition programs usually take longer, cost more, and deliver fewer quantities and capabilities than DOD originally planned. With the prospect of slowly growing or flat defense budgets for the foreseeable future, DOD must get better value for its weapon system spending and find ways to deliver needed capability for less than it has spent in the past. DOD estimated that its logistics operations, including supply chain management, cost about $194 billion in fiscal year 2009. Since our last high-risk update, DOD has taken a major step toward improving management of supply inventories. Weaknesses in these focus areas can affect DOD’s ability to support the warfighter. DOD also will need to fully implement a program for monitoring and independently validating the effectiveness and sustainability of corrective actions. The department submitted its Comprehensive Inventory Management Improvement Plan to Congress in November 2010. DOD has acknowledged that it needs to track the speed, reliability, and overall efficiency of the supply chain. IRS enforcement of the tax laws is vital to ensuring that all taxes owed are paid, which in turn can promote voluntary compliance. IRS last estimated the resulting tax gap to be $345 billion for 2001. After late payments and IRS enforcement, the gap is estimated to be more than $400 billion. The gap is expected to close by the end of the next decade, DOD says. the net tax gap was $290 billion. Congress and IRS have taken innovative actions aimed at improving tax compliance. If approaches like these could reduce the tax gap by 1 percent, the resulting revenue increase would be about $3 billion annually. The complexity of the tax code also contributes to noncompliance and therefore the tax Gap. The government continues to take high-risk problems seriously and is making long-needed progress toward correcting them, the authors say.. Lasting solutions to high- risk problems offer the potential to save taxpayers money. billions of dollars, dramatically improve service to the American public, and strengthen public confidence and trust in the performance and accountability of our national government. The GAO’s high-risk update and High Risk and Other Major Government Challenges Web site, www.gao.gov/highrisk/, can help inform the oversight agenda for the 112th Congress and guide efforts of the administration and agencies to improve government performance and reduce waste and risks. For further information on this testimony, please contact J. Christopher Mihm at (202) 512-6806. a work of the U.S. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States. The published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from GAO. However, because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material, permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org.