In every war fought by the United States, civilian ships have supported military operations by transporting supplies and personnel. The civilians that have served on these vessels historically have worked in varying capacities either for private shipping companies under contract with the federal government or for the government itself. These civilians are collectively referred to as merchant mariners. In World War II, an estimated 8,500 merchant mariner were killed and 11,000 were wounded. During Operation Enduring Freedom and Operation Iraqi Freedom, it is estimated that 63% of the military cargo shipped to the Middle East and Afghanistan was delivered by U.S.-flagged commercial vessels. Considered veterans for the purposes of federal benefits. Currently, only limited groups of World War II-era merchant mariners are eligible for benefits from the Department of Veterans Affairs. No legislation was enacted in the immediate aftermath of World war II to grant veteran status to merchantMariners. Section 401 of the GI Bill Improvement Act of 1977 ( P.L. 95-202 ) granted veterans' benefit to merchantmariners. H.R. 476, introduced in 1947, would have expanded the existing benefits for merchant seamen related to health care and disability. P.L. 95-202 extended "active duty" status to civilians who served as Women's Air Forces Service Pilots (WASPS) during World War II. The Secretary of Defense has the authority to extend active duty status for the purpose of eligibility for federal veterans' benefits to other groups of civilian federal employees or contractors. The factors to be used in reviewing such applications included the uniqueness of service rendered by the group and whether or not the group was subject to military control, discipline, and justice. In 1982, the Secretary of the Air Force rejected the application for active duty status for oceangoing merchant mariners who served during World War II. In 1985, the. Secretary rejected the applications of merchant mariner who served in contested waters in World War. II, merchant mar Mariners involved in any military invasion during World. War II, and all merchantmariners involved in Operation Mulberry during World war II. These rejections were recommended by the Civilian/Military Service Review Board. Lawsuit challenged denial of active duty status for World War II oceangoing merchant mariners and those who participated in World War Two invasions. The U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia ruled that the Secretary of the Air Force erred in rejecting the applications. No other merchant mariner is eligible for any veterans' benefits administered by the VA. In addition, those with service-connected disabilities or medical conditions may have lost out on nearly 40 years of compensation or medical benefits.  merchant mariners would join Medal of Honor winners as the only groups eligible for cash compensation from the VA. They would not have to demonstrate a financial hardship or a service-connected disability to receive cash compensation. The VA would pay for these lost benefits. The bill is expected to be voted on in the next few months and could be signed into law by the end of the year or early next year. For more information on the bill, go to: http://www.va.gov/va-pension-benefits.