In October 2017 and more explicitly in January 2018, the President linked continued U.S. participation in the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) to congressional and allied action. On May 8, he announced that the United States would cease implementing the JCPOA, using the mechanism of reimposing suspended U.s. sanctions. This report bases its analysis primarily on the text of key documents involved in the issue, including U.N. Security Council Resolution 2231 and the Iran Nuclear Agreement Review Act of May 22, 2015. missiles to "severe sanctions" The President also called on U.S. allies to "take stronger steps with us to confront Iran's other malign activities" After the January 12, 2018, statement, the President replaced Tillerson and National Security Adviser H.R. McMaster with officials who have been critics of the JCPOA. The May 8 announcement signaled that the Administration seeks to encourage further efforts to address its concerns about the J CPOA, according to the State Department's spokesman. and broader Iran issues, possibly in a revised nuclear agreement. According to the May 8 statement As we exit the Iran deal, we will be working with our allies to find a real, comprehensive, and lasting solution to the Iranian nuclear threat. This will include efforts to eliminate the threat of Iran's ballistic missile program, to stop its terrorist activities worldwide, and to block its menacing activity across the Middle East. Iran's leaders will naturally say that they refuse to negotiate a new deal. They refuse, and that's fine. I'd probably say the same thing if I was in their position. The decision drew statements of support from Israel, Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates, and Bahrain. The leaders of France, Germany, and Britain issued a joint statement expressing "regret" over the decision. European leaders stated that they remained committed to the JCPOA as "important for our joint security" The European reaction appeared to reflect disappointment in the failure of their efforts to address President Trump's concerns through a supplemental agreement or pledges of joint action, says Peter Bergen, a former U.S. ambassador to the European Union. in place, and both indicated they intended to continue implementing the JCPOA even if President Trump ceases to implement it. Iran's President Hassan Rouhani reacted to the May 8 announcement immediately, stating that Iran would work with the remaining parties to the accord to keep it intact. Rouhani directed Iran's nuclear program officials to be prepared to restart suspended aspects of Iran's program if the accord collapses entirely. The Trump Administration could have use d provisions of the J CPOA itself t o cease implementation of U.S. commitments under the agreement. can assert that another party is violating the accord and seek to resolve the issue. The dispute resolution mechanism provides for the United States to be able to "snap back" all sanctions. A U.S. accusation of Iranian noncompliance, in the absence of supporting evidence, would undoubtedly raise questions about the use of this mechanism to leave the agreement. In his October 13, 2017, speech on Iran, President Trump announced that he was withholding INARA compliance certification on the grounds that he cannot certify that continued sanctions relief is "appropriate"