Private banking has been broadly defined as financial and related services provided to wealthy clients. Recent investigations of private bankers at Citibank and BankBoston continue to keep private banking in the forefront of public attention. Federal banking regulators may review banks’ efforts to prevent or detect money laundering in their private banking activities. Congress continues to look for ways to reinforce current anti- money-laundering laws and, more specifically, to promote due diligence in customer banking relationships. countries. The House Committee on Banking and Financial Services recently introduced legislation that would require financial institutions that open or maintain a U.S. account for a non-publicly-traded foreign entity to maintain a record of identity for each beneficial owner of the account. Federal Reserve Bank of New York reviewed private banking activities at 40 banks. Authors: Most of the banks reviewed had adequate anti-money-laundering programs. Offshore branches are subject to supervision by U.S. regulators, but not to OCC. They say regulators should try to determine whether offshore branches are making efforts to combat money laundering and try to identify what efforts are being made to combat it. in 1998, the Federal Reserve assessed the risk management practices at seven banks with private Banking Secrecy Act activities. 11 of the 20 offshore jurisdictions are identified as having weak or nonexistent regulatory supervisory structures. The National Money Laundering Strategy for 1999 marks a new stage in the government’s fight against money laundering. A major goal is to enhance regulatory oversight while making it cost-effective, with measurable results. Does the jurisdiction have KYC policies or guidelines for banks? Do the jurisdictions require banks to report suspicious activity to the authorities? Do they have adequate regulatory and law enforcement personnel to enforce the new laws? Information is for Guernsey, one of four islands known as the Channel Islands. First copy of each GAO report and testimony is free. Additional copies are $2 each. Orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent.report suspicious transactions? Does the jurisdiction have corporate secrecy laws that include criminal sanctions? Does INCSR describe supervisory structure of the jurisdiction as weak or nonexistent? Do you know more about this story? If so, call (202) 512-6000. GAO issues a list of newly available reports and testimony each day. To receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days, please call (202) 512-6000 using a touch- tone phone. A recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S., call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255.