Since 2002, the U.S. has allocated more than $72 billion for development, governance, and security in Afghanistan. The United States and international donors have increased their focus on transitioning leadership to the Afghan government. The Afghan government published a plan, called the Public Financial Management Roadmap, in July 2010. The Roadmap aims to strengthen the Afghangovernment’s performance in three key areas at the national and provincial level: budget formulation, budget execution, and accountability and transparency of financial management. The World Bank, the United Kingdom, and the United States are key donors providing assistance. CSTC-A has established a process to assess progress on key objectives and rate the capacity of MOD and MOI, in areas including finance and budget functions, on a quarterly basis. MOD has progressed from significant reliance on coalition support in 2008 to being capable of executing core functions with minimal coalition support by 2011. Progress at MOI has been slow, in part because CSTC- A’s capacity-building efforts atMOI started in 2006, several years after its efforts began at MOD in 2002. USAID’s Automated Directives System (ADS) establishes performance management and evaluation procedures USAID is expected to follow with respect to planning, monitoring, and evaluating its programs. For PFM capacity building in Afghanistan, we found a lack of compliance with USAID guidance at the mission level and at the implementing-partner level. We previously reported in July 2010 that USAID has operated without a required Mission performance management plan for Afghanistan since the end of 2008. The plan contains a results framework that includes two PFM-related objectives and several related indicators, but lacks performance targets for the indicators. The plan noted that baselines and targets for each indicator would be established in the first and second quarters of fiscal year 2011. Many indicators do not have baseline data or targets because some indicators are either new or were in the previous plan but data were never collected for them. In April 2011, donors initiated joint assessments of 14 Afghan civilian ministries, which account for 90 percent of the development budget, to establish baselines of their PFM capacity. These assessments are due by 2012, according to the plan. The performance management frameworks for PFM capacity-building projects did not meet USAID guidance because of deficiencies such as a lack of baselines, targets, and performance data. The performance indicators for EGGI and ACSS related to P FM capacity- building activities do not consistently provide baseline, performance targets, or actual performance data for each indicator, as required. We have previously reported similar deficiencies in other USAID projects in Afghanistan. We are committed to following up on USAID’s recommendations on these projects’ progress. This report examines U.S. efforts to improve the Afghan government’s public financial management (PFM) capacity. We interviewed officials from DOD, State, Treasury, and USAID in Washington, D.C., and in Kabul, Afghanistan. We reviewed documents and records from the Departments of Defense (DOD), State (State), and the Treasury (Treasury) The report also compared efforts by USAID, DOD, and Treasury with the key components of the Public Financial Management Roadmap. obtain clarifying information about performance data. Due to unexplained changes and gaps in some target and performance data, we could not verify the reliability of all performance data reported by USAID. We did not independently assess the capability of MOD and MOI finance offices. We relied on CSTC-A’s capability milestone ratings, which are used to measure the capability level of a specific area or department. We assessed data obtained for our analysis to be sufficiently reliable to provide an overall assessment of the extent to which Treasury advisers’ assistance has contributed to MOF’S PFM capacity. assistance to being capable of fully autonomous operations. Since 2002, the United States has allocated more than $72 billion for security, governance, and development to Afghanistan. The budget process in Afghanistan is highly centralized, with the Afghan national government responsible for developing and executing the country’s budget. None of the 34 Afghan provinces has the authority to raise revenues or spend public funds, according to the Department of the Treasury (Treasury) The Afghan parliament, called the National Assembly, can approve or reject the national budget in its entirety. The Combined Security Transition Command–Afghanistan (CSTC-A) has established a process to regularly assess and rate the capability of Ministries of Defense (MOD) and Interior (MOI) The assessment process uses the objectives in the Ministerial Development Plan as criteria to assess progress in capacity building at the ministries. MOD advisers complete an online survey to provide information about the scope and quality of their interaction with their Afghan counterparts on a quarterly basis. The assessment and rating is based on interviews with advisers and Afghan officials, internal quarterly assessments, and other officials’ reporting. CSTC-A does not currently use adviser surveys for MOI, but is in the process of developing and implementing these. Figures below show fiscal years 2010 and 2011 performance data for U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID) projects that focus significantly on public financial management (PFM) capacity building at the national and provincial level. to reinforce and set the current and following quarter’s objectives and initiatives. To see the rest of the report, visit: http://www.cstc-A.org/news/press-releases/2013/01/30/news-reporters-and-public-officials-report-on-the-success-of-the country's-financial-management-capacity-building-programs.