Taiwan's democracy is experiencing a period of rancor and instability as it undergoesa process of political maturation. The political system lacks institutions. The DPP lacksadministrative experience, many leadership postswithin the government remain filled by KMT members. The KMT, the New Party, and thePeople First Party (PFP) tend to be economically and politically conservative compared to the DPP and more inclined to consider eventual unification with China. The Nationalist Party, orKuomintang (KMT) lost the presidential election- the first time it has not ruled the Republic of China. for moderating partisanship and facilitating the transfer of power. Few formal and informal procedures andprecedents have been established for divided government. No party is expected to attain amajority in the Legislative Yuan. Most mass media in Taiwan are government- or party-affiliated and politically-biased. There are no firm indications about how Taiwan's political parties will fare in the December 2001 legislative elections. The KMT continues towield economic clout and economic clout, according to an American observer at the American Chamber of Commerce in Taipei. political influence, its popularity has continued to wane for several reasons. At the end of 2000, Taiwan's stockmarket had fallen by more than 50% since Chen's election and unemployment had reached a 15-year high. Taiwanese investment in the People's Republic ofChina (PRC) nearly doubled in 2000, which resulted in the transfer of many skilled and high tech jobs to themainland. According to some estimates,non-performing loans have reached 12-17 percent of all Taiwan bank loans. exports to the United States,increasing imports from abroad if Taiwan joins theWTO, (5) greater economic competition from China,the loss of global competitive advantage of some Taiwanese export items, and falling consumer demand. Some American and Taiwanese economic analysts viewed China as the key to Taiwan's continueddevelopment. They told the delegation that the PRC'saccession to the WTO and direct trade, transportation, and communication between the mainland and Taiwan would further open China to Taiwanese investmentand exports. The platform of the DPP has long advocated independence for Taiwan. as long as the PRC did not use military forceagainst Taiwan, he would not declareindependence. Analysts have posited several factorsand considerations that may explain Chen's break from past positions and pro-independence members inhis party. Chen Shui-bian has expressed a willingness to resume cross-strait talks, but without agreeing to thePRC's "one-Chinaprinciple" as a starting point. By contrast, opposition leaders have been more accepting of the " one-China" principle as a principle. Following the March2000 presidential election, both the DPP and the KMT have taken more conciliatory stances toward the mainland. The KMT has downplayed former PresidentLee Teng-hui's suggested "state-to-state" framework for negotiations. Both put forthdemocratization on the mainland as a condition for substantive moves toward greater political ties or unification. Both partiessupport the "status quo" - a position of neither independence nor unification - for the time being. Cross-strait economic ties have grownconsiderably since the late 1980s. Bilateral trade was worth $25.8 billion in 1999, up 14.5 percent from 1998. According to PRC data, Taiwan is China's largest source of imports. Taiwanese firms have invested anestimated $40 billion in more than 40,000enterprises on the mainland. Some analysts report that business interests on both sides of the strait are pursuing greater economic cooperation in preparation forPRC and ROC accession to the WTO. tensions. Officials at the Ministry of National Defense raised several concerns. ROC defense officials asserted that a mainland military attack was possible but not likely in the short-term. Taiwanesedefense leaders argued that currently the mainland could pressure Taiwan through missile tests, shootingdown Taiwanese fighters or sinking its ships. Chinese capabilities were expected toimprove substantially over the next five years. Two trends have helped to stabilize PRC-Taiwan relations in theshort term. The development of real political competition in Taiwan has encouraged themajor parties to appeal to the center of the political spectrum. ties, which have been bolstered by the prospect of WTO membership forboth sides, have raised the economic andpolitical costs of a military conflict for Beijing and Taipei. Other factors may add to tensions in the future. PRC foreign policy mishaps or social unrest stemming from economic reforms may trigger renewed governmentemphasis on Chinese nationalism. China's military modernization also bears watching. The U.S. State Department says it has no immediate plans to engage in military exercises with Taiwan or other Asian countries.