Influenza pandemic continues to be a real and significant threat facing the United States and the world. It is unknown when an influenza pandemic will occur, where it will begin, or whether an H5N1 virus or another strain would be the cause. Influenza pandemics have spread worldwide within months, and a future future pandemic could be much worse. The U.N.’ World Health Organization has said that infectious diseases are spreading faster than at any time in history. An influenza pandemic is not a singular event, but is likely to come in waves, each lasting weeks or months. A pandemic will not directly damage physical infrastructure such as power lines or computer systems. It threatens the operation of critical systems by potentially removing the essential personnel needed to operate them from the workplace. In a severe pandemic, absences attributable to illnesses, the need to care for ill family members, and fear of infection may reach a projected 40 percent during the peak weeks of a community outbreak. An influenza pandemic could result in 200,000 to 2 million deaths in the United States, depending on its severity. In September 2008, the World Bank reported a 4.8 percent drop in world economic activity, which would cost the world economy more than $3 trillion. The Homeland Security Council (HSC) took an active approach to this potential disaster by issuing the National Pandemic Strategy in November 2005, and the National pandemic Implementation Plan in May 2006. HSC indicated in.absence during the weeks before and after the peak. In the event of a catastrophic disaster, the leadership roles, responsibilities, and lines of authority for the response at all levels must be clearly defined and effectively communicated. Most of these federal leadership roles involve shared responsibilities between HHS and DHS, and it is not clear how these would work in practice. The relationship of these roles to each other as well as with other leadership roles in a pandemic is unclear. Both USDA and DHS agreed that they should develop additional clarity and better define their coordination roles in these circumstances. Strong advance planning, both within and among federal, state, and local governments and other organizations, are essential to best position the nation to prepare for, respond to, and recover from an influenza pandemic. Capabilities are built upon the appropriate combination of people, skills, processes, and assets. Ensuring that needed capabilities are available requires effective planning and coordination as well as training and exercises. According to a UNSIC global survey, 141 countries, or 97 percent of those that responded, have pandemic preparedness plans. CDC: All 50 states and the 3 localities that received federal pandemic funds have developed influenza pandemic plans and conducted pandemic exercises. HHS-led interagency assessment of states’ plans found on average that states had “many major gaps” in their plans in 16 of 22 priority areas, such as school closure policies. The remaining 6 priority areas were rated as having “a few major gaps.” HHS and DHS generally concurred with our recommendation, but have not yet held these additional meetings. Health care systems would need the ability to adequately care for a large number of patients or patients with unusual or highly specialized medical needs. The ability of local or regional health care systems to deliver services consistent with established standards of care could be compromised, at least in the short term. The volume of patients would far exceed the available hospital beds, medical personnel, pharmaceuticals, equipment, and supplies. Providing such care would require the allocation of scarce resources. In contrast to discrete events such as hurricanes and most terrorist attacks, the widespread and iterative nature of a pandemic presents challenges. management approaches that have been used in the past to increase capacity when responding to other types of disasters. In a severe influenza pandemic, almost 10 million people would require hospitalization, which would exceed the current capacity of U.S. hospitals. States would likely be unwilling to share scarce resources or deploy personnel into a location where the disease is active and thus expose those individuals to a high-risk environment. NGA reported in its September 2008 issue brief on state pandemic preparedness that EMAC is seen as unreliable during a pandemic. existing shortages of health care providers, and the potential high absentee rate of providers. Given the uncertain effectiveness of efforts to increase surge capacity, HHS has developed guidance to assist health care facilities in planning for altered standards of care. The federal government has provided funding, guidance, and other assistance to help states prepare for medical surge in a mass casualty event, such as an influenza pandemic. We recommended that HHS serve as a clearinghouse for sharing among the states altered Standards of care guidelines developed by individual states or medical experts. HHS seeks to ensure availability of antiviral treatment courses for at least 25 percent of the U.S. population. As of May 2008, both HHS and states had stockpiled a total of 72 million treatment courses. HHS is encouraging expansion and refurbishing of existing facilities but also funding the development of new adjuvants, substances that can be added to influenza vaccines to reduce the amount of active ingredient needed. By using adjuvant and cell-based vaccines, manufacturers could produce more doses and smaller stockpiles could be used to protect a larger population. necessary materials acquired. The delayed use of antivirals and the emergence of antiviral resistance in influenza strains could limit their effectiveness. weaknesses within the international influenza surveillance system impede the detection of strains. In light of this anticipated limitation in supply, HHS released guidance on prioritizing target groups for a pandemic vaccine. USDA has coordinated with DHS and other federal agencies to create a National Veterinary Stockpile. It is intended to be the nation’s repository of animal vaccines, personal protective equipment and other critical veterinary products. In 2005, CDC designated establishing appropriate and effective information-sharing mechanisms to improve homeland security as a high-risk area. Citizens should be given an accurate portrayal of risk, without overstating the threat or providing false assurances of security, CDC says. Improving risk communication to the public was one of the top three challenges identified by the forum participants, the agency says. During the 2004-2005 flu season, demand for the flu vaccine exceeded supply, and information about future vaccine availability was uncertain. different audiences, and the importance of disseminating clear, updated information when responding to changing circumstances. The National Pandemic Implementation Plan emphasizes that government and public health officials must communicate clearly and continuously with the public throughout a pandemic. HHS (including CDC), DHS, and other federal agencies have provided a variety of influenza pandemic information and guidance for states and local communities. There are established coordination networks that are being used to provide information to state and local governments and to the private sector about pandemic planning and preparedness. For example, the FEBs are charged with providing timely and relevant information to support emergency preparedness and response coordination. FEB representatives generally viewed the boards as an important communications link between Washington and the field and among field agencies. Each of the selected boards we reviewed reported conducting communications activities as a key part of its emergency support service. In addition, critical infrastructure coordinating councils have been also primarily used as a means to share information and develop pandemic- specific guidance across the industry sectors, such as banking and finance. and telecommunications, and across levels of government. State and local officials from all of the states and localities we interviewed wanted additional federal influenza pandemic guidance. Although the federal government has issued some guidance, it may not have reached state andLocal officials. In addition, private sector officials have told us that they would like clarification about the respective roles and responsibilities of the federal and state governments during an pandemic emergency, such as in state border closures and pandemic vaccine distribution. In August 2007 we reported that although the National Pandemic Strategy and Implementation Plan identified the overarching goals and objectives for pandemic planning, the plan did not address state and local concerns. the documents had some gaps. Most of the implementation plan’s performance measures consist of actions to be completed, such as disseminating guidance. This lack of clear linkages makes it difficult to ascertain whether progress has in fact been made toward achieving the national goals and objectives. The National Pandemic Implementation Plan does not establish priorities among its 324 action items, which becomes especially important as agencies and other agencies join the effort to tackle the pandemic. The plan also does not provide a clear linkage to anticipated results, making it hard to gauge whether the purpose of the activity is achieved. Some action items, particularly those that are to be completed by state, local, and tribal governments or the private sector, do not identify an entity responsible for carrying out the action. The plan gives no indication of how these actions will be monitored, how their completion will be ensured, or who will be responsible for making sure that these actions are completed. Also, it appears that HSC’s determination of completeness has not been accurately applied for all of the action items. This is further complicated by the lack of a description of the financial resources needed to implement the actions. items. Several of the action items that were reported by the HSC as being completed were still in progress. Without clear departmentwide goals, it would be difficult for all DOD components to develop effective plans and guidance. DOD designated an official to lead DOD’s pandemic efforts, established a Pandemic Influenza Task Force, and communicated this information throughout the department. DOD also assigned responsibility to the U.S. Northern Command for directing, planning, and synchronizing DOD's global response to an influenza pandemic. HHS received $5.62 billion in supplemental appropriations specifically available for pandemic influenza- related purposes in fiscal year 2006. Of the $770 million, $600 million was specifically provided by Congress for state and local planning and exercising. Strengthening preparedness for large-scale public health emergencies is one of the issues that we identified as among those needing the urgent attention of the new administration and Congress during this transition period. Although much has been done, many challenges remain, as is evidenced by the fact that almost half of the recommendations that we have made over the past 3 years have not been implemented. have still not been fully implemented. Given the change in administration and the associated transition of senior federal officials, it will be essential for this administration to continue to exercise and test the shared leadership roles that have been established. DHS and HHS should also, in coordination with other federal agencies, continue to work with states and local governments to help them address identified gaps. These challenges include clarifying roles and responsibilities of federal and state governments. The challenges include coordinating between the federal and private sectors before and during a pandemic.  Continued leadership focus on pandemic preparedness is particularly crucial now as attention on influenza pandemic may be waning. U.S. should continue to work with international organizations and other countries to help address gaps in available information. The Secretary of Health and Human Services should expeditiously finalize guidance to assist state and local jurisdictions to determine how to effectively use limited supplies of antivirals and pre-pandemic vaccine in a pandemic. In December 2008, HHS released final guidance on antiviral drug use during an influenza Pandemic. Human Services and Homeland Security should convene additional meetings of the states in the five federal influenza pandemic regions to help them address identified gaps in their planning. HHS and DHS officials indicated that while no additional meetings are planned at this time, states will have to continuously update their pandemic plans and submit them for review. DHS officials informed us that the department is working on initiatives, such as developing pandemic contingency plan guidance tailored to each of the critical infrastructure sectors, and holding a series of “webinars” with a number of the sectors. GAO: USDA and Homeland Security should develop memorandum of understanding. Agencies should test effectiveness of this coordination during exercises, GAO says. HSC did not comment on the recommendation and has not indicated if it plans to implement it. GAO: Secretary of Agriculture should focus additional work with states on how to overcome potential problems associated with backyard birds and disposing of carcasses and materials. (4) USDA officials have told us that the agency has developed online tools to help states make effective decisions about carcass disposal. The National Veterinary Stockpile now contains enough antiviral medication to protect 3,000 animal health responders for 40 days. USDA has yet to determine the number of individuals that would need medicine based on a calculation of those exposed to the virus under a specific scenario. The Secretary of Agriculture should also determine how to obtain and provide supplies within 24 hours of an outbreak. (1) Appendix II: Implemented Recommendations from GAO’s Work on an Influenza Pandemic as of February 2009. The 14 national implementation plan tasks assigned to the Joint Staff as the lead organization within DOD have been completed. DOD, through U.S. Northern Command as the global synchronizer for pandemic influenza planning, collected information from the combatant commands on funding requirements. The combatant Commands are increasingly inviting representatives from the United Nations, including the World Health Organization and the Food and Agriculture Organization; host and neighboring nations; and other federal government agencies to exercises and conferences to share information and fill information gaps. The Secretary of Defense should instruct the Joint staff to develop options to mitigate the effects of factors that are beyond thecombatant commands’ control. DOD views updating and reviewing plans to ensure that they are current as a continuous process driven by changes in policy, science, and environmental factors. The Chairman, Federal Reserve, the Comptroller of the Currency, and the Chairman, Securities and Exchange Commission should consider taking additional actions to ensure market participants adequately prepare for an outbreak. OPM should initiate discussion with the Department of Homeland Security and other responsible stakeholders to consider the feasibility of integrating the two plans. The U.S. Pacific Command, along with the military services and installations, are increasingly working and planning with state, local, and tribal representatives. the federal executive board’s (FEB) emergency support responsibilities into the established emergency response framework, such as the National Response Plan. The FEB strategic plan for fiscal years 2008 through 2012 includes operational goals with associated measures for its emergency preparedness, security, and employee safety line of business. OPM, as part of its strategic planning process for the FEBs, should develop a proposal for an alternative to the current voluntary contribution mechanism that would address the uncertainty of funding sources for the boards. U.S. Northern Command was designated as the lead combatant command for directing, planning, and synchronizing DOD’s global response to an influenza pandemic. DOD has updated its publicly available pandemic influenza Web site, to include links to the Military Vaccine Agency, which provides information on the risks and side effects of vaccines. DOD issued additional guidance related to the distribution of its vaccine and antiviral stockpiles in the event of an influenza Pandemic. The Office of the Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller) is utilizing established protocols for programming funds related to pandemic pandemic preparedness for DOD.