In 2003, oil accounted for about 40 percent of the total U.S. energy consumption. Most oil is used in the transportation sector as gasoline, diesel, and jet fuel. Since 1970, imports of crude oil and other products have increased 255 percent. The United States relies on imported oil for more than half of its supply and appears likely to increase its reliance in the future, the authors say. They say the United States is currently the world’s third largest oil producer, but its proven oil reserves account for less than 1 percent of world demand. Since the 1970s, the crude oil market has, at times, been heavily influenced by the OPEC cartel. OPEC holds about 68 percent of total world oil reserves. Because of the relative political instability in the Middle East, occasional oil supply disruptions and price shocks have been a fact of life for about the past 30 years. Demand has pressed the limits of the production and delivery infrastructure in the oil industry in recent years, says John Defterios, president of the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants. The federal government has supported a number of research and development and regulatory efforts designed to reduce demand for petroleum fuels in transportation. GAO has issued numerous reports on aspects of the petroleum sector, including gasoline markets and government efforts to reduce consumption of gasoline in vehicles among other areas. The U.S. government has encouraged the development and deployment of technologies focused on identifying alternatives to petroleum-based fuels, such as the recent FreedomCAR initiative for fuel-cell technologies for vehicles. The federal government supported the Partnership for a New Generation of Vehicles to aid automobile manufacturers in developing gas-electric hybrid vehicles. GAO has noted that low gasoline prices do not reflect external costs associated with gasoline use. Low gasoline prices work to discourage energy efficiency and the use of alternative fuels. Later this year, GAO will release a primer on how gasoline is made and distributed, what factors influence the price of gasoline, and why gasoline prices change. In forthcoming work requested by the Congress,GAO will report on the presence of multiple fuel formulation requirements in some parts of the country and how the expansion of these fuels have affected prices. In 2003, coal accounted for about 23 percent of total U.S. energy consumption. Nearly all of the coal consumed in the United States, 92 percent, was used in the production of electricity. Coal reserves are located across the country, with large reserves in the West, the Midwest, and the Appalachian Mountains. In 2003, using EIA data, estimates of recoverable U.s. coal reserves could last over 250 years, based on current usage.for over 100 years. Coal is generally extracted from either surface, or underground mines, but underground coal also contains combustible gas. Coal prices have been declining in real terms since the mid-1970s. The production and use of coal have a variety of environmental consequences. Surface mining has the most significant impacts on land resources. combustion of coal in power plants emits pollutants and contributes to air quality. The federal government controls the amount of federal land an individual company may mine, and requirements that surface land be restored to conditions similar to natural conditions when mining ends. The U.S. Geological Survey says coal reserves are located on federal lands and subject to direct federal controls. GAO: Coal plants emit pollutants such as NOx, sulfur oxides, particulate matter, mercury. In addition to these pollutants, coal plants release a substantial amount of carbon dioxide. GAO: 100 or more power plants featuring advanced technologies are being considered for development in the United States. How can the federal government balance the use of this abundant domestic energy source with its regulated and unregulated environmental consequences, GAO asks in a new report.. What changes in controls, if any, should the U.S. make to how coal can be mined on federal land and elsewhere? What role should the government play in extracting coal bed methane? Natural gas plays a vital role in meeting the country’s national energy demand. Use of natural gas has been growing rapidly since the mid-1980s. The Energy Information Administration estimates that U.S. consumption could increase to about 31 trillion cubic feet (TCF) by 2025. The United States still has substantial undeveloped natural gas resources, but some of these resources are located under federal lands, and access to some of them is restricted, authors say. They ask: What role should the federal government play in providing incentives for using coal in ways that are safer for the environment? 40 percent of the natural gas resources on federal land in the Rocky Mountain region are not available for development. Meeting the sharp increases forecast for natural gas demand could also require substantial increases in infrastructure, such as new pipelines and LNG terminals. To meet the need for sharply higher imports of natural gas, some experts believe that the United States may need to build more LNG Terminals. To date, however, such facilities have not been built due to economic, safety, and security concerns. Consequently, it is not clear whether the U.S. can compete with other countries for these supplies. reports on the natural gas markets and their oversight. In 2002 and 2003, for example, we issued reports analyzing natural gas Markets. GAO will report on federal efforts to understand natural gas market and its role in U.S. energy policy. In forthcoming work requested by the Congress, GAO would report on the federal effort to understand the market and the role of the EIA in overseeing it. The report would also look at various approaches for compensating the federal government when natural gas is removed from federal land and the impacts on certain industries. and manage risks associated with potential terrorist attacks on LNG shipments and other tankers. Should the federal government encourage further development of domestic natural gas on federal lands, and can it ensure that environmental impacts are adequately mitigated? What are the implications for consumers (residential, commercial, industrial, and electric power) of the increasing reliance on natural gas to generate electricity? To what extent is the federalGovernment positioned to ensure that natural gas prices are determined competitively? What role, if any, should the government play in facilitating the development of this infrastructure? Nuclear energy currently accounts for about 8 percent of U.S. national energy consumption. Nearly all nuclear energy is used to generate electricity. The first commercial nuclear power plant came on line in 1957. Whether we can continue to rely on, or expand our use of, nuclear energy in the future at existing plants or at new plants based on new designs hinges on solving the long-term waste storage problem as well as resolving concerns over safety and security, writes John Defterios, a nuclear energy expert. Many nuclear plants operating today were initially licensed for 40 years. No new plants have been ordered in the United States since 1996. Many of the plants that were completed witnessed multibillion dollar cost overruns. The average annual capacity factor has increased from 71 percent in 1997 to 90 percent in 2004. The remaining 104 units have increased their productivity, the output actually increased by about 13 percent from 1998 through 2003. The U.S. nuclear industry has a long way to go, however, to reach its full potential. Interest in nuclear power plants has increased, in part, because they do not emit regulated air pollutants. Nuclear energy plays a large role in supplying energy in France, Germany, Canada, Japan, and other developed nations. Nuclear plants remain very costly to build compared to some other plant types. They have lower fuel and other operating costs and can produce electricity at a lower cost than new plants that use fuels such as coal or natural gas. The U.S. increasingly relies on international markets to obtain the nuclear fuel used here. Efforts to develop the facility have focused on storing the waste deep under Yucca Mountain in the desert north of Las Vegas, Nevada. In 2002, about 45,000 tons of spent fuel from nuclear plants was stored in the United States. Because the permanent repository has not been completed, the highly radioactive waste remains stored at power plants and other facilities and has been the subject of several lawsuits. Nuclear power plants contain radioactive materials that if released could pose catastrophic risks to human health over an expansive area, but are designed and operated to avoid such an event. Since 9/11, nuclear plants have emerged as a key security concern. Industry expects that new plant designs will further reduce safety and security risks. We have issued a series of reports, spanning more than 20 years, that focus on various aspects of developing of a permanent nuclear waste storage facility. In 2002, we reported that it would be premature for DOE to recommend the facility at Yucca Mountain to the President as a suitable repository for nuclear waste. In September 2004, we testified that NRC was generally approving plants’ new security plans on the basis of limited details in the plans. GAO will continue to examine homeland security issues related to protecting commercial nuclear power plants from terrorist attacks. What role should nuclear energy continue to play in providing the nation’s energy needs in view of the aging of existing plants? Are changes needed in how the industry and NRC ensure that plants are operated safely and securely, and is enough being done to protect nuclear plants? GAO will undertake a comprehensive review of NRC”s reactor oversight process and how NRC ensures that plants operate safely. From 1980 through 2003, the quantity of electricity sold increased by 75 percent. In 2003, over 70 percent of electricity was generated using fossil fuels. The federal government has a direct role in supplying electricity, through the federally controlled Power Marketing Agency. In recent years, new power plants have predominantly relied on natural gas, the authors say. and determining whether the federal government can improve how electricity markets function remains a focus for federal policy. and energy policy in the U.S. from terrorist attacks. Electricity sector is restructuring to foster more competition, authors say. But the federal government still oversees wholesale electricity markets, they say. Authors: Consumers should be able to manage their own electricity energy demand. They ask: What changes are necessary to federal and state monitoring and oversight of electricity markets? They also ask: How does continued uncertainty about the future of electricity restructuring affect electricity companies, investment in new plants and transmission lines, and consumer prices? The authors: What role should the federal Power Authority play? In 2003 renewable and alternative energy sources accounted for slightly more than 6 percent of the total U.S. energy consumption. Hydropower is the largest single source in this category and makes up over 45 percent. Several alternative sources, such as hydrogen and fusion power, may offer potential long-term promise, but research remains at an early stage. To what extent are homeland security principles being integrated into new electricity infrastructure and business processes? For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. Wood accounts for about 34 percent of total renewable energy, although its use has declined since 1989. Alcohol fuels, such as ethanol, make up about 4 percent of the total, but their use has increased rapidly in recent years, almost doubling from 1999 through 2003. Wind energy has witnessed substantial and persistent growth in recently years, more than tripling from 1998 through 2003, according to the U.S. Energy Information Administration. The U.N. estimates that in 2003, there were about 2.5 billion kilowatt-hours of renewable energy consumed. Solar energy accounts for about 1 percent of all renewable and alternative energy consumed. Growth in wind power has benefited from improvements in wind turbine technology. Technologies such as hydrogen power and fusion are currently being developed as new sources of energy. EIA: It is important to keep one eye on the technical goals and one eyes on the marketplace. energy source should be measured by its contribution to increasing the use and feasibility of an energy source, rather than its impact on the environment, EIA says. than reaching specific technical research and development goals. GAO will report on the impact of wind turbines on birds and other aspects of the environment. What should the federal government’s role be in researching and developing existing and future sources of renewable and alternative energy sources? What are the implications of renewable energy mandates for deploying renewable energy technologies and for electricity markets? Experts have long contended that energy strategies that reduce demand can cost less, be brought on line faster, and provide greater environmental benefits, GAO says. Energy demand in the U.S. has trended steadily upward for the last 50 years. While demand has increased, the amount of energy the country uses relative to its economic output has fallen. The reduction has been even more striking when examining the industrial sector, where energy used per dollar of GDP has fallen by over 60 percent since 1970. Despite their advantages, opportunities to improve efficiency and consumer choice are often overlooked, the authors say. It is not clear whether this reduction reflects a reduction in fossil fuel consumption. The federal government has, periodically, made efforts to reduce demand, encourage energy efficiency. Federal efforts have met with some success. Energy efficiency investments made from 1973 through 2003 saved the equivalent of 40 to 50 quadrillion BTUs of energy in 2003. Several organizations, including a panel of several national laboratories, estimate that many opportunities for additional improvements in energy efficiency remain untapped. The U.S. government has also made investments to improve energy efficiency and save money on energy at its own buildings. Reducing demand when prices are falling has been difficult for several reasons. Consumers are often not aware of the energy inefficiency of their homes and businesses. Falling energy prices have also made it more difficult to demonstrate the cost-effectiveness of spending money to replace aging and inefficient equipment. In contrast, when consumers face prolonged period of higher energy prices, they are more likely to identify and adopt cost-effective strategies for reducing their energy demand. For example, following prolonged supply disruptions and price increases for gasoline in the 1970s, consumers in the 1980s chose to purchase more fuel-efficient vehicles, pushing up energy prices. GAO has examined policies designed to reduce demand in electricity markets. GAO will evaluate the Department of Energy’s program for setting energy efficiency standards for appliances. Striking a balance between efforts to boost supplies and those focused on reducing demand presents challenges as well as opportunities. Consumer choices made from today forward will determine to a great extent how much energy will be needed in the future, says GAO's John Defterios. The U.S. energy policies come down to choices, he says. the same choices that we are confronting today. How far have we come? Have we charted a course that can be sustained in the 21st century? In 30 years, will we again come full circle and ask ourselves these same questions about our energy future? The answer to this final question lies in our collective ability to develop and sustain a strategic plan, with supporting incentives, along with a means to measure our progress and periodically adjust our path to meet future energy challenges. For further information about this testimony, please contact me, Jim Wells, at (202) 512-3841. Ray Smith. Energy Markets: Effects of Mergers and Market Concentration in the U.S. Petroleum Industry. Energy Policy: Options to Reduce Environmental and Other Costs of Gasoline Consumption. Nuclear Waste: Technical, Schedule, and Cost Uncertainties of the Yucca Mountain Repository Project. Natural Gas Flaring and Venting: Opportunities to Improve Data and Reduce Emissions. Geothermal Energy: Information on the Navy’s Geothermal Program. Solar and Renewable Energy Technologies Program. and distributed in its entirety without further permission from GAO. However, because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material, permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. For support in the U.S., call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline on 1-800-273-8255.