Claims representatives at SSA field offices are responsible for processing all applications and determining the amount of monthly SSI payments. SSA uses both financial eligibility reviews, known as redeterminations, and computer matching to identify and prevent overpayments. No computer matches are done that could identify unreported or underreported income from the Aid to Families With Dependent Children (AFDC) and workers’ compensation (WC) programs. In 1994, SSA began establishing on-line connections between its field offices and state agencies that had automated databases that could easily be linked to SSA's computer system. Some states may not want to grant SSA on-line access because of privacy concerns. Others may refuse to negotiate the necessary agreements until SSA grants reciprocal access. SSA has not tracked the costs it has incurred when making the necessary changes to its systems to implement on-LINE access. Some states that do not have fully automated data are willing to explore giving SSA access in exchange for SSA sharing the costs of automating their data, the authors say. They believe it is possible to develop a system that would minimize the possibility of accessing personal data for unofficial use. copy of each GAO report and testimony is free. Additional copies are $2 each. Orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent. VISA and MasterCard credit cards are accepted, also. Orders should be sent to the following address, accompanied by a check or money order made out to the Superintendent of Documents, when necessary: U.S. General Accounting Office P.O. Box 6015 Gaithersburg, MD 20884-6015 Room 1100 700 4th St. NW (corner of 4th and G Sts. NW) menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists. For more information about how to get these lists, please visit the site's home page. The site will also provide a list of the most popular lists on the site. For the most up-to-date list, please go to the website's homepage. The most popular list on the website is the list of most popular search terms, which can be found at: http://www.dailymailonline.co.uk/news/article-361552/how-to get-a-list-of-the-most-popular-search-words-from-the online-news-menu.html.