PBGC was created as a government corporation by the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (ERISA) PBGC guarantees the retirement income of U.S. workers with private-sector defined benefit plans. In 2003, GAO designated PBGC’s single-employer program as high-risk, and PBGC has remained high- risk with each subsequent update, including our most recent update in 2009. This means that the program still needs urgent congressional attention and agency action, says GAO.  PBGC’s first communication with participants is generally a letter informing them that their pension plan has been terminated and that PBGC has become the plan trustee. PBGC also operates a customer service center with a toll-free number that participants can call if they have questions. If the participant is already retired, or retires before the benefit determination process is complete, PBGC makes payments to the retiree based on an estimate of what the final benefit amount will be.in detail below.  PBGC does not systematically track the number of participants affected by the limits on guaranteed benefits. PBGC has conducted two studies on the impact of these limits in a sample of large plans. We found cases where estimated benefits were adjusted within 9 months of termination, while in other cases, more than 6 years elapsed before estimates were adjusted. Even for participants who are not yet receiving benefits, the lack of communication about the likely amount of their final benefits makes it difficult to plan for retirement, we found.  PBGC officials have taken steps to shorten the benefit determination process. The agency has also developed more than 500 letter formats to address the myriad of situations that may arise in the process. Officials acknowledged that their standard letter formats may not always meet the needs of participants, especially those with complex plans. They were generally sympathetic to the difficulty of communicating such complicated information. As one advocate acknowledged, for the letters to be accurate, they have to be complicated; this may just be “the nature of the beast.”  PBGC recently undertook a project to review and update their letters to try to better meet participant needs. The vast majority of participants in terminated plans are not affected by overpayments or PBGC’s recoupment process. When an overpayment occurs, retirees typically repay the amount owed by having their monthly benefits reduced by some fraction until the debt is repaid. According to PBGC data, 22,623 participants in plans terminated and trusteed during fiscal years 2000 through 2008 (2.1% of the total) Some pension advocates and union representatives said that this is often the case in complex cases involving large benefit reductions. In the participant files we reviewed, the benefit statements that accompanied the letters ranged in length from 2 to 8 pages. In some cases, there were as many as 20 to 30 different line items that required making comparisons between the items to understand the logic of the calculations. Participants may appeal the results of the benefit determination process within 45 days of receiving a final benefit determination. Appeals are accepted.  PBGC policy stipulates that in cases with an ongoing payment, recoupment of an overpayment may not be waived unless the monthly reduction would be less than $5. Federal agencies such as the Social Security Administration and the Office of Personnel Management generally pursue repayment at a faster rate with larger reductions to benefits when recouping overpayments. To address the concerns of workers and retirees in terminated plans who stand to lose as much as one-half or more of their long-anticipated retirement income, PBGC needs a more strategic approach. GAO: PBGC should develop a better strategy for processing complex plans. PBGC generally agreed with our recommendations, noted the steps it would take to address GAO’s concerns. For example, PBGC said that it had started to track and monitor tasks associated with processing large, complex plans, and would continue to look for other ways to improve its processes. A complete discussion of our recommendations and PBGC's comments, can be found at: http://www.gao.org/news/features/top-stories/2013/01/30/gao-recommends- PBGC-develop-a-better-strategy-for-processing-complex- plans.  PBGC’s financial challenges continue to mount and dramatic increases to PBGC's workload appear imminent, GAO says. GAO: Improvements in PBGC processes are urgently needed. This is a work of the U.S. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States. The published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from GAO. However, because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material, permission from the copyright holder may be required. necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. For support in the UK, contact the National suicide Prevention Lifeline on 0800 555 111. For more information on suicide prevention, visit www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org.