deadline suit is a lawsuit in which an individual or entity sues because EPA has allegedly failed to perform any nondiscretionary act or duty by a deadline established in law. For example, a person suing EPA because EPA failed to issue a rule by a date established in statute. A person may sue EPA because it missed a recurring deadline to review and revise, as necessary or appropriate, an existing rule. In August 2011, we reported that the number of new environmental litigation cases—of all types—filed against EPA each year from fiscal year 1995 through fiscal year 2010 averaged 155 cases per year. The term settlement refers to both settlement agreements and consent decrees. Both are negotiated agreements between EPA and the plaintiff. A settlement agreement is not subject to court approval but can result in a stay of the lawsuit. A consent decree is entered as a court order. If EPA fails to meet the terms of a consent decree, the court can enforce or modify the consent decree. The court can cite EPA for contempt of court, among other things, if it fails to comply with the decree. It generally follows procedures prescribed in the Administrative Procedures Act (APA) GAO identified seven key environmental laws for which EPA has primary regulatory authority that allow citizens to file a deadline suit. EPA works with DOJ to consider several factors in determining whether or not to settle the deadline suit and the terms of any settlement. With the exception of the Emergency Planning and Community Right-to- Know Act, citizen suits may only be filed to compel certain actions listed in the law. For example, the provision in the Clean Air Act states: “ny person may commence a civil action on his own behalf - … against the Administrator.” EPA and DOJ work together to determine how to respond to the lawsuit. EPA and DOJ have an agreement under which both must concur in the settlement of any case in which DOJ represents EPA. EPA issued 32 major rules from May 31, 2008 through June 1, 2013. They were all Clean Air Act rules. The terms of settlements in deadline suits that resulted in EPA issuing major rules in the last 5 years established a schedule to either promulgate a statutorily required rule or make a determination that doing so is not appropriate or necessary. GAO: Most of the resources available to complete RTRs are focused on a 2011 settlement. GAO: EPA accounts for anticipated workload arising out of litigation in its budgeting cycle for affected programs but does not make changes in existing budget allocations specifically to address settlements in deadline suits. The report will be available at no charge on the GAO website at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staff members have any questions about this report, please contact me at (202) 512-3841.