The VA offers a broad range of benefits to veterans of the U.S. Armed Forces. Certain criteria must be met to be eligible to receive any of the benefits. This report focuses on basic eligibility and entitlement requirements for former servicemembers for benefits administered by the VA. The VA uses a two-step process to evaluate claims for benefits. The claimant must prove that he or she is a bona fide veteran and verify certain related matters. and the veteran must prove entitlement to the particular benefit being sought. Health Service; or as a commissioned officer of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration or its predecessors. Active service also includes a period of active duty for training during which the person was disabled or died from an injury or disease incurred or aggravated in the line of duty. Additional circumstances of service, and whether they are deemed to be active military service, are set out in law. For example, if on authorized travel to and from the performance of activeduty training or inactive duty forTraining, a person is disabled or dies. For people who enlisted prior to September 8, 1980, no minimum length of service is necessary to be considered a veteran for most VA benefits. The general requirement is the "full period" for which the servicemember was called or ordered to active duty or, if less, 24 months of continuous active duty. Several exceptions exist to this rule, including life insurance benefits, hardship discharges and persons retired or separated from service because of a service-related disability. If the veteran did not serve for the full period of active duty and served less than 24 months, and none of the statutory exceptions apply, then the veteran is not eligible for any benefit. veteran requires that the individual be discharged or released from military service "under conditions other than dishonorable" The VA often determines on a case-by-case basis whether the claimant's discharge qualifies. A bad conduct discharge from a special court-martial does not always disqualify the claimant. Veterans in prison and parolees may be eligible for certain VA benefits and must contact the VA to determine eligibility.. VA benefits are not provided to any veteran or dependent wanted for an outstanding felony warrant. was not in a combat zone. Those time periods not designated by Congress as wartime are considered to be peacetime. If a veteran served partly during wartime and partly during peacetime, the veteran meets the wartime criteria if he or she served 90 consecutive days. Congress has designated eight wartime periods: Indian Wars, Spanish-American War, Mexican Border Period, World War I, WWII, Korean Conflict, Vietnam Era and Vietnam Era. The Vietnam Era was designated on August 5, 1964, for veterans in service on December 31, 1946. Members of the National Guard and the reserve components must meet the same standards as other claimants. In many cases, however, they do not meet the active duty standard or length of service standard and are therefore ineligible for VA benefits. National Guard members also qualify as veterans for the purposes of VA benefits if they are disabled or die from a disease or injury incurred or aggravated in the line of duty. Under certain conditions Guard and reserve members may be eligible for education benefits (through the Reserve Educational Program) and home loans from the VA. P.L. 95-202 provides that service for the Armed Forces by a group of civilians or contractors be considered active service for benefits administered by the VA. If these groups are considered to be active duty by the Secretary, they are eligible to receive certain benefits, including health care. To date, only certain groups who participated in World War I and World War II have been accorded active duty status under this procedure. The regulations also established the Department of Defense Civilian/Military Service Review Board and Advisory Panel to review each application. Civilian groups granted veterans status pursuant to P.L. 95-202 are eligible for VA burial benefits including interment or inurnment in VA National Cemeteries. Merchant mariners are civilians who engage in certain maritime activities, such as the transportation of military equipment by sea, in support of the armed forces. The following groups are considered veterans for purposes of eligibility for all programs administered by the VA: U.S. Merchant Seamen who served on blockships insupport of Operation Mulberry in World War II; and American Merchant Marine personnel who served in oceangoing service.