The academies are structured to provide a curriculum critical to the development of successful future officers. Approximately 4,000 students are enrolled at each of the three service academies at any one time. Each academy’s student population consists of about 15 percent women and 19 to 24 percent racial/ethnic minorities. The academies employ both civilian and military faculty, including military officers who serve as commanders to students at each academy.. Between 1993 and 1995, we issued a series of reports on student treatment at the three. academies. Survey of 9,238 students and faculty at three military service academies. Majority responded that quality-of-life problems are openly confronted and/or solved at their academies to some, little, or no extent. Students expressed mixed views on the practice of the honor code/concept on their campuses. Male students were more likely to be dissatisfied with their social life than female students, the survey found.. More actions were needed to eliminate sexual harassment and that disparities in the treatment of women and minorities existed at the academies, the review found. The perceptions of students on the emphasis the academies place on preventing race-/ethnicity-based discrimination also varied according to group membership. A large majority of all students rated the overall atmosphere for racial/ ethnic minorities as good or excellent. Student perceptions varied as to whether various groups of students, such as women, recruited athletes, and minorities, receive preferential treatment during the admissions process and in general. Many students at the three academies reported that they plan to stay in the military beyond their initial retirement. and performance, but they lack a complete oversight framework. We recommended that DOD improve its oversight by enhancing its performance goals and measures. The academies’ climate surveys are conducted periodically and can inform decision makers about areas that may warrant further attention. The results of our surveys, especially those areas mentioned above, may be of use to DOD in enhancing the quality of its oversight. We are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees; the Secretaries of Defense, the Army, the Navy, and the Air Force. Student and faculty perceptions of aspects of student life at the U.S. Military, Naval, and Air Force Academies. Key contributors are listed in appendix IV. If you or your staff have any questions concerning this report, please contact us at [email protected] or call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-TALK (8255). For confidential support on suicide matters call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. nine general topics: (1) academic climate, military/professional development, social and cultural climate. Five student-related topics: harassment, discrimination (gender- and race-/ethnicity-based), and preferential treatment for various groups of students. Five intercollegiate and intramural athletics topics: campus services, personal affairs, and career intentions. To ensure the relevance and appropriateness of the survey questions, we sought outside comments on our survey approach and questions from officials in the Office of the Under Secretary of Defense. determine whether the questions and the manner in which we planned to ask them were adequate for addressing the larger questions posed by our evaluation. Second, to find out whether academy students and faculty had the knowledge to answer our survey questions. The reviewing officials did not act as pretest interviewees; they provided critiques. Based on the comments received, we modified the survey terminology to apply to the respective academies, eliminated and/or changed questions or response items that did not apply, and added questions or responses germane to all three service academies. initial difficulties in resolving inaccuracies in the E-mail addresses provided to us by the Air Force Academy. To administer the surveys, we built six Web-based survey sites, two for each academy (one for students and one for faculty) Table 15 shows that the response rates for the surveys were generally high. Since we surveyed the entire student and faculty populations at all three academies and not a statistical sample, achieved high response rates, and found minimal error rates. We concluded that the survey results appeared to be generally representative of the academy populations. How much emphasis does the Academy place on academics, relative to what you think it should be? How effective or ineffective are your Academy instructors as teachers? Based on your experiences, how would you rate the overall academic program at the Academy? How satisfied or dissatisfied are you with the types of cultural opportunities (e.g., courses related to the arts, opportunities to participate in the arts?) The responses can be considered representative of those populations. We performed our work between November 2002 and July 2003 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. and attending such events) available to Academy students on or off Academy grounds. How satisfied or dissatisfied are you with opportunities to participate in religious services and activities? How often have you witnessed academic cheating at the Academy? When you were applying to the Academy, were you recruited to be an athlete for one of the Academy’s varsity intercollegiate athletic teams? To what extent is the Honor Code/Concept practiced as it is taught? (percent) (percent), 10.4 25. How satisfied or dissatisfied are you with the following housing conditions, food services and other services/facilities at the Academy? How much emphasis does the Academy place on academics, relative to what you think it should be? How effective or ineffective is the four-year class system for developing students as officers? Based on your experiences, how would you rate the overall military development program at the. Academy? (percent) (percent), 1.1 (percent?) (percent, 1.8 (percent). extent are quality of life problems at the Academy openly confronted and/or solved? Are you a military or civilian member of the Academy faculty? In the past 4 years, have you participated in the admissions process? ( percent) (percent) 34. In addition to the individual named above, Gabrielle M. Anderson, Nancy L. Benco, Carolyn M. Boyce, Brian G. Hackett, and Joseph W. Kirschbaum also made key contributions to this report. GAO’s Web site (www.gao.gov) contains abstracts and full- text files of current reports and testimony. The Web site features a search engine to help you locate documents using key words and phrases. You can print these documents in their entirety, including charts and other graphics. Each day, GAO issues a list of newly released reports, testimony, and correspondence. The list contains links to the full-text document files. The fastest and easiest way to obtain copies of GAO documents at no cost is through the Internet.