The public faces a high risk that critical services provided by the government and the private sector could be severely disrupted by the Year 2000 computing crisis. Financial transactions could be delayed, flights grounded, power lost, and national defense affected. America’s infrastructures are a complex array of public and private enterprises with many interdependencies at all levels. A single failure could cause a single failure to have adverse repercussions, the authors say. The information and telecommunications sector is especially important, they say. Year 2000 readiness problems in the international arena. Only 18 of 127 countries (14 percent) had a national Year 2000 program. Aircraft and other military equipment could be grounded because the computer systems used to schedule maintenance and track supplies may not work. Further, the Department of Defense (DOD) could incur shortages of military equipment if the problem is not corrected. The following are examples of some of the major disruptions the public and private sectors could experience if the Year 2000 problem isNot corrected. Unless the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) takes much more decisive action. Medical devices and scientific laboratory equipment may experience problems beginning January 1, 2000, if the computer systems, software applications, or embedded chips used in these devices contain two-digit fields for year representation. According to the Basle Committee on Banking Supervision, failure to address the Year 2000 issue would cause banking institutions to experience operational problems or even bankruptcy. On February 4, 1998, the President signed an executive order that established the President’s Council on Year 2000 Conversion led by an Assistant to the President and composed of one representative from each of the executive departments. Many of the federal government’s computer systems were originally designed and developed 20 to 25 years ago. Some applications include thousands, tens of thousands, or even millions of lines of code. Unless progress improves dramatically, a substantial number of mission-critical systems will not be compliant in time. If they do, the impact of Year 2000 failures could be widespread, costly, and potentially disruptive to vital government operations worldwide.. FAA must determine how to ensure continuity of critical operations in the likely event of some systems’ failures. renovating mission-critical mainframe software, certain areas of risk in its Year 2000 program remained. Many of the states’ Disability Determination Service systems still had to be renovated, tested, and deemed Year 2000 compliant. More attention needs to be devoted to ensuring that the government has a complete and accurate picture of Year 2000 progress, he says. If priorities are not clearly set, the government may well end up wasting limited time and resources in fixing systems that have little bearing on the most vital government operations. need to set priorities. Canada has established 48 national priorities covering areas such as national defense, food production, safety, and income security. Business continuity and contingency planning across the government has been inadequate. Only four agencies reported that they had drafted contingency plans for their core business processes. Without such plans, when unpredicted failures occur, agencies will not have well-defined responses and may not have enough time to develop and test alternatives. One weak link anywhere in the chain of critical dependencies can cause major disruptions to business operations. whether these systems are owned by the agency. Our recently issued guidance aims to help agencies ensure such continuity of operations through contingency planning. Third, OMB’s assessment of the current status of federal Year 2000 progress is predominantly based on agency reports that have not been consistently reviewed or verified. In fact, we have found cases in which agencies’ systems compliance status as reported to OMB has been inaccurate. In May 1998, the Department of Agriculture reported (USDA) 15 systems as compliant, even though these were replacement systems that were still under development or planned for development. plans to remove these systems from compliant status in its next quarterly report. Fourth, end-to-end testing responsibilities have not yet been defined. Agency must work early and continually with their data exchange partners to plan and execute effective end- to-end tests. We have set forth a structured approach to testing in our recently released exposure draft. It includes requiring agencies to develop contingency plans for all critical core requiring agency to develop an independent verification strategy to involve inspectors general or other independent organizations in reviewing Year 2000 progress. processes and supporting systems is performed. State and local governments also face a major risk of Year 2000-induced failures to the many vital services they provide. For example, food stamps and other types of payments may not be made or could be made for an incorrect amount. Date-dependent signal timing patterns could be incorrectly implemented at highway intersections. Safety severely compromised, if traffic signal systems run by local governments run by state and local government are not properly tested. The report was published by the Government Accountability Office and the Chief Information Officers Council. Recent surveys of state Year 2000 efforts have indicated that much remains to be completed. Only about one-third of the states reported that 50 percent or more of their critical systems had been completely assessed, remediated, and tested. To effectively manage their Year 2000 projects, state and local governments must perform the same types of activities as the federal government, says John Sutter, author of "Year 2000: A Guide for States and U.S. Agencies’ New Year 2000 Efforts" Texas' Office of the State Auditor recently reported on the state’s efforts to remediate its embedded systems. The State Auditor found that many state entities had not finished their embedded systems inventories and, therefore, it is not likely that they will complete their embedded system repairs before the year 2000. To address these concerns, the report noted that (1) many entities lacked contingency plans in case theirembedded systems fail, (2) several entities cited a lack of funds as a barrier to embedded systems repair efforts, and (3) no entity is responsible for coordinating and reporting on statewide embedded system repair efforts. Office of the State Auditor also made recommendations, such as the Texas Year 2000 Project Office including embedded systems in its Year 2000 contingency plan requirements. For example, Illinois’ Office of the Auditor General reported that significant future efforts were needed to ensure that the year 2000 would not adversely affect state government operations. Vermont’s Office of Auditor of Accounts reported that the state faces the risk that critical portions of its Year2000 compliance efforts could fail. Florida’S Auditor General has issued several reports detailing the need for additional Year 2000 planning at various district school boards and community colleges. As computers play an ever-increasing role in our society, exchanging data electronically has become a common method of transferring information among federal, state, and local governments. As computer systems are converted to process Year 2000 dates, the associated data exchanges must also be made Year 2000 compliant. To successfully remediate their data exchanges, federal agencies and the states must assess information systems to identify data exchanges that are not year 2000 compliant, authors say. They also say states must reach agreement on the date format to be used in the exchange. federal agencies and states in implementing Year 2000 compliant data exchanges. In summary, federal, state, and local efforts must increase substantially to ensure that major service disruptions do not occur. Greater leadership and partnerships are essential if government programs are to meet the needs of the public at the turn of the century. Mr. Chairman, this concludes my statement. I would be happy to respond to any questions that you or other members of the Subcommittee may have at this time. Back to the page you came from. Each day, GAO issues a list of newly available reports and testimony. To receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days, please call (202) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone. A recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists. Orders may also be placed by using fax number (202- 512-6061, or TDD (202/512-2537) or by using a phone number from the General Accounting Office (Washington, DC)