General revenue sharing (GRS) is typically defined as unconditional federal grants to state and local governments. GRS has not been explicitly identified as a primary tool to provide counter-cyclical assistance. Over the almost 15-year life of the GRS program (1972 through 1986), over $83 billion was transferred from the federal government. To achieve a comparable magnitude of assistance today, approximately $313 billion (in 2008 dollars) would need to be distributed over the next 15 years. Some observers have suggested that a revenue sharing program that provided states with grants to forestall spending cuts and tax increases in 2009 may deter pro-cyclicals. The relative income factor (RIF) and the general tax effort factor (GTEF) were intended to adjust the state allocations based on the state's "ability-to-pay" and tax structure. The GTEF was considered important for GRS because it created a disincentive for states to reduce taxes and rely more on the federal government for revenue over time. In the three-part GRS formula, the higher a state's RIF, the greater the share of revenue. The rationale behind GRS cannot be traced to a single political or economic objective. Proponents of reallocation cite the more "progressive," and thus desirable, structure of federal taxes. Opponents of federal assistance to state and local governments during economic slowdowns suggest that poor state-local fiscal management creates deficit problems. The arguments for and against GRS are subjective because they rely on measuring fairness. of GRS is a bipartisan effort to improve federal revenue sharing between the states and the federal government. First, layoffs reduce aggregate demand because when workers are laid off, their income would fall steeply until they find new jobs, causing their consumption to fall. Second, since government services are included in GDP, measured economic activity would be directly reduced as long as resources (workers) lay idle. If GRS prevented net job losses, these negative effects on the economy could be avoided. The saving behavior of potentially separated employees would likely enhance the stimulative effect of avoiding job losses. But avoiding induced early retirement may provide less stimulus. than avoiding furloughs and lay-offs. Research has shown that low income workers save a smaller portion of their income than high income workers. Across-the-board cuts would affect a variety of spending programs that do not easily conform to one succinct appraisal. The stimulative effect of avoiding cuts in local aid would be positive, though the magnitude is uncertain. Generally, tax cuts are more stimulative than cuts in state and local aid. It is likely that their incomes are lower than the median for state employees. If the employees are early in their careers and/or are in low skill positions, they are likely candidates for layoffs. cuts are less stimulative than direct spending increases, because individuals are likely to save some of their tax cut. Debt reduction and contributing to a rainy day fund would offer little stimulus because such action would be equivalent to an increase in public saving. In the short run, increased public saving does not stimulate the economy. If the federal grants were used to avoid tapping into tobacco revenue, the saving effect would be similar to contributing to an emergency fund. The combined effect of the various potential responses of state and local governments to federal grants is difficult to quantify a priori. GRS grants authorized by the State and Local Fiscal Assistance Act of 1972 (the 1972 Act) were essentially unconditional. GRS grants could be used by local governments for the following acceptable operating expenditures. Congress believed GRS was necessary for a variety of reasons. The most prominent reason at the time was the perceived need for reallocation of government responsibilities arising from the changing citizen demands for government services. The congressional sentiment behind the 1972 Act that created general revenue sharing is summarized well in the following passage from the Senate report accompanying the Act. The need for public services has increased manyfold and their costs are soaring. At the same time, state and local governments are having considerable difficulty in raising the revenue necessary to meet these costs. The Nixon Administration seemed to have a similar perspective. When President Nixon signed the legislation, the President remarked that the GRS program would "place responsibility for local functions under local control and provide local governments with the authority and resources they need to serve their communities effectively" But the shift in the demand for and provision of government services was not the only justification for GRS. to alter the nation's overall tax system by placing greater reliance on income taxation (predominantly federal) as opposed to property and sales taxation. Counteracting cyclical economic problems, such as state and local budget deficits induced by a slowing economy, was not explicitly mentioned as justification for GRS in the 1972 Act. When the debate began in 1974 on extending GRS beyond 1976, the countercyclical potential of revenue sharing apparently became important to policymakers. The 1976 extension also eliminated the priority expenditure categories for local governments and the prohibition on states from using the grants for federal matching grants. The program would be funded at a rate of $10 million for each one-tenth percentage point decline in real wages and salaries measured from the pre-recession base. The amount of money allocated in any one quarter would be limited to $300 million. After setting aside 1% of the funds for Puerto Rico, Guam, American Samoa, and the Virgin Islands, the remaining funds would then be split evenly between state governments and "county areas" The state portion would be adjusted by the state's tax effort. The 1980 Act discontinued revenue sharing for the states. It introduced the concept of providing countercyclical fiscal assistance through federal grants to state and local governments. The 1980 Act provided $13.7 billion in grants to local governments—approximately 2.3% of total own-source revenue. Local governments generated $593.8 billion of own source revenue over the three fiscal years covered by the 1980 Act. The 1983 Extension provided the same amount for local governments in three equal annual installments of $4.567 billion. This amount was equal to the amount received by local governments from 1977 through 1980.