The United States and the UK are two of the five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council. The UK is also the sixth-largest economy in the world and a major financial center. U.S. and UK officials, from the Cabinet level down, consult frequently and extensively on many global issues. Some observers assert that a common language and cultural similarities, as well as the habits of British people, may play a role in the relationship between the two countries. The two countries share an extensive and mutually beneficial trade and economic relationship. The UK is led by Prime Minister Theresa May of the Conservative Party. She became prime minister in July 2016, after David Cameron resigned in the wake of leading the unsuccessful campaign for the UK to remain in the European Union. As the longest-serving home secretary in modern times, May oversaw the UK's counterterrorism, policing, crime, and immigration policies from 2010 to 2016. The special relationship also encompasses close intelligence-sharing arrangements and unique cooperation in nuclear and defense matters. The term special relationship has often been used to describe the high degree of mutual trust between the two countries. The UK election of June 8, 2017, resulted in a hung parliament. No single party won a majority of seats in the 650-seat House of Commons. With 318 seats, the Conservative Party came in first place but lost the majority it had in the 2015 election. The Labour Party outperformed most expectations by winning 262 seats, a gain of 30. It was not what Prime Minister May had in mind in April 2017 when she unexpectedly announced a snap election shortly after opening the two-year window for negotiating the exit from the EU. May was able to form a Conservative minority government after concluding a deal for support from the Democratic Unionist Party. Since 2007, the DUP has led Northern Ireland's devolved regional government in a power-sharing arrangement with Irish nationalist party Sinn Fein. The Conservatives granted the DUP more budgetary resources for Northern Ireland as a key part of the two parties' parliamentary support deal. Other notable outcomes from the June 2017 election included the following: After gaining 50 seats in the 2015 election, the Scottish National Party (SNP) suffered the loss of 21 seats. Nearly 52% of British voters in the June 2016 referendum on EU membership answered that the UK should leave the EU. Factors such as economic dissatisfaction, unease with globalization and immigration, and antielite or antiestablishment sentiments played key roles in the referendum outcome. The vote was the culmination of a decades-long debate in the UK about the country's EU membership. Fearing a loss of national sovereignty and influence, the UK stood aside in the 1950s when the six founding countries launched the first steps of European integration. The relationship between London and Brussels often has been marked by ambivalence. The UK "opted out" of several major elements of European integration, such as the euro currency and the passport-free Schengen Area. British "euro-skeptics" have frequently expressed frustration that the EU tends to focus too much on internal treaties and process. With the clock ticking on a presumed exit in March 2019, Prime Minister May has sought to manage an intense debate about what Brexit should look. The UK government opted for a "hard Brexit," meaning a full departure from the EU single market and customs union. The strategy indicated that the UK would attempt to negotiate a free trade agreement with the EU to secure as much access to the EU market as possible. Emboldened by the result of the June 2017 election, however, advocates of a "soft Brexit" strategy have continued to urge the UK retain at least some elements of membership in the EUSingle market and agree to a multiyear transition period.  Divisions over differing viewpoints toward Brexit run through Parliament and the British public, but also through the Conservative Party and Prime Minister May's Cabinet. With her leadership weakened after the June 2017 election, many observers question how PM May can deliver a Brexit deal that satisfies both viewpoints. The tasks of managing Brexit-related tensions and disagreements within her own party, heading off rebellions from one side or the other, and finding potential areas of compromise are likely to be central challenges for the Prime Minister and her Cabinet. In December 2017, the government suffered a defeat when Parliament voted (309-305, with 11 Conservative MPs defecting) in favor of an amendment to the government's EU Withdrawal Bill. The government had promised a "meaningful vote" in Parliament on the withdrawal agreement, but some MPs feared the bill's language allowed ministers too much power to implement statutory changes without parliamentary approval. The country's National Health Services (NHS) have been severely strained by a capacity crisis during the winter of 2017-2018, pressuring the prime minister. the government to make plans for increasing resources and improving the performance of the UK's health sector. The Conservative Party also faces growing calls for a new definition of what it stands for in order to counter voters' receptiveness to the antiausterity messages of Jeremy Corbyn and the Labour Party. On March 29, 2017, Prime Minister May invoked Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union. The UK named as its lead negotiator David Davis, holding the newly created position of Secretary of State for Exiting the EU. The European Commission (the EU's executive institution) serves as the EU's negotiator. The EU's negotiating guidelines adopted at the leaders' summit in Brussels in April 2017 presented a two-phase approach to the talks. The EU resisted opening negotiations on its future economic and trade relationship with the UK until at least some of the main terms of withdrawal had been agreed. After seven months and six rounds of discussions, the two sides reached an agreement in principle covering main aspects of the three priority topics. The European Commission released the text of its draft withdrawal agreement on February 28, 2018. UK initially proposed that EU free movement rights would not carry over after withdrawal. EU citizens resident in the UK at the time of withdrawal would need to apply for a new immigration status. The outcome reflected in the December joint report was much closer to the original EU position. Citizens' advocacy groups assert that a lack of clarity remains about many questions, including whether and how individuals will need to register in order to qualify or claim their rights. The "divorce bill" quickly became one of the most contentious subjects of the negotiations. Sources in the EU suggest a figure as high as €100 billion (approximately $124 billion) Although it does not specify a figure, the agreement set out in the December joint report suggests that the total cost to the UK is likely to be about €40-€45 billion. The agreement includes the UK's share of implementing the EU's budget through the end of 2020 (the EU's current budget framework covers 2014-2020) Although the exact schedule and methodology remains to be detailed, costs are to be paid in euros and as they fall due. The border between Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland has become a complicated sticking point in the Brexit negotiations. Some observers initially expressed concerns that the reestablishment of a harder border could harm Northern Ireland's economy and destabilize the peace process. All parties have been eager to avoid such an outcome, and have sought to negotiate a special arrangement for Northern Ireland. The UK commits to avoiding a hard border, including the establishment of physical infrastructure for checks or controls, and to protecting North-South cooperation. Prime minister called for a custom tailored economic relationship with the EU. She additionally spoke of a border that is as "frictionless as possible" No new tariffs or quotas, and a "comprehensive system of mutual recognition" in terms of regulatory standards. The UK would also be able to apply its own tariffs and trade policy for goods intended for the UK market, she said. She asserted that every Free Trade Agreement has varying market access depending on the respective interests of the countries involved. Prime minister also called for a new independent arbitration mechanism, not the ECJ, to resolve disputes. Draft guidelines indicated that with the UK out of the single market and customs union, the EU considers such an ambitious trade and economic relationship as unrealistic. EU leaders are expected to adopt formal negotiating guidelines for phase two at a summit on March 22, 2018. The draft suggested the possibility of a free trade agreement that avoids tariffs and quotas but has only limited coverage of services (including financial services) and less potential for regulatory cooperation and mutual recognition of standards. agreement and transition arrangements. Examples of such issues include transition arrangements for the UK's exit from free trade agreements with both the EU itself and with third countries. The negotiations also are expected to address issues related to security cooperation, including judicial and law enforcement cooperation. The remaining 27 member states will decide where to resettle the two EU agencies located in the UK. (The agencies are the European Arrest Warrant and the European Court of Justice.) The negotiations are also expected to seek arrangements facilitating the transfer of information-sharing databases. The withdrawal agreement must be approved by both sides. In the UK, both Houses of Parliament (Commons and Lords) will vote on whether to accept the withdrawal agreement as negotiated or move ahead with no deal. The UK is likely to remain subject to EU rules governing trade policy and the single market without having voting representation in the EU institutions that shape those rules. Some observers suggest that given the pace and dynamics of the negotiations thus far, there is a possibility of a "no deal" scenario for March 2019. convert all EU law into UK law to prevent a legal "black hole" following the UK's departure from the EU. The UK would then decide on its own timetable what parts of EU law to keep or change going forward. Many economists have expressed concerns that Brexit could cause an economic shock that leaves the UK facing weaker economic growth, higher inflation, job losses, and depreciation of the pound. Advocates of Brexit have maintained that such economic fears are greatly exaggerated. The uncertainty has led some large companies to make plans, or to consider making plans, for moving their EU base, along with attendant jobs and capital, elsewhere. World's financial firms basing their European headquarters in London and employing 1 million people, is the loss of the UK's EU "passporting" rights. The signature initiative of the Conservative-led coalition government that took office in 2010 was a far-reaching austerity program aiming to reduce the country's budget deficit. Between 1993 and 2008, the British economy enjoyed an unprecedented period of sustained growth. The country was severely impacted by the global financial crisis and entered a deep recession in 2008, and a prolonged slump lasted until 2012. budget deficit as spending outpaced tax revenues and growth. The government budget deficit grew from 5% of gross domestic product (GDP) in 2008 to nearly 11% in 2009. In response to these trends, the coalition government began a program of budget austerity. Supporters have praised the austerity strategy as necessary to put the UK back on the path of financial sustainability. Opponents have argued that the government's approach is ideologically driven, unduly targets the poor, and is unfair to the poor. The UK's "special relationship" with the United States has been a cornerstone of British foreign policy since the 1940s. The UK is often perceived to be the leading allied voice in shaping U.S. foreign policy debates. British support, in turn, has often helped add international credibility and weight to U.N. policies and initiatives, and the U.K. is a key ally of the European Union, the European Council and the European Court of Human Rights, among others. The British government's most recent budget moderately loosened fiscal policy, with more spending to support the NHS. The UK continues to look to the United States for close partnership. President Trump appears to have a largely positive view of the UK as well. But there have been points of tension and uncertainty in the relationship over the past year. Some Members of Congress also have backed negotiating a free trade agreement with the UK. The UK cannot formally negotiate trade agreements until it leaves the EU, but some suggest that positive indications of a likely future agreement could help bolster the UK's position in negotiations with the EU on the terms of Brexit. Prime Minister May has consistently sought to convey that the alliance remains central to European security and the deterrence of Russian aggression. In contrast, President Trump has expressed opposition to the Iran nuclear deal and announced the planned U.S. withdrawal from the Paris climate agreement. May disagreed with the Trump Administration's recognition of Jerusalem as Israel's capital, calling the move "unhelpful in terms of prospects for peace in the region" She also expressed "deep concern" about the President's plan announced in March 2018 to introduce tariffs on steel and aluminum imports. Many in the UK have criticized Prime Minister May's outreach to the Trump Administration. Several incidents during President Trump's first year in office generated a backlash. In November 2017, President Trump was rebuked by PM May and numerous other British politicians for retweeting anti-Muslim videos posted by a far-right British group. President Trump initially pushed back against May's criticism, but he later offered to apologize. A date for PresidentTrump's state visit has not been officially set, leading to considerable uncertainty. In January 2018, President Trump canceled a planned working visit in February 2018 to open the new $1.2 billion U.S. embassy in London. Later in the month, he indicated that he planned to visit the UK at least once in 2018, with the official state visit potentially taking place in October 2018. The cancellation of the February working visit led some observers, including UK Foreign Secretary Boris Johnson, to express concerns that opposition to Trump in the UK was endangering the U-S.-UK relationship. U.S. defense planners have long viewed the UK as one of the most capable European allies. Observers note that the United States and the UK have long tended to have similar outlooks on issues such as the use of force. UK leaders have emphasized their continued commitment as a leading country in NATO. The UK has taken a strong role in efforts to deter Russian aggression, the U.S.-led coalition has said. the UK hosts about 8,700 American military personnel. During 2017, the UK was the lead nation in NATO's Very High Readiness Joint Task Force (VJTF) U.S. personnel would pull out of three leased UK airbases and move to other locations in the UK and Germany. Full U.S divestment from these bases, originally planned for 2022, might not occur until 2024. Facilities of the Joint Intelligence Analysis Complex are being relocated from Molesworth and consolidated in a new Joint intelligence analysis center at RAF Croughton. The U.s. Air Force plans to increase personnel at RAF Lakenheath, which is home to an F-15 fighter wing and home to two squadrons of F-35s. The United States and the United Kingdom are key partners in terms of defense industry cooperation and defense sales. The two countries are engaged in more than 20 joint equipment programs, including the F-35 Joint Strike Fighter. Most major U.S. defense companies have a UK presence; numerous British companies, most notably BAE Systems, operate in the United States. In 2007, in an effort to address long-standing British concerns about technology-sharing restrictions, the countries signed a Treaty Concerning Defense Trade Cooperation. In 2016, the UK had the world's fifth-largest military expenditure, spending approximately $52.5 billion. The UK is one of the few NATO countries to meet the alliance's defense spending benchmark of 2% of GDP. As part of the government's broad austerity program, UK defense spending decreased 8% in real terms over the period 2011-2015. Experts assert that the cuts, combined with other associated decisions, reduced the UK's conventional military combat capability by 20% to 30%. The UK has been focusing on areas such as special forces, intelligence, counterterrorism, and cybersecurity. In October 2016, the UK launched a new National Cyber Security Centre (NCSC) within the GCHQ. The NCSC absorbed and replaced four previous government cybersecurity units, bringing together their expertise in a single point of contact for the public and private sector. The agency provides advice, consulting services, and incident response and recovery services. It works with law enforcement, intelligence and security agencies, and international partners. Between March and June 2017, there were three terrorist incidents in the UK claimed by the Islamic State group. With these attacks perpetrated by British citizens, the group's capacity to direct or inspire attacks in Europe has become a top concern. Experts have estimated that approximately 760 people have traveled from the UK to train or fight in Syria and Iraq and that at least 350 such individuals have returned home. The UK adopted a new Counter-Terrorism and Security Act in 2015 that enhanced the country's already relatively extensive body of counterterrorism legislation. Most analysts and officials agree that U.S.-UK intelligence and counterterrorism cooperation is close, well established, and mutually beneficial. The relationship was damaged by public accusations of British complicity in U.s.-led renditions and the alleged torture of terrorist suspects between 2002 and 2008. There have been occasional tensions. Under the Tempora program, which has.to confiscate the passports of terrorism suspects, UK officials have called on internet and technology companies to do more to remove terrorism content from their sites. not been acknowledged by GCHQ, the UK reportedly has tapped into undersea transatlantic fiber-optic cables that carry international telephone and internet traffic. Media reports have suggested that the NSA and GCHQ worked together on at least some aspects of collection operations. This episode raised considerable concerns among UK civil liberty and privacy groups. The U.S.-UK bilateral investment relationship is the largest in the world. In 2016 (latest complete data available), U.s. foreign direct investment (FDI) in the UK was $682.4 billion. U.S. FDI flows to the UK reportedly decreased 50% over the first nine months of 2017, compared to the same period of 2016. The UK is the United States' seventh-largest trading partner. Analysts believe that close U.S.-UK cooperation will continue for the foreseeable future in areas such as counterterrorism, intelligence, economic issues, and the future of NATO. Some officials have conveyed concerns that the UK's withdrawal could make the EU a less important partner. But the UK is expected to remain a key U.s. partner in operations to combat the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria. The UK is a leading voice for robust EU sanctions against Russia due to its actions in Crimea and eastern Ukraine. Some observers suggest the departure of the UK could shift the debate in the EU about the duration and severity of the sanctions. The UK has irritated some of its EU partners by essentially vetoing initiatives to develop a stronger CSDP, arguing that such efforts duplicate and compete with NATO. In 2011, for example, the UK blocked a proposal to consolidate the command structure for EU military missions under a single permanent operational headquarters. U.S. officials generally have supported EU initiatives aimed at increasing European defense capabilities. They continue to urge that such efforts remain complementary to NATO and do not duplicate or compete with NATO activities. Some observers note that Brexit pushes Europe back toward another prolonged bout of internal preoccupation, consuming a considerable degree of UK and EU time and personnel resources in the process. The EU should concentrate more effort and resources toward addressing a wide range of shared external challenges (such as terrorism and instability to Europe's south and east), they say.