Violence Against Women and Department of Justice Reauthorization Act of 2005 wassigned into law on January 5, 2006 ( P.L. 109-162 ). The act reauthorizes many of the agencies andprograms under the DOJ's jurisdiction. It also includes several provisionsthat builds upon previous efforts to restructure the Office of Justice Programs (OJP) At issue was the apparent duplication of efforts between OJP's grant programs and the various bureaus within OJP that werecharged with administering grants. justice statistical capabilities. While BJS does administer grant programs, like the National Criminal History ImprovementProgram (NCHIP), the administration of grants is not the primary function of this bureau. The Office for Victims of Crime (OVC) provides federal funds for victim compensation and assistanceprograms across the country. OVC also provides training for professionals working with victims,developing and disseminating publications, supporting projects to enhance victims' rights andservices. The Community Capacity Development Office (CCDO) is responsible for overseeing andmanaging the Weed and Seed Program. CCDO was created in March 2004 to work with local communities to develop programsthat deter crime and promote neighborhood revitalization. CCDO's current mission is to develop, evaluate, and implement policies that serve as models for community capacitydevelopment efforts. The Office of the Police Corps and Law Enforcement Education funds state Police Corpsprograms to combat crime by providing state and local law enforcement with a greater pool of highlyqualified candidates. To this end, the office awards competitive scholarships to students who agreeto be law enforcement. enforcement officers for four years after they complete a four-year degree. Police Corps programs also award noncompetitive scholarships to dependent children of law enforcement officers killed inthe line of duty who are enrolled in accredited universities. The next section discusses the role of the DOJ's Office of the Inspector General (OIG) inauditing OJP and other DOJ offices' management of grant programs. Later in the report, the auditing functions of the OIG are discussed in the context of the legislative proposal to create an audit office. After reviewing 10 OJJDP-funded evaluations, GAOexpressed concerns about the methodology used in the evaluations. GAO noted that five ofthe evaluations were in the formative stage and five were being implemented. Of the four impactevaluations that had moved past theformative stage, only one, the Byrne Children At Risk Program, was found to be methodologically sound. The Inspector General's memorandums on the Top Management Challenges in DOJ for theyears 2002-2004 note that OJP continues to have problems managing its programs. grants. Partof the problem stems from the large influx of grant funds into DOJ since the passage of the ViolentCrime Control and Law Enforcement Act of 1994 ( P.L. 103-322 ). Like GAO, the OIG found thatmany grantees were not submitting their progress reports or financial reports. In addition, OIG'saudits found that site-visit reviews were not consistently addressing all of the grant conditions. A 2005 report on awardsto tribal governments suggests OJP is still encountering problems with monitoring grants.Congress has proposed the creation of an Office of Audit, Assessment and Management. oversight of its grant programs or whether another level of oversight is necessary. The creation of the Office of Audit,Assessment and Management may raise questions about possible duplication of efforts. Congress may want to explore how federal funds are overseen and the findings of the OIG and the GAO are addressed. Could proper oversight of federal funds be achieved with improvements to OJP's current structure? Would a stand-alone Community Capacity Development Office (CCDO) be made responsible for providing state, local, and tribal governments with training on OJP and other DOJ grant programs?