Sen. Jeff Sessions asked Chuck Hagel about the Obama Administration's plans for the next steps in nuclear arms control. Hagel did not accept Senator Sessions' view that future reductions in U.S. nuclear weapons should occur only through the treaty-making process. President Obama views New START, which was signed by the United States and Russia in April 2010, as "just one step on a longer journey" The United States signed several formal arms control treaties that limited the numbers of deployed nuclear weapons with the Soviet Union during the Cold War. President Bush did not notify Congress or seek congressional approval before pursuing these reductions. President George W. Bush also withdrew from deployment a number of U.S. nonstrategic nuclear weapons, although he did so without seeking or expecting reciprocity from Russia. Several Presidents have reduced unilaterally the number of warheads in the U.s. stored stockpile, as the United States has retired older weapons and responded to changing assessments of the necessary size and size of the arsenal. Following Article II of the Constitution, the Senate reviewed these treaties and voted to provide its advice and consent to ratification. structure of the U.S. nuclear force. These changes are a part of the normal force planning process, managed by the Department of Defense and approved by the President. They have also occurred without prior explicit approval from Congress. This report reviews these characteristics and demonstrates their effect on decisions about the use of the different mechanisms. The report also describes the role of Congress in the arms control process. It then provides an analytic framework that reviews the characteristics of theDifferent mechanisms, focusing on issues such as balance and equality. This report does not address the question of whether the United States should pursue further reductions in deployed nuclear weapons. While many in Congress disagree with the Administration's plans for further reductions, that goal is its stated policy. The report will evaluate these mechanisms only in the context of reductions in U.S. and Russiannuclear weapons. It will not evaluate whether other nations—such as China, the United Kingdom, and France—should participate in these reductions or which mechanism would be appropriate if other nations do. During the Cold War, arms control played a key role in the relationship between the U.S. and Soviet Union. Arms control negotiations were often one of the few channels for formal communication between the two nations. The United States and Russia deploy far greater numbers of nuclear weapons than these other nations, so they may be able to reduce their weapons further before bringing other nations into the process. Some argued that the agreements merely codified existing force structure plans and restricted the U.,S. ability to respond to emerging threats. The 1972 Anti-ballistic Missile (ABM) Treaty continued to limit it to 100 interceptors deployed at one specific location. There was little evidence that the Soviet Union sought to evade the limits in the treaties in any systematic way. The United States and Soviet Union also used arms control negotiations, and the resulting treaties, as a way to limit or reduce the specific weapons systems that were being used by the two countries. The U.S. continued its interest and expanded its research into extensive land-based and space-based defenses. they viewed as threatening and destabilizing. During the late 1970s and early 1980s, the Soviet Union deployed intermediate range missiles that could reach critical targets in NATO. With both sides fearing a first strike from the other, each had an incentive to reduce the threat. As a result, they negotiated the 1987 Intermediate-range Nuclear Forces (INF) Treaty, which eliminated all intermediate-range nuclear missiles. In a similar way, the U.S. and NATO agreed to end the use of cruise missiles in Europe. vein, throughout the Cold War, U.S. analysts expressed concerns about the Soviet force of large "heavy" intercontinental ballistic missiles. Analysts feared that the Soviet Union might consider using these weapons in a "disarming" first strike. The United States sought to mitigate concerns by deploying many of its warheads at sea, on invulnerable submarine-launched ballistic missiles (SLBMs) But it also sought to limit and reduce the numbers of large ICBMs in the Soviet Force through arms control agreements. The bilateral treaties between the United States and Soviet Union did not contain any limits or restrictions on shorter-range nuclear weapons. Both nations were free to adjust the numbers, types, and deployment areas for these weapons. These treaties also did not limit the numbers of extra warheads that either side could retain in storage, in a "nondeployed" stockpile. Each nation was also free to determine, for itself, how many spare warheads it needed and how and when to add these warheads to its deployed forces. The U.S. began to reduce these forces in the late 1970s. The number of deployed warheads declined from more than 7,000 in the mid-1970s to below 6,000. These reductions occurred, for the most part, because officials believed they could maintain deterrence with fewer, but more modern, weapons. In 1970, NATO allies agreed in 1970 that the United States should deploy new intermediate-range nuclear weapons in Europe. In 1983, in the Montebello Decision, when the NATO defense ministers approved additional weapons modernization plans, they also called for the removal of older nuclear weapons. The number of U.S. nonstrategic nuclear weapons dropped sharply in the waning days of the Cold War, falling to fewer than 1,000 warheads by the mid-1990s. The Pentagon implemented these reductions as a part of its regular force planning process; it did not seek or need the approval of Congress. President Bush indicated that the United States would take these steps unilaterally, and would implement these measures regardless of the Soviet reaction. In addition, President Bush identified and adopted these steps without consulting with or notifying the Soviets. The U.S. maintains a stockpile of warheads in storage that are not deployed with operational delivery systems. Many of these warheads are awaiting dismantlement, but some remain active and could return to the force. The United States and Soviet Union never counted these warheads under the limits in arms control treaties. As a result, the United States has implemented all of the reductions in its stockpile unilaterally. and without congressional approval, says David Rothkopf, president of the Federation of American Atomic Energy. During the 1990s, as the relationship between the United States and Russia improved, their cooperation expanded to include a wide range of economic, political, and military issues. As a result, arms control negotiations no longer played a central role in fostering cooperation between the two nations. Nevertheless, as Table 2 indicates, the U.S. and Russia have negotiated three arms control treaties since 1992. Two of these have entered into force, but the two governments have not yet agreed on further reductions in strategic forces. In the 1990s, many analysts believed the U.S. no longer needed arms control to limit the Russian threat. George W. Bush pledged to set aside the arms control negotiating process. The Bush Administration eventually altered its approach and agreed to negotiate with Russia. As a result, the Bush Administration agreed to codify its proposed limits in the 2002 Strategic Reductions Treaty, which became known as the Moscow Treaty. But this treaty did not contain any detailed descriptions of the limited or limited definitions of the weapons to be limited. The U.S. and Russia began negotiations on a New Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty in May 2009. The goal was not only to "reset" the relationship, but also to negotiate further reductions in the numbers of deployed strategic warheads. A negotiated agreement would allow the United States and Russia "to preserve stability at significantly reduced force levels," the Obama Administration said in a 2010 Nuclear Posture Review report. But large disparities in nuclear capabilities may not be conducive to maintaining a stable, long-term strategic relationship, the report said. The U.S. and Russia signed the New START Treaty on April 10, 2010. The treaty entered into force on February 5, 2011. The Obama Administration views New START as the first step on a path to deeper reductions in the numbers of deployed strategic nuclear weapons. President Obama emphasized this point in March 2012, when he said: My administration's nuclear posture recognizes that the massive nuclear arsenal we inherited from the cold war is poorly suited to today's threats, including nuclear terrorism. The United States and Russia did not sign New START until April 2010. Even after new START, the United States will still have more than 1,500 deployed nuclear weapons and some 5,000 warheads. President Obama confirmed his commitment to reduce U.S. nuclear weapons further during a speech in Berlin on June 19, 2013. He stated that he believes the. United States can maintain its security, and that of its allies, with reductions of up to one-third in. the number of deployed strategic nuclear warheads. He further indicated that he would seek negotiated reductions with Russia to move beyond Cold War nuclear postures. The Clinton Administration altered the readiness of some of the remaining weapons, but it did not recommend or implement any further reductions in the number of U.S. nuclear weapons deployed in Europe. According to unclassified reports, the George W. Bush Administration did implement further reductions. Some reports indicate the weapons were withdrawn from Greece and Ramstein Air Base in Germany between 2001 and 2005. In addition, reports indicate that the United States withdrew its nuclear weapons from the RAF Lakenheath air base in the United Kingdom in 2006. approval from Congress before implementing these changes. The Obama Administration believes that the United States and NATO should seek an agreement with Russia before changing the size and structure of the U.S. force of nonstrategic nuclear weapons deployed in Europe. The Administration indicated that the Navy would retire its stockpile of nuclear-armed sea-launched cruise missiles. The George H. W. Bush Administration had removed these missiles from surface ships and attack submarines as a part of the 1991 PNIs. The Clinton and Bush administrations had retained these missiles, and the capability to restore them to submarines. The U.S. stockpile of nondeployed nuclear weapons stood at almost 14,000 warheads in 1992. By 1994, the number of warheads in the stockpile had declined to about 11,000, a reduction of around 50% from the stockpile that had existed at the beginning of the George H.W. Bush Administration. In 2000, the stockpile remained at about 10,600 nonde deployed warheads in 2000. In 2009, the Obama Administration released an unclassified summary of the size of the U.s. stockpile, showing a decline of nearly 60% from 2000. Senate committees would hold hearings, craft a resolution of ratification, and vote on that resolution. The resolution would require a two-thirds majority to pass. If the U.S. and Russia were to alter New START with changes that imposed a legally-binding obligation on the United States, it seems likely that the President would need to submit these proposed amendments to the Senate for its advice and consent. The Senate emphasized this point in Declaration 9 of the Resolution of Ratification to New START, when it stated "that any agreement or understanding which in any material way modifies, amends, or reinterprets United States or Russian obligations" A congressional-executive agreement would not require the advice and consent of the Senate. Instead, the agreement would be authorized by means of a statute approved by both houses of Congress. The 1961 Arms Control and Reduction Act generally bars the Executive from taking action that would "obligate" the United States to reduce armaments in a military significant manner unless such action takes the form of a treaty or is affirmatively authorized by Congress. In other words, the Senate expects any future arms control agreement to come to the Senate as a treaty, not to the whole of Congress as an executive agreement. Under the executive branch interpretation of ACDA, a document that contained a political, but not legally-binding, commitment would not require the advice and consent of the Senate. The document could make its intent clear with a distinct statement indicating that it was only politically binding. Even if it did not include a specific statement, the agreement could make it clear with other language that each side was simply declaring its own intentions. For example, they could state that they intended to record those intentions in a joint statement. The United States and Russia have concluded politically binding statements within the framework of previous arms control agreements. If the Obama Administration sought to reduce U.S. nuclear weapons unilaterally, or in parallel with Russia without a legally-binding agreement, Congress could still exercise oversight of the process. Congress could also used funding decisions to influence the arms control process. For example, in 1968 and 1968 and.to reduce their forces even though they were not obligated to do so. Numerous Administrations have claimed that the President has the authority to reach such agreements without congressional authorization. 1969, Congress tried, unsuccessfully, to reduce funding for the emerging U.S. Sentinel and Safeguard anti-ballistic missile (ABM) systems. In 1972, the United States and Soviet Union signed the ABM Treaty, which restricted each side to two sites for its ABM systems. Congress also sought to influence the arms control process with funding restrictions in the latter half of the1990s. During the 1994 Nuclear Posture Review, the Defense Department had decided that during the 1994 nuclear posture review, the Pentagon would not fund the Sentinel system. DOD would retire all 50 Peacekeeper ICBMs and four if its eighteen Ohio-class ballistic missile submarines to meet the START II limits. These decisions were incorporated in DOD's budget plans, even though START II had not entered into force. Congress stated that "funds available to the Department of Defense may not be obligated or expended during fiscal year 1997 for retiring or dismantling" The funding limitation could be waived if START II entered into Force, but, even in that case, funding could not be used "to implement any agreement or understanding" of these systems. Congress passed the legislation to provide the Russian parliament with an incentive to approve the START II Treaty. The Clinton Administration sought to ease the restriction in subsequent years as the budgetary cost to retain aging systems increased. Congress included similar provisions in the Defense Authorization Bills for FY1999, FY2000, and FY2001. It did, however, repeal this language for the Bush Administration in the FY2002 Defense Bill, after the 2001 Nuclear Posture Review called for the elimination of the restrictions. The legislation recognized that the President could reach a politically-binding agreement with Russia to accelerate the implementation of the Treaty, but he would have to report to Congress about the agreement. Congress has sought to prevent the President from reducing U.S. nuclear forces below the limits in New START. New START does not require the elimination of any warheads or gravity bombs. Congress did not include this language in the final version of the NDAA for 2014 ( H.R. 3304) The legislation did not withhold funding for the implementation of New START pending the completion of that report or a restoration of lost funding. The legislation in the late 1990s sought to limit the President's ability to reduce nuclear weapons below legally-binding treaty obligations. ), but, as noted above, it did express its view that further reductions should occur through the treaty process. Some of these characteristics may weigh more heavily than others at different times, reflecting conditions in the international security environment and domestic political environment. Analysts have debated, over the years, about whether balance and equality contribute to stability and reduce the risk of nuclear war. Others support the idea that, in seeking a measure of balance, arms control agreements can lock nations into force structures that might become destabilizing over time. In the 1990s, the United States and Russia continued to negotiate formal arms control treaties. Authors: The value placed on balanced and equal limits served as a symbol of "political balance" In 2009, the Obama Administration argued that a measure of balance and equality was important for stability. The Obama Administration has indicated that it would like the next nuclear arms control treaty to cover deployed strategic nuclear weapons, nonstrategic nuclear weapons and nondeployed nuclear weapons. Instead, Russia would like to negotiate an agreement that would limit U.S. ballistic missile programs. seeks to evade treaty-imposed limits. The level of detail, and, therefore, the amount of predictability, included in arms control treaties grew during the 1970s and 1980s. In contrast, the United States and Russia never codified the reductions outlined in the 1991 PNIs in a formal treaty, or in any other bilateral document. Each side simply announced the reductions in presidential speeches. As a result, they did not provide details on how they would reduce their weapons systems. Predictability between the United States and Russia may be far less important today than it was during the Cold War. Both force levels and the risk of war are far lower than they were at that time. Some experts argue that, "there is no conceivable situation in the contemporary world in which it would be in either country's national security interest to initiate a nuclear attack against the other side" The U.S. and Russia cooperate across many policy areas and maintain many channels for communication; they share information about their nuclear force structure plans. the other's force, both sides have limited flexibility to increase their forces or alter their composition. On the other hand, unilateral U.S. nuclear reductions allow the United States to set the size and structure of its nuclear force. The United States took advantage of this flexibility when it reduced its nonstrategic forces unilaterally in 1991. In 2001, the Bush Administration preference in 2001 for unilateral reductions in U.s. strategic nuclear forces, says Peter Bergen, a nuclear weapons expert at the University of California, Los Angeles. nuclear weapons, they can occur when the U.S. identifies excess weapons and has the capacity to dismantle them. Treaties, on the other hand, often set an arbitrary time line for weapons eliminations, which can add to the costs and increase the complexity of the process. If nations reduce their forces unilaterally, even if they do so in parallel, they could eventually undermine stability. If either party, fearing that the other was about to add to its forces, sought to reverse its reductions quickly, the other might feel insecure or threatened. Each side could structure its forces the way it wanted and reduce them at its own pace. The New START Treaty retains some of these flexible provisions. It contains an aggregate limit on the total number of deployed warheads and delivery vehicles, but it does not impose sublimits on particular systems. The two sides exchange substantial amounts of data about the numbers, locations, and characteristics of their deployed delivery vehicles. They also conduct up to 18 inspections each year to confirm this data. But the treaty does not contain specific counting rules that attribute a number of warheads to each type of delivery system. U.S. and Russia could exchange reciprocal statements about their intentions. They could also exchange data and possibly permit visits or inspections. This is similar to the type of regime the George W. Bush Administration proposed in 2008. Russia rejected the proposal, and indicated that it could not permit data exchanges and inspections unless they were part of a legally binding agreement, writes David Rothkopf. But if both sides support further reductions, each prefers to maintain a greater degree of flexibility, he says. The arms control process has played a key role in providing the participating nations with access to and an understanding of the military forces and activities of the other party. Even a formal treaty that focuses on transparency and confidence-building measures, may be sufficient to provide a measure of predictability. The absence of agreement on transparency measures, whether to monitor negotiated reductions or to account for unilateral adjustments, could undermine predictability, authors say. For example, a nation may choose to adjust its forces unilaterally, rather than through negotiated limits, precisely because it does not want to provide access to information about its forces. U.S. and Russia have never included limits on stored, nondeployed warheads in formal treaties. The United States has reduced this stockpile unilaterally over the years. The risks created by intrusive monitoring needed to verify compliance with negotiated reductions may be greater than the benefits created by the predictability of balanced limits on the weapons, the authors say. The U.S., Russia have occasionally exchanged information on the progress of implementing the PNIs, but this cooperation lacked the rigor of information required by arms control treaties. President Bush did not seek new transparency measures in the 2002 Moscow Treaty. Obama Administration offered a different view on the value of transparency in arms control. It indicated that one of the key reasons that it sought to negotiate a new Treaty with Russia in 2009 was to maintain monitoring and verification capabilities of the 1991 START Treaty. The Administration has not responded to requests for comment on this article from The Associated Press. The article was originally published in The New York Times, which has since been updated with comments from the Obama Administration. NATO stressed its support for transparency and cooperation on nuclear weapons in its approach to possible limits on U.S. and Russian nonstrategic nuclear weapons. In most cases, it is likely to take far longer to reduce nuclear forces through a bilateral arms control treaty than it would through a treaty. In its 2012 Deterrence and Defense Posture Review, NATO indicated that the allies "look forward to continuing to develop and exchange transparency and confidence-building ideas with the Russian Federation" to increase "mutual understanding" of NATO's and Russia's nuclear force postures in Europe. The United States and Soviet Union took over nine years to negotiate the original START Treaty. In contrast, the George H.W. Bush Administration developed the list of measures for the 1991 PNIs in under a month. Delays between the signing of a treaty and its entry into force are not inevitable. Parties may slow formal negotiations in response to bilateral political difficulties, disputes over the details of the treaty, or other unforeseen events. But a unilateral, Presidential decision to alter U.S. nuclear forces is likely to be reached more quickly. Several factors can lengthen the amount of time before arms control treaties enter into force. These include the time needed for the legislative body to review and evaluate the terms of the treaty. International events that are either related or unrelated to the subject matter of the Treaty can also slow or stop the arms control process. For example, the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan disrupted U.S.-Soviet relations and contributed to the failure of the 1979 SALT II Treaty. More recently, the break-up of the Soviet Union delayed the ratification of both the 1991 START Treaty and the 1993 START II treaty. The parties negotiated a Protocol to START so that Ukraine, Belarus, and Kazakhstan could join Russia as successors to the Soviet Union for the Treaty. START entered into force on December 4, 2004, nearly 3.5 years after signature. Although the United States and Russia signed START II in January 2003, the U.S. Senate waited until START entry into force before beginning hearings on START II. The Senate then delayed its vote on the treaty until January 1996. The legislative debate on formal arms control treaties could also be delayed by debates between the executive and legislative branches on issues related to, but not covered within, the treaty. Unilateral adjustments in nuclear forces would not be exempt from legislative review. The House and Senate Armed Services Committees receive testimony on U.S. nuclear weapons plans and programs during the annual authorization and appropriations process. Formal arms control treaties contain lengthy implementation periods that may not be present in unilateral measures. Although they eliminated many weapons more quickly than mandated by the Treaty, neither the START Treaty nor the START II Treaty allowed seven years for the parties to reduce their forces. But this would only slow the process of implementing reductions if Congress refused to appropriate necessary funds. The 1993 START II Treaty, which, as noted, never entered into force, initially mandated that the United States and Russia complete their reductions by the beginning of 2003. In September 1997, after delays in the ratification process, the two nations agreed to extend the elimination period to the end of 2007. In some cases, a long implementation process may be necessary because it can take a significant amount of time for the nations to comply with the detailed elimination procedures. Such a process also allows each nation to be certain that the other is meeting its obligations before it eliminates its. Some argue that U.S. should reduce nuclear weapons to New START levels in fewer than seven years. Peter Bergen: A lengthy time frame may add to the cost of nuclear weapons. He says it would be difficult to agree on the contents of a treaty that imposed balanced and equal limits. Bergen says if the United States and Russia agree to reduce their forces further while New START remains in force, they could rely on the definitions and monitoring provisions in New START to retain a degree of predictability. U.S. and Russia have taken preliminary steps to prepare for another round of arms control negotiations. There is widespread agreement that the formal arms control process has stalled. If the two nations agree to reduce their strategic nuclear weapons further, they could rely on the monitoring and verification provisions in New START. But they would either have to leave nonstrategic and nondeployed weapons outside the framework of a new agreement or, if they counted them in the limits, would have to accept less transparency about the numbers and locations of those weapons.