H.R. 4818 is the ConsolidatedAppropriations Act, 2005. It incorporated the Transportation, Treasury, andIndependent Agencies FY2005 Appropriations bill and eight other appropriations bills. The bill was held for a correcting resolution ( H.Con.Res. 528 , passedDecember 6, 2004) before being sent to the President. It was signed on December 8, 2004, by President George W. Bush. It provides funding for the Department of Transportation (DOT) and its related agencies, as well as the Treasury, the PostalService, the Executive Office of the President, and General Government provisions. a result of the creation of a new federal department, theDepartment of Homeland Security. The United States Coast Guard and the Transportation Security Administration were transferred from the Department ofTransportation to DHS. Budget numbers for years prior to FY2004 have been adjusted in light of these changes tocompare pre-FY2004 figures with FY2004 and later figures. The FY2004 Transportation, Treasury, and Independent Agencies Appropriation was passed as part of the House and Senate Committees on Appropriations, creating new subcommittees for Homeland Security and combining the former Transportation and Treasury subcommittee into one committee. The Administration's FY2005 budget request for the Departments of Transportation and the Treasury, the Executive Office of the President, and Related Agencies was $88.9 billion. The House cut approximately $47 billion from Title I (Transportation) funding during floordebate. The Senate Committee on Appropriations reported out S. 2806 ( S.Rept. 108-342 ), their FY2005 Transportation, Treasury and General Government Appropriations bill, on September15, 2004. The Committee recommended $90.5 billion, $1.6 billion more than the Administrationrequest. Treasury, and the independent agencies included inDivision H, minus a 0.80% across-the-board rescission which applies to the entire omnibus. Official numbers reflecting the rescission are not available, so the numbers in this report do not reflect therescission. The rescission will reduce the Transportation-Treasury appropriation to $89.9 billion, approximately $460 million below the amount provided for FY2004 but approximately $950 million above the Administration request for FY2005. Table 3 shows funding trends for Transportation/Treasury Appropriations from FY1999 through FY2004. House bill included $7.7 billion for this function, while the Senate bill contained almost $ 7.8 billion. Controller union representatives contend that the FAA is not taking sufficient action to mitigate against potential future staff shortages. The House bill tries to remedy this situation by providing an additional $9 million to hire and train new controllers. The Senate bill also addresses this issue and provides an Additional $10 million to hiring and training new controller. The Conference reportincludes provisions that accommodate new hiring andtraining, especially for supervisors. The Administration request for F&E was $2.5 billion, $393 million below the FY2004 enacted figure. Research, Engineering, and Development (RE&D) would have been subject to a small cut, to $117 million from the $119.4 million in theFY2004 Act. Essential Air Service (EAS) receives its funding from designated user fees collected from overflightsof United States territory by foreign aircraft. The Airport Improvement Program (AIP) provides grants for airport development andplanning. The FHWA budget provides funding for the Federal-Aid Highway Program (FAHP), which is the umbrella term for nearly all the highway programs of the agency. Most of the funding is reserved for the major federal-aid highway programs, which can be thought of asthe core programs. All of these programs are subject to apportionment on an annual basis byformula and are not subject to program-by-program appropriation. There is a second category of highway funding. This so called "exempt" category consists mostly of two elements: an additional annual authorization ofminimum guarantee funding ($639 million per fiscal year) and emergency relief. The FMCSA was created by the Motor Carrier Safety Improvement Act of 1999 (MCSIA), P.L. 106-159 . (5) This agency became operational on January 1, 2000, and assumed almost all of the responsibilities and personnel of DOT's Office of MotorCarrier Safety. Most of the funds used to conduct F MCSA activities are derived from the Federal Highway Trust Fund. The FY2005 Administration request for the FMCsa is $455 million. The agency also administers grants and programs to help states conduct truck and bus safety compliance activities. For FY2005, Congressapproved an appropriation of $447.5 million to FMCSA's account. Administration's FY2005 request for these activities is $227 million. House Committee on Appropriations recommended $190million; this was eliminated during House floor debate on a point of order, but wasexpected to be used as the House benchmark during conference discussions. NHTSA seeks to reduce impaired driving,increase occupant protection, improve police traffic services, enhance emergencymedical responses to crashes, ensure compliance with various federal vehicle safetyregulations. $109.5 million. For the disposal of obsolete vessels in the National Defense Reserve Fleet (NDRF), the Administration requested and Congress provided $21.6 million. $75 million in funding for a financial assistance program designed to encourage the construction of privately owned product tanker vessels. $98.7 million. The Senate Appropriations Committeealso directed MARAD to prepare a conditions and performance report and needsassessment of the nation's inland waterway system in order to prepare for ananticipated increase in domestic and international maritime trade. time ofwar. The intent of the law is to decrease the Department of Defense's reliance onforeign-flag oil tankers. An aspect of the program that has proved controversial is the allowance of up to 10% of a vessel's total steel weight to be constructed by aforeign shipyard. Some argue this is necessary to allow U.S. shipyards to importforeign technological expertise, while others argue that it results in subsidies flowing to foreign shipyards. For FY2005, the Administration requested a budget of $123.25 million for RSPA. Most of this funding is for activities that promote transportation safety. In recent decades, the Treasury Department has performed four basic functions: formulating, recommending, and implementing economic, financial, tax, and fiscal policies. The creation of the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) in late 2002 and its assumption of the authorities transferred to it by executive order in March 2003 significantlychanged Treasury's functional profile. While Treasury still serves as a principalsource of economic policymaking within the executive branch of the federalgovernment, its role in law enforcement is now much more circumscribed. by the Bureau of Alcohol,Tobacco, and Firearms (BATF), U.S. Secret Service, Federal Law EnforcementTraining Center, U.s. Customs Service, Financial Crimes Enforcement Network(FinCen), and Treasury Forfeiture Fund. Under the law establishing DHS ( P.L. 107-296 ), the Secret Service and Customs Service were transferred from Treasury to DHS. Many functions of BATF were transferred to the Justice Department (DOJ) The creation of DHS has greatly diminished Treasury's involvement in law enforcement. taxes, classifying those products fortax purposes, and regulating the operations of industrial users of distilled spirits. Treasury is taking steps to revamp its involvement in the federal government's inter-agency fight against the financing of international terrorist networks and other financial crimes. In FY2004, the Treasury Department received $11.100 billion in appropriated funds. Most of these funds were used to fund the operation of the IRS, whose budget was set at $10.184 billion. The remainder of the funds went to Treasury. For FY2005, the Bush Administration requested a budget for Treasury of $11.610 billion, or $510 million above its level of funding in FY2004. The vast share of this budget request was allocated to the IRS, which would receive $10.674 billion. The remainingdepartmental offices and bureaus would receive the following appropriated amounts: departmental offices, $185.0 million; departmental systems and capital investments, $36.2 million; Office of Inspector General, $14.1 million; Treasury Building and Annex Repair and Restoration, $20.3 million. Treasury would receive $11.247 billion in funding in FY2005. The IRS would receive the vast majority of the appropriated funds. H.R. 5025supported the Administration's request to eliminate two current programs. During the debate in the House, several contentious amendments were considered. The House passed the measure 397-12 on September 14, 2004, and the Senate passed it on September 15, 2004. The bill was approved by the House Appropriations Subcommittee on Transportation, Treasury and Independent Agencies on July 15,2004. or implementing regulationsto allow financial institutions to accept matricula consular cards as a legitimate formof identification for opening new accounts at financial institutions. Another amendment approved during the debatespecified that the Treasury Department may use none of the funds appropriated for FY2005 to plan, enter into, or implement contracts for collection of delinquent taxdebt between the IRS and private debt collectors. The House also approvedamendments to prevent any funds from being used to implement a directive from the Office of Management and Budget that requires federal agencies to open up to competition from the private sector. Treasury's FY2005 budget would be set at $11.329 billion. Nearly 90% of this amount, or $10.253 billion, would go to the IRS. The House and Senate finally agreed on a budget for the Treasury Department in FY2005, in separate votes cast on November 20, 2004. It was included in abroader appropriations measure ( H.R. 4818 , P.L. 108-447 ) known as theConsolidated Appropriations Act, 2005. Under current law, members of the House Ways and Means Committee, Senate Finance Committee, and Joint Committee on Taxation have the authority to examinetax return information. They face criminal and civil penalties if they improperly disclose personal tax information or carelessly lose tax return documents. Republicanleaders in both houses agreed to pass an enrolling resolution( H.Con.Res. 528 ) to delete the provision. Under H.R. 4818 , Treasury is to receive the information under the new law. $11.248 billion in appropriated funds, an amount that does not reflect the mandatory 0.83%across-the-board reduction in spending. Virtually all of this gain (91%) and this shortfall (98%) aretied to approved funding for the IRS, which is set at $10.318 billion in FY2005, or $134.1 million above its funding for FY2004. Three Treasury accounts arereceiving less money than they did in FY2004: Department-Wide Systems andCapital Investments Program ($32.3 million) and Treasury Building and Annex Repair and Restoration ($12.5million) theadministration of the health insurance tax credit (virtually the same amount asFY2004) According to budget documents issued by the IRS, this proposal wasintended to achieve three strategic goals. Public disclosures about illegal corporatetax shelters and sharp declines in audit rates for high-income taxpayers and largecorporations in recent years have sparked heightened congressional scrutiny of the IRS. The IRS estimates that theoverall gross tax gap in the 2001 tax year, the most recent year for which data areavailable, amounted to $310.6 billion.  amendments to H.R. 5025 approved during the floor debate in the House would affect IRS operations in FY2005. One would prevent the IRS from using any appropriated funds to plan, enter into, or implement contracts forcollection of delinquent individual income tax debt involving the IRS and privatedebt collectors. Under S. 2806 as reported by the Senate Appropriations Committee (but not considered by the full Senate), IRS operations would be funded at $10.253billion in FY 2005, or $68.8 million more than the FY2004 budget. $4.107 billion for processing, assistance, and management. $4.519 billion for tax law enforcement, $1.606 billion for information systems. $125 million for business systems modernization, and $34.8million for administering health insurance tax credit. $140 million in unobligated balances in account for business systemmodernization would be withdrawn. The House and Senate agreed on a budget for the IRS for FY2005 by passing an omnibus appropriations bill ( H.R. 4818 ) on November 20, 2004. Figures are from a budget authority table provided by the House Committeeon Appropriations. Because of differing treatment of offsets, the totals will notalways match the Administration's totals. Figures within this table may differslightly from those in the text due to supplemental appropriations, rescissions, andother funding actions. Columns may not add due to rounding or exclusion of smallerprogram line-items. The Transportation, Treasury, and Independent Agencies Appropriations Act funds all but three offices in the Executive Office of the President (EOP) changing needs and priorities" (18) The Administration reportedly sought to eliminate the"needless complexity [of different accounts] that adds expense, that adds burdens,that adds administrative hurdles that they must go through to accomplish anything" (19) Congressional concern about this proposed consolidation has centered on Congress's"legitimate needs and desires to have oversight over spending of public funds" (20) Proposed in the FY2005 budget request for consolidation was a Title VI general provision that would provide authority for the EOP to transfer 10% of the appropriated funds among different accounts. In the first session of the 108th Congress, the conference agreement accompanying the FY2004 Consolidated Appropriations Act was signed. The transfer authority would "allow the President to address, in a limited way, emerging priorities and shifting demands" According to the EOP budget submission, the transfer authoritywould "provide the President with flexibility, improve the efficiency of theEOP,and reduce administrative burdens" (22) The transfer power would be subject to the approval of the Vice President, who would have to sign off on any changes. provided that separateappropriations for the EOP accounts be continued and that the transfer authorityproposal not be accepted. According to the committeereport accompanying the Senate bill: The Committee recommends funding for the offices that directly support the President according to the existing structureof accounts. This arrangement has served the Committee's and the public's need fortransparency in the funding and operation of these important functions while alsoproviding the executive branch with the flexibility it needs to reprogram funds withinaccounts to address unforseen budget needs. Up to 10% of the appropriated funds among theaccounts for the White House Office could be transferred to any other appropriation. The House and Senate Committees on Appropriations must receive 15 days notice of the transfer from the OMB Director. Transfers would be subject to the approval of the Vice President. The White House office includes the Homeland Security Council, Office of Policy Development, Council ofEconomic Advisers, National Security Council Office of Management and Budget Office of National Drug Control Policy Special Assistance to the President and Official Residence of the vice president. The President's FY2005 budget for EOP programs proposed an appropriation of $774.5million, a decrease of 1% from the $782.0 million appropriated in FY2004, after the0.59% rescission. The salary of the President is $400,000 per annum,effective January 20, 2001. The House and Senate Committees on Appropriationsrecommended, the House passed, and the conference agreement and the law providethe same amount as the President requested. The amount of anappropriation cannot be increased by more than 50% by such transfers. that the Senate billassumed funding of $4.173 million. The conference agreement and the law provide an appropriation of $2.475 million and include the funding under the White House Office. This amount is $1.7million less than the President's request. After the 0.80% rescission, the FY2005 funding is $2,455 million. For repair and restoration of the White. House, the budget proposed an appropriation. of $1,9 million. (29) The House and Senate Committees on Appropriations recommended, the House passed, and the conference. agreement and law provide the same amount as the President requested. request. Reimbursements are to be separately accounted for and thesponsoring organizations billed, and charged interest, as appropriate. Staff of the Executive Residence must report to the Committees on Appropriations, after theclose of each fiscal year, and maintain a tracking system on the reimbursableexpenses. Council of Economic Advisers (CEA) was created in 1946 to assist andadvise the President in the formulation of his economic policies. National Park Service is responsible for maintenance and repair of national monuments. Economic policy. Council analyzes andevaluates the national economy, economic developments, federal programs, and federal policy to formulate economic advice. Council assists in the preparation of the annual Economic Report of the President to Congress. National Security Council (NSC). NSC advises the President on integrating domestic, foreign, military, and economic policies relating to national security. Office of Policy Development. Office supports and coordinates the Domestic Policy Council (DPC) and theNational Economic Council. NSC willparticipate in the White House Core Enterprise Pilot Program. House Core Enterprise Pilot Program. Costs associated withrent payments to the GSA ($1.7 million), after-hours utilities use ($45,000), andprorated Medical Unit costs ($5,000) will be realigned to the OA. The Office of Administration provides administrative services, including informationtechnology; human resources management; library and records management;financial management; and facilities, printing, and supply. After the 0.80% rescission, the FY2005 funding is $8.861million. Committee on Appropriations recommended, and the House passed, an appropriation of $67.8 million, of which up to $1,500 would be available forofficial representation expenses. The House bill would provide that none of the fundsappropriated or made available could be used for any of the following purposes: toreview any agricultural marketing orders or any activities or regulations under theAgricultural Marketing Agreement Act of 1937, to alter the transcript of actualtestimony of witnesses, except for the testimony of OMB officials, before the Committees on Appropriations or their subcommittees. a levelof 500 full-time equivalents (FTEs) OMB used 491 FTE in FY2003 and told the Committee that the FY2004 request for 510 FTE included "no new staff" The funding for the Financial Accounting StandardsAdvisory Board (FASAB) and the Joint Financial Management ImprovementProgram (JFMIP) would be retained in the OMB account. $8.3 million would be transferred to the OA account for the White House Core Enterprise PilotProgram to be used to make rental payments and pay other administrative expenses. againlimits reception and representation expenses to $1,500. Within 90 days of theact's enactment, OMB is directed to provide a report detailing its blueprint and master plan for realizing substantive reductions in regulatory burdens on industries. The Committee recommends that OMB first direct its reduction efforts at regulations where the greatest gain can be achieved with the leasteffort. If achieved, if achieved, will result in true savings regardless of system efficiencies. Thereport should identify regulatory areas with the greatest time, cost and volumeburden, and note how OMB's blueprint andmaster plan addresses these areas forsubstantive reduction. to examine theoriginal intent of the underlying laws ... and determine where regulations could becoordinated and simplified to reduce costs and regulatory burdens .... (44) The Senate Committee on Appropriations recommended an appropriation of $68.4 million, of which up to $3,000 would be available for official representationexpenses. This amount is $8.2 million less than the President's request. The Senatebill would provide that none of the funds appropriated or made available could beused for any of the following purposes: to review any agricultural marketing orders or activities or regulations under the Agricultural Marketing Agreement Act of1937. OMB employee whocalculates, prepares, or approves any tabular or other material that proposes thesub-allocation of budget authority or outlays by the Committee on Appropriations. OMB would have not more than 60 days toperform budgetary policy reviews of water resource matters on which the Chief of Engineers has reported. The OMB Director would notify the appropriate authorizingand Appropriations Committees when the 60-day review is initiated. If waterresource reports have not been transmitted to theappropriate authorizing andappropriating committees within 15 days of the end of the OMB review period based on the notification from the director, Congress would assume OMB concurrence with the report and act accordingly. OMB's request to transfer funding for theFederal Accounting Standards Advisory Board (FASAB) and the Joint FinancialManagement Improvement Program (JFMIP) to the Department of the Treasury isdenied. The justification for consolidating OMB's annual payments to FASAB and JFMIP in the Treasury Department isexceptionally weak. The recommendation assumes an adjustment of $639,000. As for the Core Enterprise Services Program, "The Committee recommendation transfers $7,193,000 back to the Office of Administration to consolidate O MB's rent,after-hour utilities, and health unit costs in the ... program." Because of budget constraints, the Committee defers $1.6 million requested "to hire additional personnel to reach the currently authorized level of full-timeequivalent positions" The conference agreement and the law, likewise, provide an appropriation of $68.4 million, of which up to $1,500 shall be available for official representationexpenses. The committee report states that "Keeping as many entities in the ... program reduces the number ofindividual bills that have to be processed and reconciled" amount is $8.2 million less than the President's request. After the0.80% rescission, the FY2005 funding is $67.9 million. The House Committee on Appropriations recommended, and the House passed, an appropriation of $28.1 million. Of the total amount requested, $26.3 million is for salaries and expensesoperations and $1.4million is for policy research. The Committee approves five additionalfull-time equivalent employees for ONDCP, but no additional funding for staff isprovided. proposed an appropriation of $40 million. The FY2004 appropriation was $42 million, but after the 0.59% rescission was $41.8million. Of the total amount requested, $18 million is for counternarcoticsresearch and development projects, and $22 million for the continued operation of the technology transfer program. The House Committee on Appropriations recommended and the House passed an appropriation. of $30 million. This amount is $10 million less than the President'srequest. spendingplan ... [and agrees] with language ... directing CTAC to expeditiously obligate allof its research funding in pursuit of functions for which it was appropriated" (56) Federal Drug Control Programs. The High Intensity Drug Trafficking Areas (HIDTA) program provides assistance tofederal, state, and local law enforcement entities operating in those areas mostadversely affected by drug trafficking. The President's FY2005 budget proposed an appropriation of $208.4 million. resources to combat [the threat of methamphetamine, marijuana, cocaine, and heroin] The conference agreement and the law, likewise, provide an appropriation of $228.4 million. After the0.80% rescission, the FY2005 funding is $226.5 million, an increase of $18.1 millionabove the President's request. No less than 51% of the total shall be transferred to state and local entities for drug control activities, which shall be obligated within 120days of enactment of the act. The conference agreement and the law provide an appropriation of $213.7 million, which is $21.3 million less than the President's request. After the 0.80%rescission, the FY2005 funding is $212 million, a reduction of $23 million from thePresident'srequest. The appropriation is allocated (before the rescission) as follows:a national media campaign ($120 million), matching grants to drug-free communities ($80 million), evaluation and research related to National Drug ControlProgram performance measures ($1 million) to submit the plannedperformance measures development plan." (65) Unanticipated Needs. The account provides funds for the President to meet unplanned and unbudgetedcontingencies for national interest, security, or defense purposes. Special Assistance to the President (Office of the Vice President). This account funds the vice president in carryingout the responsibilities assigned to him by the President and by law. Official Residence. This account provides for the care and operation of theVice President's official residence and includes the operation of a gift fund. funding is $330,336, a reduction of some $2,600 from the President's request. Advances or repayments or transfers may be made from theappropriation to any department or agency for expenses related to the account. The committee expects to be kept fully apprized by the Vice President's office of any and allrenovations and alterations made to the residence by the Navy. (66) Merit Systems Protection Board (MSPB) serves as guardian of the federal government'smerit-based system of employment. within thelaw and that actions taken by OPM and other agencies support and enhance federalmerit principles. The President's FY2005 budget proposed an appropriation of $37.3 million for the MSPB. After the 0.80% rescission, the FY2005 funding is$34.4 million, a reduction of $2.9 million from the President's request. The House and SenateCommittee on Appropriations in FY2004 did not agree with the proposal and recommended that the trust fund transfer becontinued. Personnel Management (OPM) is the central human resourcesagency for the Federal Government. The StrategicHuman Resources Policy Division "designs, develops, and leads the implementation of innovative, flexible, merit-based human resources policies and strategies" The Human Capital Leadership and Merit System Accountability Division assistsagencies in implementing and assessing human capital standards. The Office of Inspector General (OIG) conducts audits, investigations, evaluations, and inspections throughout the agency and may issue administrativesanctions related to the operation of the Federal government. Employees Health Benefits Programthat "debar from participation in the health insurance program those health careproviders whose conduct may pose a threat to the financial integrity of the program" (71) The President's FY2005 budget proposed an appropriation of $18.2 billion for OPM. The House Committee on Appropriations recommended, and the House passed, a $120.4 million appropriation for O PM salaries and expenses, $10.9 million lessthan the President's request. The funds for the enterprise human resourcesintegration project, the government-wide initiative to modernize the federal payrollsystems and service delivery would be allocated in the same manner as the President requested. the managers." According tothe committee report The Committee finds that the budget justification materials are severely lacking in any real detail about the programsproposed or underway at OPM and the resources involved. Many of the verbosedescriptions did not provide concrete information on theprograms, activities and funding requirements and changes to OPM'swork. The Senate Committee on Appropriations recommended an increase in the minimum wage to $7.25 per hour. The committee report notes that the decision to make health savings accounts a part of the federal employees' benefits package is welcomed. appropriation of $130.6 million for OPM salaries and expenses which is $691,000 less than thePresident's request. The total would be allocated as follows: Enterprise Human Resources Integration project ($1.9 million); leading the government-wide initiativeto modernize the federal payroll systems and service delivery ($6.2 million);e-Human Resources Information System project ($748,000); e-Clearance project($1. 9 million); and coordination and conduct of program evaluation and performance measurement ($5 million) would fund automation of the retirement recordkeeping systems. The Senate bill also would provide that none of the funds appropriated or made available under this act or any other appropriations act could be used to implement restrictions or limitations on the Coast Guard Congressional FellowshipProgram. If the proposed regulations are final on this act'senactment date, no funds can be used for implementing, administering, or enforcing such final regulations. Senate Committee on Appropriations directs the GAO, in consultation with OPM and the GSA, to study the child care needs of federal employees. how best to serve the needs of all Federal employees" OPM isdirected "to reevaluate its efforts to provide information and education to agencies" on programs which provide subsidized child care for lower income employees. The GAO is directed "to do a comprehensive audit on the problems and any mismanagement of the modernization project" The conference agreement and the law provide an appropriation of $125.5 million for OPM salaries and expenses, of which $12 million shall remain availableuntil September 30, 2007. e-human resources information system project, and$1,887,000 for the e-clearance project. $12,000,000 of the funds are made available until September 30, 2007. No funds are provided for the recruitment one stop project or the program evaluationand performance assessment project. provide $250,000 to complete the retirement readiness project. urge the Office to expand the ... project tonon-federal employees. allow the Director the flexibility to allocate the budget resources consistent with the direction provided in this statement. the Director to submit a report by March 4, 2005 comparing the pay and non-pay compensation packages of the Federalworkforce and the private sector. expect OPM and GSA, with technical assistance from GAO, to work collaboratively to collect data on child care needs. The President's FY2005 budget proposed an appropriation of $300 million for thisfund. The FY2004 appropriation was $1 million, but after the 0.59% rescission was$994,000. The fund is designed to help low-income employees. create performance-driven pay systems for employees and reinforce the value of employee performancemanagement systems. It will provide additional pay over and above any annual,across-the-board pay raise to certain civilian employees based on individual ororganizational performance and/or other critical agency human capital needs. The House Committee on Appropriations recommended, and the House passed, an appropriation of $12.5 million. This amount is $287.5million less than the president's request. The bill would allow the OPM Director to determine andtransfer to federal agencies such amounts as necessary to carry out the purposes of the fund. of the approval ofan agency's performance plan and the prior approval of such subcommittees has beenobtained. OPM is directed to report annually to the House and Senate AppropriationsCommittee "on the performance pay plans that have been approved" The Senate Committee on Appropriations did not recommend and the conference agreement and the law do not provide funding for the performance fund. The committee report accompanying the Senate bill states that such an initiative"should be budgeted and administered within the salaries and expenses of eachindividual agency" to investigatewhistle blower allegations and report to the Congress and the President asappropriate. The President's FY2005 budget proposed an appropriation of $15.449 million for the OSC. The House and Senate Committees on Appropriations recommended, the House passed, and the conference agreement and the law provide the same amount as thePresident requested. The FY2004 appropriation was $13.5 million, but after the 0.59%rescission, the FY2005 funding is $14.325million, a reduction of $124,000. states that "the Committee expectsOSC to acquire an appropriate mix of new staff that will maximize its ability toreduce this backlog" instead of hiring just attorneys. No later than March 31, 2005,OSC must report to the Committees on Appropriations on "the status of its staffingefforts, particularly describing those new positions hired" (89) Table 8. Title IV: Independent AgenciesAppropriations (in millions of dollars) Source: Figures are from a budget authority table provided by the House Committeeon Appropriations. Assistance Commission, received an appropriation of $1 billion for electionreform grants in a separate division of the FY2004 Consolidated appropriations bill. Federal Election Commission (FEC) administers federal campaign finance law. Office of Election Administration, which serves as a clearinghouse for information on voting laws and procedures forstate and local election officers, is another part of the FEC. President's FY2005 budget proposed an appropriation. of $52.2 million for the FEC, an increase of $919,000 above the fiscal 2004 appropriation of. $51.2million; increase reflects adjustments for inflation and salary and benefitincreases. authorized $52.2 million for the FEC and included thetwo legislative provisions recommended by the Senate Committee (the Houseprovision was dropped). Federal Labor Relations Authority (FLRA). The FLRA serves as a neutral party in the settlement ofdisputes that arise between unions, employees, and federal agencies. It decides majorpolicy issues; prescribes regulations; and disseminates information appropriate to theneeds of agencies, labor organizations, and the public. It has three components: the Authority which adjudicateslabor-management disputes; the Office of the General Counsel which, among other duties, investigates all allegations of unfair labor practices filed. The House passed the same appropriation as the President requested. The Senate Committee on Appropriations recommended and the conference agreement and the law provide an appropriation of $25.7 million. A rescission of $3 million of prior appropriations is recommended for salaries andexpenses because "significant amounts of annual appropriations have lapsed at theend of FY2002 and 2003 which reflect salary and benefit surpluses related to thedecline in caseload and actual FTE usage over the same period." (90) General Services Administration (GSA) administers federalcivilian procurement policies. Figures within this table may differ slightly fromthose in the text due to supplemental appropriations, rescissions, and other fundingactions. Columns may not add due to rounding or exclusion of smaller programline-items. *FY2004 figures reflect an across-the-board rescission of 0.59%. **FY2005 figures do not reflect anAcross-The-board Rescission of0.80%. ***The appropriations total does not include the limitations on obligations figure for the Federal Buildings Fund (FBF) National Archives and Records Administration (NARA) custodian of historically valuable records of the federal government since its establishment in 1934. NARA also administers the presidential libraries system; publishes thelaws, regulations, and presidential and other documents. National Historical Publications and RecordsCommission (NHPRC) makes grants nationwide to help nonprofitorganizations identify, preserve, and provide access to materials that document U.S. history. The funds ultimately allocated to NARA by the consolidated appropriations legislation, as approved by both houses of Congress, were a little over $321 million. The Merit Systems Protection Board (MSPB) serves as guardian of the federal government'smerit-based system of employment. The agency carries out its mission by hearing and deciding appeals from federal employees of removals and other major personnelactions. The MSPB also hears and decides other types of civil service cases, reviewsOPM regulations, and conducts studies of the merit systems. The budget for OPM is composed of budget authority forboth permanent and current appropriations. This report discusses the budget for current appropriations for current year. the Presidentcarry out his responsibilities in managing the Federal workforce. The Human Capital Leadership and Merit System Accountability Division assistsagencies in implementing and assessing human capital standards. The Office of Inspector General (OIG) conducts audits, investigations, evaluations, and inspections throughout the agency and may issue administrativesanctions related to the operation of the Federal Employees Health Benefits Program. (103) The President's FY2005 budget is available online at: http://www.cnn.com/2005/01/30/politics/federal-employee-benefits-program/index.html. proposed an appropriation of $18.2 billion for OPM. This total includes discretionary funding of $131.3 million and $1.627 million for OIG salaries and expenses. OPM expects toreduce the audit cycle to 2.9 years for FEHBP [Federal Employees Health BenefitsPlan] carriers. Total recoveries are expected to increase by $14 million annually. In 2005, OPM will add audits of pharmacy benefit managers and expand the scope ofaudits for the largest community-rated health plans. totalfunding after the rescission. The House Committee on Appropriations recommended, and the House passed, an appropriation of $120.4 million for OPM salaries and expenses, $10.9 million lessthan the President's request. The funds for the enterprise human resourcesintegration project, the government-wide initiative to modernize the federal payrollsystems and service delivery would be allocated in the same manner as the Presidentrequested. OPM is directed to submit an operating plan for FY2005,signed by the Director, to the House and Senate Committees on Appropriations. or limitations on the Coast Guard Congressional FellowshipProgram, or to implement OPM's proposed regulations. If the proposed regulations are final on this act'senactment date, none of the funds appropriated or made available under this act could be used to implement, administer, or enforce such final regulations. The Senate Committee on Appropriations directs the GAO, in consultation with OPM and the GSA, to study the child care needs of federal employees in executive, legislative, and judicial branch agencies. OPM isdirected "to reevaluate its efforts to provide information and education to agencies" ongoing program to automate and streamline the processes for administering the federal retirement program. The GAO isdirected "to do a comprehensive audit on the problems and any mismanagement ofthe modernization project" (115) The conference agreement and the law provide an appropriation of $125.5 million for OPM salaries and expenses, of which $12 million shall remain availableuntil September 30, 2007. This amount is $5.8 million less than the President'srequest. No funds are provided for the recruitment one stop. project or the program evaluationand performance assessment project. provide $250,000 to complete the retirement readiness project. urge the Office to expand the ... project tonon-federal employees. allow the Director the flexibility to allocate the budget resources consistent with the direction provided in this statement. direct the Director to submit a report by March 4, 2005 comparing the pay and non-pay compensation packages of the Federalworkforce and the private sector. expect OPM and GSA, with technical assistance from GAO, to work collaboratively to collect taxes. data on child care needs,analyze options to meet the identified needs, and provide the data and analysis toGAO. The President's FY2005 budget proposed an appropriation of $300 million for thisfund. The FY2004 appropriation was $1 million, but after the 0.59% rescission was $994,000. The fund is designed to create performance-driven pay systems for employees. It will provide additional pay over and above any annual,across-the-board pay raise to certain civilian employees. agency human capital needs. The House Committee on Appropriations recommended, and the House passed, an appropriation of $12.5 million. This amount is $287.5million less than the president's request. The bill would allow the OPM Director to determine andtransfer to federal agencies such amounts as necessary to carry out the purposes of the fund. No funds would be obligated or transferred until the Director has notified the relevant subcommittees of the Committees on Appropriations of the approval of an agency's performance plan. theamounts that have been obligated or transferred" (118) The Senate Committee on Appropriations did not recommend and the conference agreement and the law do not provide funding for the performance fund. The President's FY2005 budget proposed an appropriation of $15.449 million for the OSC. The FY2004 appropriation was $13.5 million, but after the 0.59%rescission, the FY2005 funding is $15,325million. The requested amount is 15.1% more thanthe FY2004 funding after the rescission. U.S. Postal Service generates nearly all of its funding by charging users of the mail. It does receive a regular appropriation from Congress to compensate for revenue it forgoes. Under the Revenue Forgone Reform Act of 1993, Congress is authorized to reimburse USPS $29 million each year until 2035. For11 years the payment was provided as a matter of course. In its FY2005 budget, the Bush Administration proposed to provide no funds for the payment, and in the list of "terminations" in the budget. USPS argues that cancelling the payment could result in the whole 30-yearobligation, totaling $899 million, being written off as a bad debt and charged to current postal ratepayers. In its detailed justification of its FY2005 budget request, USPS asked Congress for an additional $779 million in emergency response funds to protect the safety ofemployees and customers from threats such as the 2001 anthrax attack. The Administration's FY2005 Budget does not include anyadditional funds for emergency preparedness for the Postal Service. House Committee on Appropriations recommended, and the House passed, the amounts requested in the President's budget. Conferees provided $598 million for the Postal Service for FY2005, an increase of $502 million over FY2004. This appropriation includes $507 million forbiohazard protection. Senate Committee recommended that the $29 millionpayment for past revenue forgone be continued in FY2005. It also recommended theappropriation of $507. million to an Emergency Preparedness Account for USPS toreimburse it for past and future expenditures. and authorizing agencies to pay GSA bills for spacerenovation and other services. In the past provisions have been included which relateto specific agencies or programs. For both Transportation- and Treasury-relatedgeneral provisions and government-wide general provisions, with noted exceptions, the sections discussed here will be those which are new in the FY2005 budget or which contain modified policies. There are also general provisions at the end of eachindividual title within the bill which relate only to agencies and accounts within thattitle. Under the Federal Employees Pay Comparability Act of 1990 (FEPCA), federal white-collaremployees, paid under the General Schedule (GS) and related salary systems, are toreceive pay adjustments each year based on two separate mechanisms. By law,the disparity between non-federal and federal salaries is to be reduced to 5% inJanuary 2005. The Administration's FY2005 budget proposed a 1.5% federal civilian pay adjustment, but did not state how the increase would be allocated. The Federal Wage System (FWS) is designed to compensate the federal blue-collar, orskilled labor, force at rates prevailing in local wage areas for like occupations. Since 1979, Congress has limited the ratesof pay adjustment for blue- collar workers to the average percentage pay adjustmentreceived by federal white-collar employees. Part of therationale for the limitation is that, in certain high cost areas, some FWS wages wouldexceed the salaries paid to General Schedule supervisors. Wages in the lower costareas will be allowed to increase according to the findings of the wage surveys. survey data (known as the Monroney Amendment) to Department of Defense personnel. For January 2005, the minimum SES salary is $104,927 and the maximum salary for most members of the SES is $145,600. Those employees in agencies with performance appraisal systems certified by OPM, will be able toreceive a maximum SES Salary of $158,100, an amount equal to that of Members ofCongress and U.S. District Court judges. OPM published regulations to implement the law on January 13, 2004. payfor SES members were published by OPM on July 29, 2004. A $300 million fund would be set asidegovernment-wide to allow managers to reward top-performing individuals withadditional pay over and above any annual across-the-board pay raise. P.L. 108-199 provided an FY2004 appropriation of $1 million for the fund. If Congress is silent on this issue in legislation, the annualadjustment for Members of Congress and other officials becomes effectiveautomatically. Since 2000, either one or both houses have approved provisions in the annual Treasury appropriations bill that would ease U.S. economic sanctions on Cuba. In its statement of policy on H.R.5025, the Administration indicated that the President would veto themeasure if it contained provisions weakening Cuba sanctions. Ultimately, theCuba provisions were not included in the FY2005 omnibus appropriations measure. In June 2004, through new OFAC regulations amending the CACR, the administrationeliminated the category of fully-hosted travel. more suffering for the Cuban people. The House-passed version of H.R. 5025 had three provisions that would have eased Cuba sanctions. The Senate version of the FY2005 Transportation/Treasury appropriations bill, S. 2806, had a provision that wouldhave prohibited funds from administering or enforcing restrictions on Cuba travel ortravel-related transactions. That provision, which was proposed by Senator ByronDorgan, was unanimously approved by the Subcommittee on Transportation,Treasury and the Senate Appropriations Committee. and General Government on September 9, 2004. ARC: Amtrak Reform Council AIP: Airport Improvement Program (FAA) AIR21: the Wendell H. Ford Aviation Investment and Reform Act for the 21st Century. ARAA: the Amtrak Reform and Accountability Act of 1997 ( P.L. 105-134 ), the current Amtrak authorizing legislation ATSA: the Aviation and Transportation Security Act (P. l. 107-71 ), legislation which created the Transportation Security Administration within the DOT. BRR: Bridge Replacement and Rehabilitation program (FHWA) BTS: Bureau of Transportation Statistics CG: Coast Guard Transportation is function 400 in the annual unified congressional budget. Funding for the DOT budget is derived from a number of sources. The majority of funding comes from dedicated transportation trust funds. The remainder of DOT funding is from federal Treasury general funds. Most highway and transit programs are fundedwith contract authority derived by the link to the highway trust fund. The funding guarantees were set up in a way that makes it difficult for funding levels to be altered as part of the annualbudget/appropriations process. transit projects, but have not beencommitted to specific projects. Allocated funds, arefunds distributed on an administrative basis, typically to programs under directfederal control. For example, federal lands highway program monies are allocated;the allocation can be to another federal agency, to a state, to an Indian tribe, or tosome other governmental entity. These terms do not refer to the federal budgetprocess, but often provide a frame of reference for highway program recipients. Many people assume, albeit incorrectly, that a state apportionment is part of theFederal budgetper se.