The Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms (ATF) is a law enforcement agency within the Department of the Treasury with responsibilities directed toward reducing violent crime, collecting revenue, and protecting the public. Suspicion of illegal firearms activities is the principal reason that initiates ATF firearms investigations. ATF has come under public criticism and congressional scrutiny primarily as a result of its operation at the Branch Davidians’ compound in Waco, TX, and citizen accusations that ATF agents used excessive force in carrying out their enforcement responsibilities. Lawmakers: Use of force has been construed to include a wide range of techniques used to compel compliance. The variety of coercive options available to agents in a confrontational setting is often referred to as the “force continuum.” In October 1995, Treasury and the Department of Justice adopted use of deadly force guidelines that are uniform with the exception of certain agency mission-specific provisions. While warning shots generally are not permitted under the Treasury and Justice policies, the U.S. Secret Service may use warning shots in exercising its protective responsibilities. visited the FBI and DEA Washington field divisions to compare ATF’s use of dynamic entries and equipment to other federal law enforcement agencies. We identified and reviewed files related to the investigation of reported shooting and use of excessive force incidents during fiscal years 1990 through 1995. We also reviewed literature available from IACP and other law enforcement experts regarding the use of equipment, dynamic entries, and other tactics. We did not evaluate the quality and adequacy of the shooting and using excessive force investigations or the validity of their conclusions. 1996, meetings, the Senior Advisor to the Under Secretary of the Treasury for Enforcement and ATF officials provided Treasury’s comments. Also present at the Justice meeting were officials from the Office of the Attorney General, the Criminal Division, DEA, and FBI. The Treasury and Justice officials either characterized the report as balanced, accurate, and thorough or had no comments. They provided some technical comments that we have incorporated in this report, where appropriate. State rules and Supreme Court guidance on the use of deadly force have been evolving for a number of years. Many states followed something similar to the English common-law rule on the use of deadly force. The 1982 Tennessee statute, found unconstitutional, was based on the fleeing felon rule. The Model Penal Code approach imposes several qualifications on the Use of Deadly Force. It is not justified unless the arrest is for a felony or there is a substantial risk that the suspect will cause death or serious bodily harm if his apprehension is delayed, the law says. The American Law Institute formulated the Model Penal code in 1962. In Garner, a police officer shot and killed Edward Garner to prevent his escape from the scene of a burglary. The officer argued that his actions were reasonable under a Tennessee statue that provided that a law enforcement officer could use any means necessary to make an arrest. “Where the officer has probable cause to believe that the suspect poses a threat of serious physical harm, either to the officer or to others, it is not constitutionally unreasonable to prevent escape by using deadly force,” the court said. The Supreme Court provided some clarification as to how courts should examine allegations that law enforcement officers have used excessive force. In Graham, a diabetic felt the onset of an insulin reaction and drove with a friend to a convenience store to purchase orange juice. A police officer became suspicious, followed Graham’s car, and made an investigative stop. Graham sustained various physical injuries during the incident, and was thrown headfirst into the police car. The officers refused to let him have some orange juice as a remedy for his condition. the officers learned that nothing had happened at the store. Graham brought an action against the officers involved in the incident alleging that the officers had used excessive force in making the investigatory stop. The District Court applied a four-factor test and ruled in the officers’ favor. The Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit, without attempting to identify the specific constitutional provision under which Graham’s claim arose, endorsed the four-Factor test applied by the District Court and affirmed the Court of appeals decision. In October 1995, Treasury and Justice adopted use of deadly force policies to standardize the various policies their component agencies had adopted over the years. The policies are uniform with the exception of certain agency mission-specific provisions covering, for example, Justice’s prisoner-related responsibilities. The Justice and Treasury uniform policies provide that their respective officers may use deadly force only when necessary, that is, when the officer has a reasonable belief that the subject of such force poses an imminent danger of death or serious physical injury. reasonable belief that the subject of such force poses an imminent danger of death or serious physical injury to the officer or to another person. The commentaries recognize that the reasonableness of a belief or decision must be viewed from the point of view of the officer at the time of the use of deadly force. They provide that “probable cause,” “reason to believe,’ or a “reasonable belief” for purposes of their policies, mean facts and circumstances, including reasonable inferences. perspective of the officer on the scene, who may often be forced to make split-second decisions. Justice and Treasury commentaries also state that as used in their respective policies, “imminent” has a broader meaning than ‘immediate’ or ‘instantaneous’ The concept of ‘Imminent’ should be understood to be elastic, that is, involving a period of time dependent on the circumstances, rather than the fixed point of time implicit in the concept. The 1988 ATF and 1995 Treasury policies generally authorize the use of such force. Both policies limit the degree of force authorized to that which is needed to accomplish the law enforcement purpose. The 1988 ATF use of deadly force policy was consistent with DEA and FBI policies in effect prior to the 1995 uniform policies. The policies described in this chapter contain additional guidance regarding specific situations, such as fleeing persons, escaping prisoners, verbal warnings, warning shots, and shooting at or from vehicles. This additional additional guidance can be found in appendix I. Since 1988, ATF has maintained a policy that was consistent with prior FBI and DEA policies. ATF policy requires that ATF agents be reminded of the deadly force policy at least quarterly throughout their careers. All new ATF agents are required to attend the FLETC’s Criminal Investigator Training Program (CITP) This program, which in fiscal year 1996 is to be expanded to approximately 9 weeks, provides basic training in a broad range of skills that criminal investigators require. Students are to receive over 175 hours of training in the classroom/lecture, 117 hours of laboratory work, and 39 hours of practical exercises. FLETC provides a 2-hour course on Firearms Policy during the first week of training. In Judgment Pistol Shooting (3 hours), students are to use a weapon that has been altered to shoot a laser beam. Students are shown a video illustrating a situation that poses various levels of threat. In Non-Lethal Control Techniques, students are provided the basic skills to arrest a non-compliant suspect without using deadly force. To successfully pass the course, students must score 100 percent in judgment and 70 percent in shooting accuracy. During the first year with ATF, new agents are supposed to complete phase 1 of the training program. The types of training provided to new ATF agents in fiscal year 1995 to introduce them to and train them in the use-of-force and deadly force policies was consistent with the types ofTraining provided to DEA and FBI new agents. Each agency provided new agent trainees with an initial 2-hour classroom lecture and discussion describing with examples the agency’s use- of-force/deadly force policy within the first week of training. In 1994, ATF developed and began requiring an Operational Risk Assessment form to be completed by agents when planning an operation. Factors, such as the suspect’s violent tendencies, the location of the premise, and the amount of fortification expected, also are considered. According to one SRT leader, one specific factor, if present, would not dictate the use of a particular tactic. ATF decided in October 1995 to implement lessons learned from Waco. One change ATF decided to make was that dynamic entry would only be planned after all other options had been considered. ATF training is to emphasize that no one tactic is an absolute and that a number of factors, beyond the agents’ control, will influence whether a dynamic entry or other technique is best. Dynamic entries are to be planned only after all other tactical options have been considered. SRTs are required to receive a minimum of 8 hours training each month, or 24 hours each quarter, in addition to the quarterly firearms training to be received by all ATF agents. This continuing training must be provided by qualified sources, which includes other law enforcement agencies. warrant operations when there is no response to the ATF agents’ knock and announcement. ATF breaching equipment includes items such as one- and two-person battering rams, hydraulic door spreaders, pry bars, and other firemen’s entry tools. Shotgun and explosive breaching has not been authorized by ATF. Agents also can use body bunkers, which are ballistic shields with clear viewports. These bunkers are capable of withstanding direct shots fired from various firearms and provide additional protection to agents. Flash/sound diversionary devices represented the specialized equipment SRTs most frequently trained with and used during deployments. According to agents and several SRT deployment reports, these devices greatly assisted S RTs in subduing suspects, controlling situations, and avoiding shooting incidents. Although SRT members conducted training on rapelling from buildings and aircraft at their initial training and/or fiscal year 1995 in-service training sessions, this tactic was not used during any deployments in 1995, according to the ATF records we reviewed. Two agents breach the door using a ram or other tool to gain entry to the premise. Teams carrying body bunkers then quickly enter and search the premise to locate suspects and clear the premise of any danger. A bunker team generally consists of two or three agents. Additional agents follow the bunker team and handcuff or detain suspects as they are located, and agents located outside the premise provide rear and front security. The Enforcement Support Branch of ATF’s Special Operations Division provides vehicles to ATF divisions for use in enforcement operations. include sedans, vans, and trucks. SRTs may have designated vehicles from which they can deploy during high-risk operations. On the basis of vehicle listings from ATF’s Inventory Tracking and Equipment Management System and our review of all SRT deployments in 1995, vehicles such as large delivery trucks, excess military ambulances, vans and utility trucks have been obtained or donated to ATF for use by S RTs. We observed the Washington, Baltimore, and Los Angeles divisions’ SRT vehicles, which are used to store equipment. ATF obtained five excess military armored “peacekeeper” vehicles from the U.S. Air Force in 1993. One of these vehicles was sent to the SRT training facility at Fort McClellan, and the rest remained at the Enforcement Support Branch in Rockville. ATF decided not to keep these vehicles or obtain others for enforcement operations. At the time of our review, ATF had provided four of these cars to local law enforcement agencies. The remaining vehicle was awaiting disposal.. Vehicles was assigned to field divisions at the time of our review. As of February 1996, ATF had obtained nine excess military fixed-wing twin engine two-seater aircraft for use in enforcement operations. According to ATF policy, the airplanes primarily are intended for use during surveillance operations, such as aerial photography and general area surveys. In only one instance did an SRT use aircraft to transport agents during an operation in fiscal year 1995. In this operation, the SRT was deployed to provide surveillance and possible assistance in the arrest of a suspect in the Oklahoma City bombing investigation. ATF agents’ basic duty uniform for enforcement operations consists of a dark-blue jacket with matching teeshirt, pants, baseball cap, and ballistic vest. Agents are not issued footwear, but may obtain tactical boots for which they are to be reimbursed by ATF. Almost all agents are issued a U.S. Army excess tactical helmet with a detachable, clear plexiglass shield for eye protection. ATF has obtained excess military clothing, such as camouflage battle dress, for use by agents during training. Dynamic entry is a common tactic used by ATF, DEA, and FBI when entry to premises is used to execute high-risk search and arrest warrants. Dynamic entry is to be used when it is believed to be the safest alternative given the particular circumstances and requirements of an operation. ATF has procedures in place for reporting, investigating, and reviewing shooting incidents and use of excessive force allegations involving ATF agents. These procedures are generally comparable to those used by SRTs for dynamic entries. The DEA HEAT team does not train with or have equipment for rappelling. ATF has procedures in place for reporting, investigating, and reviewing shooting incidents. These procedures were revised in October 1994 as part of an overall reorganization of ATF’s operations. ATF investigations determined that all reported intentional shootings were justified and most reported allegations of excessive force were unsubstantiated. ATF also has procedures for addressing administrative tort claims and civil lawsuits filed by complainants. Agents are not required to report shooting incidents related to authorized training and recreational shooting. However, shootings of canines or other animals, while required to be reported, are not normally investigated. DEA and FBI reporting procedures require their agents to immediately report shooting incidents through their chains of command. DEA and FBI field divisions involved in a shooting incident may investigate that incident, while ATF field divisions cannot. ATF also has procedures in place for reporting, investigating, and reviewing use of excessive force allegations. ATF’s OCC is responsible for reviewing administrative tort claims and civil lawsuits filed by complainants. The investigation is to be conducted using the same investigative techniques and techniques as those discussed earlier. guidelines and/or standards recommended by IACP, PCIE, and the Commission on Accreditation for Law Enforcement Agencies. IACP and PCIE guidelines and standards respectively for reporting, investigating, and reviewing use of excessive force incidents are the same as those for shooting incidents discussed earlier. ATF procedures designate OI, which reports directly to ATF’s Director, to investigate complaints of misconduct, including use ofcessive force. According to DEA officials, complainants report their allegations either to local law enforcement agencies or to field division SACs. to first conduct an administrative investigation of alleged misconduct by its agents. If the investigation identifies any potential criminal misconduct by an ATF agent, OI is to refer the matter to the appropriate federal, state, and local prosecutor. In addition to reporting use of excessive force allegations to ATF, complainants may also file administrative tort claims under the Federal Tort Claims Act (FTCA) These claims are filed against the United States for allegedly negligent or other wrongful acts committed by its employees, such as ATF special agents. The claim is then to be assigned to an attorney. The attorney is to conduct an initial screening of the claim to determine whether it is filed in a timely manner. If the claim does not contain a sum certain figure or sufficient documentation to support the claimed damages, a letter to the claimant is to be prepared requesting that the claim be denied. The claimant may bring a lawsuit in federal court 6 months after the claim has been filed, or if the claim is denied, the claim can be brought to trial. In shooting incidents, the relevant SIR is to be obtained. In incidents where no investigative report is available, OCC is to request an investigation of the allegations. During fiscal years 1990 through 1995, 975 administrative tort claims were filed against ATF. According to the ACC for litigation, 279 of the 975 claims were approved. If the award involves more than $25,000 and it is approved by the Administrative Programs Division Chief, it must also be approved by Justice. Without Justice’s approval, the letter to the claimant cannot be sent. Of 279 claims, 143 resulted from the Waco incident. About 29 percent could be related to the excessive use of force. 25 of the 55 injury-related tort claims alleged such activity. Of the 55 tort claims resulting from injuries, 4 were granted, 12 were pending at the time of our review, and 39 were denied. tort claims that were granted were for medical costs of an arrestee ($122.46), one was for detention of individuals during a state enforcement action in Waco. which ATF agents participated ($200 for each claimant), one was for the execution of a search warrant at a wrong address ($10,000) Twenty-three of the injury tort claims also resulted in civil lawsuits. Of these, 12 were dismissed, 1 was settled for $20,000 for false arrest, and 10 were pending at the time of our review. If a settlement in excess of $500,000 is recommended, it must be approved by Treasury’s Assistant General Counsel for Enforcement if the lawsuit is against the United States, ATF, or an ATF employee in his/her official capacity. through 1995, 528 civil lawsuits were filed against ATF. According to the ACC for litigation, of the 528 lawsuits, 183 were Bivens and FTCA-related lawsuits. Of the 183 lawsuits, 31 were filed as a result of a shooting or other allegation of excessive force use. Among some of the lawsuit settlements, two were for trespass-type claims, the ACC says. In addition to the lawsuits not related to Waco, 11 were settled with no finding against or concession of wrongdoing. Our review of available information in ATF’s shooting incident and excessive force investigative files for fiscal years 1990 through 1995 showed that ATF complied with its investigative procedures in effect at the time of the investigation. Two investigative files did not contain a record of review required by the procedures. The settlements ranged from $200 for false arrest claims to $250,000 for the accidental shooting of a local law enforcement officer. We did not evaluate the events that resulted in the incidents or the quality and adequacy of the ATF investigations. In 18 of the 25 investigations, the ATF agents involved in the alleged incidents were cleared of all allegations. Four investigations found some type of misconduct by ATF agents. Two investigations were ongoing at the time of our review. One investigation was closed without further action because OI determined that there was no need for adjudication. ATF’s investigations and subsequent reviews determined that most reported use of excessive force allegations were unsubstantiated due to the lack of evidence. In a 1990 incident, a complainant alleged that an ATF agent assaulted him during an arrest for possession of an unregistered firearm. We did not verify whether all shooting and alleged excessive force incidents were reported, or whether all reported allegations of excessive force were investigated. We did a limited check to identify incidents that ATF may not have investigated. Through these sources, eight incidents were identified. We then cross-checked the alleged incidents we identified against ATF’s (a) investigative records to determine if ATF investigated these incidents and (b) litigation records to see if any complainants filed civil lawsuits against ATF related to these incidents. We determined that three of the incidents—one shooting and two excessive force allegations—were investigated by ATF. SIRB is to make formal recommendations about changes in enforcement operations and policies, training, and technology. The heads of the Directorates are responsible for implementing the recommendations and responding to the SIRB in writing. The recommended changes are to reach field agents through their SACs, who are ultimately responsible for their implementation. OI does not have the power to enforce the recommendations, their implementation is to be verified as part of OI’s inspection of ATF’S divisions. SIRB determined that some ATF agents were accidentally discharging their firearms while using body bunkers. SIRB concluded that factors such as wearing gloves and using the off/weak hand may have contributed to the accidental discharges. In response to these recommendations, both the Associate Director for Enforcement and the ATF Director issued separate memorandums to cognizant officials, such as SACs and the Chief of ATF’s National Academy, informing them of the need to improve body bunker and firearms training. In October 1995, ATF issued a report identifying issues arising from the operation at the Branch Davidian compound in Waco. According to ATF officials, they reviewed the Treasury report on the Waco operation and addressed each issue raised in the report. In addition, ATF consulted with experts from other organizations and law enforcement agencies, such as IACP, the National Tactical Officers Association, the FBI, and the Secret Service. copies of the report have been distributed to all ATF field divisions to help implementation. ATF must be prepared to seek assistance from other federal, state, and local law enforcement agencies when necessary. Raid commanders must be chosen on the basis of their ability to handle the type of operation involved. Operational security must receive greater attention; in crisis situations, ATF must seek help from other agencies. Raid planners must have training in a wide range of tactical options and must contain carefully constructed contingency plans so that the momentum of going forward does not take control over rational decisionmaking. The incident commander must be located at the command post. ATF is in the process of providing command and control and crisis management training to decisionmakers. ATF determined that the SRTs needed to be better equipped, to be provided with more specialized training, and to have expanded capabilities. ATF personnel, at all times, must be prepared to tell the truth and admit mistakes. If misstatements are made, they must be corrected as quickly as possible, according to the ATF October 1995 report. The ATF Director in October 1994 restructured ATF’s headquarters operations. ATF has procedures in place for reporting, investigating, and reviewing shooting incidents and allegations of excessive force by ATF agents. These procedures are consistent with guidelines and/or standards recommended by IACP, PCIE, and the Commission on Accreditation for Law Enforcement Agencies. ATF has implemented lessons learned from shooting investigations, and is in the process of implementing lessons Learned from Treasury’s investigation of the Waco incident, the report says. The report concludes that ATF has complied with its investigative procedures in effect at the time of the investigation.