The NFIP is designed to pay operating expenses and flood insurance claims with premiums collected on flood insurance policies rather than with tax dollars. The program is not actuarially sound because of the number of policies in force that are subsidized. FEMA faces a challenge in providing effective oversight of the 95 insurance companies and thousands of insurance agents and claims adjusters. The NFIP faces a major challenge in working with its contractor and state and local partners of varying technical capabilities and resources to produce accurate, digital flood maps. FEMA has statutory authority to borrow funds from the Treasury to keep the NFIP solvent. The large number of claims arising from Hurricanes Katrina and Rita will require FEMA to borrow heavily. The NFIP does not have the financial reserves necessary to offset heavy losses in the short-term. FEMA estimated that floodplain management regulations enforced by communities have prevented over $1.1 billion annually in flood damage, according to a 2005 FEMA report. In a 2004 testimony, FEMA noted that congressional proposals have been made to phase out rates for repetitive loss property. Many policyholders continued to find it easy to drop policies, even if the policies were required by lenders. FEMA has embarked on a multi- year effort to update the nation’s flood maps at a cost in excess of $1 billion. Accurate flood maps that identify the areas at greatest risk of flooding are the foundation of the NFIP. The maps are principally used by the approximately 20,000 communities participating in theNFIP to adopt and enforce building standards for new construction within the flood plains. FEMA should develop documented plans with milestones for implementing requirements of the Flood Insurance Reform Act of 2004. FEMA should provide policyholders with a flood insurance claims handbook that meets statutory requirements. FEMA must establish a regulatory appeals process, and ensure that flood insurance agents meet minimum NFIP education and training requirements. Congress and the NFIP face a complex challenge in assessing potential changes to the program that would improve its financial stability, the report says. The most immediate challenge for theNFIP is processing the flood Insurance claims resulting from Hurricanes Katrina and Rita. to the minimum required amount (i.e., the amount of their outstanding mortgage balance) This in turn can increase taxpayer exposure for disaster assistance resulting from flooding. There is no “silver bullet’ for improving the current structure and operations of the NFIP. It will require sound data and analysis and the cooperation and participation of many stakeholders. Mr. Chairman and Members of the Committee, this concludes my prepared statement. I would be pleased to respond to any questions you and the Committee Members may have. This is a work of the U.S. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States. It may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from GAO. However, because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material, permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org.