least 70 countries. In addition, IRS pointed to certain current QI requirements that provide IRS with some information on fraud and illegal acts. IRS agreed that while there are benefits to electronic filing of tax Forms 1042 and 1042-S, IRS said there are also benefits to not filing forms at all. However, self-reporting by the QI is not equivalent to judgments by the auditors about whether there are indications that fraud or illegal acts have occurred. And the universe of potential fraud orillegal acts extends beyond potential violations of know your customer rules. such a requirement would be a burden for QIs that file only a few (3 or fewer) forms. Requiring electronic filing whenever possible would reduce IRS’s costs and improve the timeliness and accuracy of data for program oversight. Money is mobile and once it has moved offshore, the U.S. government generally does not have the authority to require foreign governments or foreign financial institutions to help IRS collect tax on income generated in the United States. The IRS said it has implemented a procedure to include an application to electronically file for all QIs applying for or renewing participation in the program. In 1913, the United States enacted its first legislation establishing that U.S. persons and NRAs were subject to withholding at source. IRS issued a comprehensive set of withholding regulations for NRAs in 1956. Payors of this income do not have to withhold tax on this income but are required to report certain information to IRS about the amounts of income sent and to whom. Among the types of investment income sent to NRAs, some are exempt from U.s. tax and some are taxable. financial intermediaries are neither required to withhold taxes on the income nor report information on the payment of the income to IRS. Some U.S. investment income, such as dividends, is subject to a statutory tax rate of 30 percent. Payors of this income generally are to withhold the 30 percent tax if the recipients do not reside in a nation that has negotiated a treaty with a lower tax rate. The payors also have to report to IRS certain information covering the amount of income sent and to whom. About $5 billion of this capital income was withheld for tax year 2003. Under the QI program, foreign financial institutions sign a contract with IRS to withhold and report U.S. source income sent offshore. QIs may opt out of primary withholding and reporting responsibilities for designated accounts. U.s. taxpayers must report all of their current income on their income tax returns. Most of the income flowing offshore is likely to be sent to NRAs, but some income may be sent directly to US. NRAs are taxed on their worldwide income, while US persons are only taxed on certain source income. Under the contract signed with IRS, QIs accept enhanced responsibilities for providing assurance that customers are in fact eligible for treaty benefits and exemptions. U.S. withholding agents must determine the residency of the owner of the income and the kind and amount of U.s. source income. Because QIs agree to follow specified account-opening procedures, there is enhanced assurance that the residency and nationality of the account holder has been accurately determined and thus correct withholding decisions will be made. NQIs provide somewhat less assurance of proper withholding and reporting than exists under the QI program. U.S. maintains a network of bilateral tax treaties designed to set out clear tax rules. Treaties are intended to eliminate double taxation of taxpayers conducting economic activity in the two jurisdictions. As of January 2007, there were 54 tax treaties in force, including all members of the Organization of Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) For tax year 2003, about 80 percent of U.S source income flowed through treaty countries, with 88 percent of that flowing through U.s. withholding agents. law, corporations, including foreign corporations, are treated as the taxpayers. Because the owners of the corporation are not known to IRS, individuals are able to hide behind the corporate structure. Withholding agents, regardless of the type of institution, generally may accept a withholding certificate at face value. In situations where the foreign corporation is owned by a U.S. person or persons, it is incumbent upon the owners to report their corporate ownership and any income appropriately taxable to them on their own tax returns. Mogul for income tax evasion. U.S. person, a resident of Nevada, produced, marketed, sold and distributed videotapes and DVDs through a business incorporated in Oklahoma and operating in California. He also formed a Nevada company to perform marketing, purchasing, and promotional activities on behalf of the Oklahoma/California company. Using nominee shareholders to conceal his ownership, he also established an international business corporation in the Cayman Islands which was the named owner of a bank account in Bermuda and a brokerage account in California, the indictment alleges. and brokerage accounts to obscure his ownership, overstate business and personal expenses, and underreport more than $18 million of his true taxable income for the years 2002-2003. Foreign corporations received at least $200 billion, or 68.4 percent, of the $293.3 billion in total U.S. source income for tax year 2003. From this income, almost $3 billion was withheld (a withholding rate of 1. 4 percent), representing more than$57 billion of treaty benefits and exemptions. IRS generally does not have the legal authority to audit a foreign financial intermediary. Internal auditors are not responsible for following up on possible indications of fraud or illegal acts. IRS obtains considerable data from withholding agents but does not make effective use of these data to ensure that withholding agents perform their duties properly, the authors say. The QI agreement requires each QI to engage and pay for an external auditor to perform “agreed-upon procedures” and submit a report of factual findings to IRS. U.S. Government Auditing Standards are more stringent on this topic than the ISRS standards. IRS could draw on existing auditing standards to establish a consistent definition of fraud and illegal acts. Data that IRS needs to effectively administer the QI program are not readily available for use and in some instances no longer exist. All withholding agents, whether QIs or not, are to report withholding information on their annual withholding tax returns (Forms 1042) and information returns ( form 1042-S) IRS has difficulty ensuring that refunds claimed by withholding agents are accurate. contracts whenever possible, thereby reducing the need to manually process data reported from abroad. IRS agreed it would be beneficial to investigate U.S. withholding agents’ reliance on self-certified identity documents. For the first recommendation, IRS’s detailed comments focused on examining the accuracy of the self- Certified documents. IRS agrees that there are benefits to electronic filing of tax Forms 1042 and 1042-S, but said such a requirement would be a requirement. of fraud and illegal acts. burden for QIs that file only a few (3 or fewer) forms. IRS said it has implemented a procedure to include an application to electronically file for all QIs applying for or renewing participation in the program. We believe any burdens filers of few forms would face could be addressed by offering them a waiver opportunity similar to waivers that are available to all institutions that are currently required to file electronically. Requiring electronic filing whenever possible would reduce IRS’s costs and improve the timeliness and accuracy of data for program oversight. from the issue date. At that time, we will send copies of this report to appropriate congressional committees and the Acting Commissioner of Internal Revenue. We also will make copies available to others upon request. In addition, the report will be available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staff have any questions concerning this report, please contact me at (202) 512-9110 or brostekm@gao,gov. whether weaknesses exist in QI external reviews and the Internal Revenue Service’s (IRS) use of program data. To address our objectives, we reviewed various IRS documents and interviewed IRS officials in the QI program office and U.S. withholding program audit staff. We reviewed various studies and reports on foreign investment and banking practices and visited IRS’’ Philadelphia Campus, which was responsible during our review for processing information returns submitted by some QIs. Withholding data used in this report were reported by the IRS. We analyzed IRS data on U.S. source income that flowed overseas for tax years 2002 and 2003. The data do not include an unknown amount of activity that was unreported. We determined that these data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of describing the QI program by (1) performing electronic testing for obvious errors in accuracy and completeness and (2) interviewing agency officials knowledgeable about the data. We reviewed the sampling methodology used in the AUPs and found that it was adequate to identify problems with the accounts. Joan Vogel; and Elwood White made key contributions to this report. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. For support in the U.S., call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. For confidential help in the UK, call the Salvation Army at 08457 909090 or click here.