Endangered and threatened species are controversial, in part because dwindling species are often harbingers of resource scarcity. Most common cause of species' decline is habitat loss or alteration. Of the 1,358 U.S. species, 1,168 (86.0%) are covered in recovery plans. As of October 20, 2008, a total of 1,183 species of animals and 749 species of plants were listed as either endangered or threatened under the ESA, of which the majority occur in the United States and its territories.  conservationists increasingly are talking about ecosystems as the units of interest, rather than species. At times, efforts to protect and recover listed species are controversial. Declining species often function like the proverbial canary in the coal mine, by flagging larger issues of resource scarcity and altered ecosystems. Species may be listed on the ESA on the basis of their relationships with other species, as well as their status as threatened or endangered. They may also be listed based on their conservation status, such as "threatened" or "endangered" The Secretary must decide whether to list the species based only on the best available scientific and commercial information. With certain exceptions, the Secretary must designate critical habitat (CH) in areas where the species is currently found or which might provide additional habitat for the species' recovery. As of October 20, 2008, FWS had designated CH for 38.7% of listed domestic species. The duty to avoid adverse modification of CH is an express obligation only for federal agencies and actions, or private actors in actions with a federal nexus. exemption if the Secretary of Defense determines that an exemption is necessary for national security (16 U.S.C. ยง 1536) The Department of Defense (DOD) has claimed that requirements under ESA conflict with its readiness activities, but DOD has not requested any exemptions to date. Other statutes may provide for waivers of ESA provisions. Section 102(c) of the Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act of 1996 provides for a waiver of ESA and the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) Congress, Section 3 of H.R. 6895 would exempt construction and operation of a nuclear facility, approved under an accelerated procedure, from ESA. According to FWS, any hurricane-related federal activities in presidentially declared disaster areas would trigger the emergency consultation provisions of ESA. For the 2005 Gulf of Mexico hurricanes, FWS stated that restoring "any infrastructure damaged or lost due to the hurricane back into the original footprint does not require ESA consultation with the Service" The appropriate Secretary generally must develop a recovery plan. A 1988 amendment forbade the Secretary from favoring particular taxonomic groups. In 2008, FWS published guidance on the use of a crediting framework in carrying out recovery measures. Critics question whether the level of accountability for and enforcement of actions on private land would protect listed species comparable to what federal agencies are required to provide on public lands. The appropriate Secretary must cooperate with the states in conserving protected species and must enter into cooperative agreements to assist states in their endangered species programs, if the programs meet certain specified standards. ESA is the domestic implementing legislation for the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora. CITES parallels ESA by dividing its listed species into groups, according to the estimated risk of extinction, but uses three major categories (called Appendices) rather than two. In contrast to ESA, CitES classifies species based solely on the risk that trade poses to their survival. ESA makes violations of the law punishable by up to 10 years in prison. Under CITES, the Conference of Parties convenes every two to three years. At these meetings, the parties vote on adopting amendments to Appendices I and II. The most recent COP was held in June 2007 in The Hague, Netherlands. The next COP will be held in Doha, Qatar, in 2010. In the 110 th COP, decisions regarding the listing of species were discussed. They included denying a proposal to review restrictions on whales, listing species of sawfish and European eel. International illegal wildlife trade is estimated to be worth more than $10 billion annually. The United States is considered one of the largest importers of illegal wildlife and wildlife products. CITES as well as the Lacey Act are two of the primary policy mechanisms that address the illegal Wildlife trade. Several legislative proposals were introduced in the 110 th Congress to address illegal wildlifetrade. These measures centered on establishing a list of acceptable species that could enter the United States and increasing the enforcement capacity of FWS. rhinoceroses, Asian and African elephants, marine turtles, and great apes (gorillas, chimpanzees, bonobos, orangutans, and the various species of gibbons) This fund supports conservation efforts benefitting these species, often in conjunction with efforts under CITES. In the 110 th Congress, P.L. 110-132 reauthorized the African Elephant Conservation Act and the Rhinoceros and Tiger Conservation Act of 1994 through FY2012. Other bills were introduced to deal with international concerns. H.R. 1464 would have amended the Lacey Act Amendments of 1981 to extend protection to plants illegally harvested outside of the United States. H.r. 4455 would have authorized. the sale of illegal plants in the U.S. to other countries. The bill was reported (amended) by the House Committee on Natural Resources on September 24, 2008 ( H.Rept. 110-882 ) and passed the House of Representatives on May 21, 2008. The Senate Committee on Environment and Public Works reported H. R. 1771 ( S. rept.110-493 ) on September 23, 2008, and passed it on September 25, 2008; the House passed the bill on May 20, 2008 and May 21. the Secretary of the Interior to provide international wildlife management and conservation programs through FWS's Wildlife Without Borders Program. H.R. 5756 and S. 3490 would have reauthorized the Neotropical Migratory Bird Conservation Act through FY2015. S.Res. 598 expressed the sense of the Senate regarding the need for the United States to lead international efforts to assist developing nations in preventing the extinction of a large portion of the world's plant and animal species. The answer to this question depends on what is measured. Since a major goal of ESA is the recovery of species to the point at which ESA protection. 48 U.S. and foreign species or distinct population segments thereof have been delisted. Recovered species include alligators, Yellowstone grizzly bear, bald eagle, brown pelican, peregrine falcons (two subspecies), and three species of kangaroos. ESA reauthorization has been on the legislative agenda since the funding authorization expired in 1992. Issues for the 110 th Congress included effects of ESA on private and federal land use, promotion of species recovery, agency use of scientific information, specific regional resource conflicts. several recent situations, legal, economic, and social disputes have resulted from actions under ESA. Examples of these controversies include the Florida panther, Klamath River Basin suckers and coho salmon, and Sonoran Desert bald eagles. Critics in some of these disputes suggest that the science supporting ESA action has been insufficiently rigorous or mishandled by the agencies. What should be done in such instances? Some suggest that considerations other than species conservation should prevail; others seek to change the current posture of the law by changing the role of ESA.  ESA does not elaborate on this question, but some assert that, given the protective purpose of ESA, arguably dwindling species are to be given the benefit of the doubt and a margin of safety. These considerations are complicated by the costs and time required to acquire more complete data, particularly in connection with many lesser-known species. This phrase is drawn from H.Rept. 96-697, p. 12 (1979), which states that the "best information available" language should be used. In the 110 th Congress, the House Committee on Natural Resources held an oversight hearing on political influence and scientific integrity in ESA implementation. H.R. 3459 would have amended ESA to require FWS to publish a summary statement of the scientific basis for a listing or delisting decision or the designation of CH. "Best scientific and commercial data available" is not a standard of absolute certainty, reflecting Congress's intent that FWS take conservation measures before a species is conclusively headed for extinction. The Department of the Interior and FWS have both issued additional guidelines that are available through their websites. In the absence of federal regulatory action on climate change, environmental groups are eyeing use of the Endangered Species Act. The idea is to petition FWS and NMFS to list as endangered or threatened various animals whose habitat is or will be adversely affected by climate change. Once listed, the argument would be made that sources of substantial greenhouse gas emissions, such as coal-fired powerplants, cause an unlawful "take" of these species under ESA Section 9. This could force negotiation of an incidental take permit for the source. S. 1554 would have amended the Clean Air Act to provide funding for programs and projects conserving habitat for endangered species and species of conservation concern. H.R. 3221 would have allocated funds to the FWS endangered species programs and to related funds to assist species adaptation to climate change. S. 3071 would have temporarily prohibit the Secretary of the Interior from considering global climate change as a natural or manmade factor in determining whether a species is a threatened or endangered species. As open space dwindles and increasing human populations put pressures on wildlands and natural resources, efforts at conserving species and their habitats may highlight underlying resource crises and economic conflicts. Controversy erupted in 2001 when the Bureau of Reclamation announced it would not release water from part of its Klamath irrigation project. The operational change sought to make more water available for three fish species under ESA protection. A proposed agreement has been drafted to address conflicting water management objectives. The parties to this proposed agreement have indicated that, if the agreement is finalized, they will seek legislative support from Congress. In 2007, the hatchery listing policy of NMFS was ruled invalid by a federal court in part because the court found it scientifically questionable to include hatchery-raised fish. S. 3608 would have established a Salmon Stronghold Partnership program to protect wild Pacific salmon. Delta smelt ( Hypomesus transpacificus ) is a small, slender-bodied fish found only in the San Francisco Bay and Sacramento-San Joaquin Rivers Delta in California. The species was listed as threatened under ESA in 1993 and, in recent years, species abundance has declined to the lowest ever observed. This provision was not retained in P.L. 110-161 , the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2008. Delta smelt decline has significant consequences for the operation of the Central Valley Project (CVP) and the State Water Project (SWP) Some contend that entrainment in water pumps is the primary cause, whereas others argue that all causes might be more or less equally responsible for the observed decline. To address the decline, changes in how these pumps are operated might be required to satisfy ESA requirements. These requirements could result in reduced pumping and less water for users. The decline of the Delta smelt has been documented since the 1970s. impact of pumping on Delta smelt, an ESA Section 7 consultation between FWS and the Bureau was conducted. FWS issued a no-jeopardy biological opinion (BiOp) in 2004, and re-issued the BiOp in 2005 to address potential critical habitat issues. In May 2007, the FWS BiOp was found not to comply with ESA with regard to DeltaSmelt. The Bureau and FWS reinitiated consultation based on new information on the Delta Smelt in 2007. H.R. 6940 would have authorized support for the establishment of a fish hatchery program. District Court for the Western District of Washington overturned the pesticide counterpart regulations. The court let stand the "optional formal consultation" process, in which NMFS or FWS can adopt EPA effects determinations as their own. A report by the services of the NFP counterpart regulations found that all ten projects reviewed by NMFS were deficient in five or six criteria. 44 out of 50 projects review by FWS missed at least one of six criteria, with 19 missing all six. The prohibitions in Section 9 (private actions) and Section 7 (federal nexus) at times frustrate the economic desires of owners of land. assert that restrictions under ESA routinely "take" property in the constitutional sense of the term. Conflicts between ESA and property owners come about despite the existence of ESA mechanisms intended to soften its impact on property owners. Critics want ESA amended to afford compensation for a broader range of property impacts than the Constitution provides. The 110 th Congress enacted P.L. 110-229 , including Section 515 authorizing the Secretary of the Interior to participate in the Platte River Recovery Implementation Program for Endangered Species. June 20, 2007, as "American Eagle Day," to celebrate the recovery and restoration of the American bald eagle. On June 18, 2008, the House agreed to H.Res. 1247 , supporting the goals and ideals of "American eagle Day" The 110 th Congress considered a variety of additional ESA issues, although none were enacted. Section 901 of S. 1892 would have required a Coast Guard report on efforts taken from FY2000 through 2007 to protect endangered sea turtles and marine mammals; the Senate Committee on Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation reported on February 5, 2008. on whether to list polar bears as threatened. H.R. 6936 would have amended the Marine Mammal Protection Act (MMPA) to allow importing polar bear trophies taken in Canadian sport hunts before the polar bear was listed as a threatened species. S.Res. 520 would have designated May 16, 2008, as "Endangered Species Day" S. Res. 583 would have declared June 20, 2008,. as "American Eagle Day," to celebrate recovery and restoration of the bald eagle. The Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation reported (amended) S. 2657. President Bush signed P.L. 110-161 ( H.R. 2764 ) into law, providing more than $236 million for FWS's ESA and related programs. On February 4, 2008, the Bush Administration released its FY2009 budget request, including over $230 million for ESA-related programs withing FWS. The FY2009 request for ESA program funding for F WS under their Ecological Services Account is $3.67 million (2.44%) less than funding enacted for FY2008.