The operation of the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) is among the subjects of legislative interest. Stakeholders have expressed concerns over a number of issues, including the USPTO's backlog of filed but unexamined applications. Some commentators believe that within an era of increasingly complex, fast-moving technology, the task of issuing quality patents on a consistent basis presents a considerable challenge to the USpTO. The USPto has actively engaged in efforts to address its issues. USPTO initiatives have responded to perceived concerns about the patenting process. The Patent Application Backlog Reduction Stimulus Plan allows an individual who has filed multiple pending applications to receive expedited review of one patent application when he agrees to withdraw another, unexamined application. The Enhanced First Action Interview Pilot Program, which allows participants to conduct an interview with the patent examiner early in the application review process, is also part of the USPTO's initiatives. The "Three-Track Initiative," under which applications would be placed into one of This report reviews a number of recent USPTO initiatives designed to enhance the patent application review process. It begins by offering a brief review of patent acquisition proceedings. The report then reviews the innovation policy issues that are implicated by patent administration policies. Finally, the report closes by reviewing possible congressional options to improve the patent system. The U.S. Constitution provides Congress with the power "To promote the Progress of Science and useful Arts, by securing for limited Times to ... Inventors the exclusive Right to their ... Discoveries" An invention must meet four primary requirements to be patentable. The maximum term of patent protection is ordinarily set at 20 years. If the USPTO allows the patent to issue, its owner obtains the right to exclude others from making, using, selling, offering to sell or importing into the United States the patented invention. Those who engage in those acts without the permission of the patentee can be held liable for infringement, the authors say. The patent owners who wish to compel others to respect their proprietary interests must commence enforcement proceedings. The USPTO has admitted that "the volume of patent applications continues to outpace our capacity to examine them" Long delays for patent approvals may negatively impact high technology industries. For market segments that feature a rapid pace of innovation and short product cycles, such as consumer electronics, the delays may also significantly devalue the patent right. Many observers believe that if current conditions continue, the backlog and delay are likely to grow at the US PTO in coming years.. The Supreme Court enjoys discretionary authority to review cases decided by the Federal Circuit. Many observers believe that the USPTO should only issue patents on inventions that meet each of the statutory criteria. Quality patents are said to enhance predictability within the marketplace. Entrepreneurial speculators may find it easy to obtain patents that can then be enforced against manufacturers and service providers. The goal of consistently high levels of patent quality may pose a considerable challenge for the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) The agency has hired many new examiners, including 1,193 in 2006; 1,215 in 2007; and 1,211 in 2008. The USPTO proposed rules with respect to claims and so-called continuing applications. These rules never came into effect due to a temporary court ruling enjoining their implementation. Inventors might also benefit from obtaining more prompt review of a particular patent application. The USPPO will continue to operate the Patent Application Backlog Reduction Stimulus Plan until December 31, 2011, or until 10,000 applications have received expedited review.. The remainder of this report reviews several of these programs. extending the Plan, however. Patents issued by the USPTO have no effect in other countries. For the most part, patents must be obtained on a nation-by-nation basis. An individual or firm that develops a new technology, and that seeks protection in more than one country, must therefore file multiple patent applications claiming the same invention. In turn, the patent offices of different nations must commit significant effort towards examining applications that are being submitted for patent protection in different countries. Patent Prosecution Highway (PPH) is an initiative intended to rationalize and expedite multinational patent acquisition. The PPH consists of a series of bilateral arrangements between the patent offices of a number of nations. Each participating patent office may also potentially benefit from the work previously done by another office. The USPTO has currently entered into PPH arrangements with over a dozen foreign patent offices, including the European Patent Office and the Patent Offices of Australia, Canada, Germany, Japan, Korea, and the United Kingdom. The USPTO has explored an alternative to this longstanding procedure though an "Enhanced First Action Interview Pilot Program" Applicants that choose to participate receive a Pre-Interview Communication providing the results of a technical literature search conducted by the examiner. The applicant may then conduct an interview with the examiner with the hope of expediting approval of the application. This program originally applied only to certain divisions of the USpTO, but was recently extended to cover the entire agency under the title "Full First Action interview Pilot Program." The USPto reports that this pilot program has yielded several benefits to participants. The USPTO recently announced a "Three-Track Initiative" that would place each patent application into one of three separate queues. Through this mechanism, inventors could pay a surcharge to obtain more prompt review of their applications; or alternatively delay examination and the payment of corresponding fees for those services. Under the proposal, an application would only be placed in one of the three tracks if it was originally filed in the United States. Applications that were originally filed abroad would not be docketed for examination at all. The disparate treatment of applications based on the office of first filing has also aroused controversy. According to the USPTO, this "proposal would increase the efficiency of examination of [foreign] applications" The U.S. is a signatory to the Paris Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property and also a member state of the World Trade Organization. Even if the Three-Track Initiative is approved, it will not apply to foreign patent applications immediately, the patent office says. It will only apply to applications for which they are theOffice of First Filing. USPTO has for many years maintained an internal quality control group that monitors the quality of the patent examination process. In 2011, the USPTO endeavored to increase the effectiveness and transparency of its quality review procedure through the implementation of new metrics that measure patent quality. The new metrics have, for the most part, been positively received by the patent bar. Some observers have expressed concerns that "placing foreign nationals at a distinct disadvantage in their pursuit of patent rights in the U.S. ... could trigger, among other things, the imposition of new barriers" The 112 th Congress is engaged in extensive patent reform discussions. Two bills, H.R. 1249 and S. 23, would make a number of changes to current patent law. Reform proposals within these bills bear upon the ability of the USPTO to develop and implement new initiatives. Some commentators believe that certain of the metrics may not always reflect an accurate and efficient review of a patent application and have suggested that other metrics might also be introduced. The USPto has engaged in changes to its administrative practices to address concerns over its backlog. H.R. 1249 and S. 23 propose that the USPTO be given the authority to "set or adjust by rule any fee established or charged by the Office" Any fees set must, in the aggregate, cover the estimated costs of the agency's services. This capacity may provide the agency with heightened capability to develop new initiatives without need for congressional activity, the authors say. New realities within the intellectual property environment, including a growing number of patent applications, increasingly complex technologies, and heightened user demand for prompt and accurate patent services have encouraged the US PTO to innovate.