The Railroad Rehabilitation and Improvement Financing program offers low-interest loans. Congress has authorized $35 billion in loan a uthority for the program, but freight railroads have been unenthusiastic. Since 2000, RRIF has made 37 loans to 29 operators for a total of $5.4 billion. About 85% of the RRIF program's nominal loan amount has gone to government-controlled entities for passenger rail projects rather than to freight operators, says John Sutter. The railroad industry has changed significantly since Congress created a forerunner of RRIF in 1976. Congress significantly deregulated the railroad industry, making it easier for carriers to consolidate and to shed less profitable routes. Since that time, mergers have reduced a large number of regional railroads to a handful of companies that operate across many states. Deregulation allowed the large railroads. to focus their construction and maintenance efforts on heavily trafficked main lines and to stop service on. other lines. Some lightly used trackage was sold to smaller operators. These smaller railroads are collectively known as short line railroads. They are classified by the Federal Railroad Administration as Class II and Class III carriers. Their revenues are smaller, their lines of business typically are more limited than those of the Class I railroads, and their creditworthiness generally is lower. However, nearly half of the short-line railroads in the U.S. are Class I freight railroads and are able to finance improvements out of their revenues. nation's short line railroads have come under the control of 27 holding companies, potentially offering them easier access to private financing. Amtrak operates at a loss and relies on federal grants appropriated annually to continue operations. There is an estimated backlog of $38 billion in capital investment needed to restore the aging NEC infrastructure to a state of good repair. The Northeast Corridor is a rail line running from Washington, DC, through New York City to Boston. This line also is used heavily by commuter rail operations and also hosts freight service. Congress created the RRIF program in 1998 and revised it in 2005, 2008, and 2015. Eligible recipients of this assistance include railroads, state and local governments, government-sponsored corporations, and joint ventures that include at least one railroad. Projects eligible for RRIF assistance include acquiring, improving, and rehabilitating track, bridges, rail yards, buildings, and shops. RRIF loan applications are reviewed by the Build America Bureau, independent financial analysts hired by the Bureau, and DOT's Office of Credit and Finance. Public-sector entities have been intended for passenger rail projects. One $83.7 million loan to the Alameda Corridor Transportation Authority in 2012 was to support a freight project. FRA looked at the safety record of short line railroads, taking accident rates as a proxy for the condition of the infrastructure. Since the late 1980s, Class I railroads have moved from maximum car weights of 263,000 pounds to 286,.000 pounds. Track and bridges must be strengthened to handle these heavier loads. FRA estimated that the total investment needs of short line railroads would be $6.9 billion over the five-year period from 2013 to 2017. The survey results suggested an estimated gap of around $265 million per year between the available funding and the amount short lines felt was needed. The tax credit, first enacted in 2004, allows Class II and Class III railroads to reduce their taxes by 50% of the cost of track maintenance expenses incurred in a year, up to a limit established by multiplying track mileage by $3,500. Congress created a National Infrastructure Investment discretionary grant program in 2009. The program, popularly known as the Transportation Investment Generating Economic Recovery (TIGER) grant program, made over $5 billion in grants through FY2017. Passenger and freight rail infrastructure projects are eligible uses of TIGER funds. Extending the credit has been introduced in the 115 th Congress ( H.R. 721, S. 407, and S. 2256). The program is very competitive, with several times as much funding requested each year as the $500. The TIFIA loan program, like the RRIF program, was authorized by Congress in 1998. As of the end of calendar year 2016, the program had assisted 56 projects with a total value of over $82 billion. Eligible projects include "rail projects involving the design and construction of intercity passenger rail facilities" and "intermodal freight transfer facilities" A number of states have established grant, loan, and tax benefit programs to help short line railroads finance infrastructure or equipment purchases. The primary competition for short line and regional railroads is the trucking industry. The degree of competition is affected by the extent of regulation and taxation on the rail and truck sectors. Trucks operate over publicly provided infrastructure (the highway network), whereas railroads are financially responsible for their own infrastructure. Congress could aid the short line railroads by, for example, increasing the amount of fuel tax paid by heavy trucks to a level commensurate with the damage they cause to the highway. The problem is exacerbated by exemptions Congress has provided to limits on truck weights. infrastructure and limiting exemptions to truck weight restrictions. Such changes also would benefit the Class I railroads. However, these changes could increase the cost of shipping goods by truck, adversely affecting trucking industry employment. Higher truck rates could affect rail shippers by giving railroads room to raise their own rates. The RRIF program has lent far less than the amount Congress authorized, particularly to private-sector borrowers, may indicate that freight railroads' ability to finance their investment needs without recourse to government support is greater than Congress believed. of Inspector General found that unclear program information resulted in incomplete loan applications that required FRA to work with applicants on completing the applications. Management of the program was subsequently transferred to the Build America Bureau. The Bureau published a guide to its credit programs (covering both RRIF and TIFIA) in January 2017. The bureau had five loan applications under review as of January 1, 2018; all were draft applications. The length of time since the draft applications had been submitted was 19 months, 14 months, 10 months, 8 months, and 7 months. Federal law requires that federal credit programs operate at no cost to the government. To cover the cost of administering the program (including evaluating loan applications), the RRIF program charges loan applicants a nonrefundable fee of up to 0.5% of the loan amount. Amtrak paid a 4.424% credit risk premium for its 2011 RRIF loan and 5.8% for its 2016 RRIF loans. If collateral of sufficient value is pledged, no credit risk premiums may be required. Prior to the FAST Act, DOT was required to refund the credit risk premium to borrowers after all the loans in their cohort of loans had been repaid. As of January 2018, DOT has not issued a formal definition of a "cohort of loans" As a result, while 21 RRIF loans have been repaid, DOT hasn't yet returned any credit risk premiums to their borrowers. DOT has reportedly decided that credit risk Premiums paid for loans made after enactment of the Fast Act will not be repaid. The RRIF program was created primarily to support freight rail service. A significant portion of RRIF assistance has gone to passenger rail service, especially since 2008. Amtrak, the federally owned intercity passenger railroad operator, has received more than half of all funds loaned by RRIF. Amtrak has repaid two of the loans; it does not have to begin repaying the 2016 loan until 2022. Lending to inter city passenger rail projects creates some unique challenges for RRIF, says the authors.