The Social Security system is largely a pay-as-you-go system. By 2012, Social Security’s annual tax revenues are expected to be insufficient to cover its benefit payments. To cover the cash shortfall, the trust fund will begin drawing on the Treasury, first relying on its interest income and eventually drawing down its assets. The larger the retirement funds, the more investment earnings they would have and the more the rate of return on investments matters, the authors say. The prospect of building up retirement funds has brought increased attention to stock market investing. under government stock investing. Social Security’s cash deficit, beginning in 2012, would be financed from stock earnings and sales. The trust fund would be particularly vulnerable to losses in the event of a general stock market downturn. The only way for the Social Security trust fund to earn the higher returns possible with stock investing is to take on greater risk, the authors say.. Caution is warranted in counting on future stock returns in designing Social Security reform, they say. The results of these simulations illustrate some outcomes associated with two investment alternatives. They are not intended to represent the full range of possible outcomes. There is no guarantee that investing in the stock market, even over 2 or 3 decades, will yield the long-term average return. Over the past 70 years or so, stock returns were negative in nearly 1 out of 4 years. With government stock ownership, the risk and potential returns would be shared collectively by workers. But even if future stock returns are lower than the historical average of 7 percent, the conventional wisdom is that stock returns will be higher than those on Treasury securities over the long term. Individual accounts proposals would fundamentally alter the role of Social Security as a social insurance program. Reform proposals that use government managed accounts would constrain investment choices to reduce the risks that individuals could take. Under proposals that place few restrictions on investment choices, investors could take much greater risks and potentially earn greater returns. Some individuals could do very well under such an approach, but others could experience a significant drop in their expected retirement income. In the short term, under current budget scoring rules, government stock investing would increase reported budget figures. deficits or decrease budget surpluses because stock purchases would be treated as outlays. Each dollar invested in stocks is a dollar no longer available to the Treasury to finance other government spending or reduce debt held by the public. Depending on how much the trust fund were to invest in stocks, the change in the reported deficit/surplus could exceed $100 billion annually. Over the long term, the impact of government stock investing on reported budget deficits/surpluses could largely be neutral. Critics have expressed concern about increased government involvement in financial markets and corporate affairs. For stock selection, proponents of government stock investing typically recommend investing in a broad-based stock index. Most of the cost of managing an index fund is incurred maintaining thousands of individual accounts. The government, as a single investor, would incur negligible costs as a percentage of its assets, he says. But he says individual accounts’ proponents argue that administrative costs would be consistent with the costs of existing private retirement investment accounts. as forecasts and do not represent the full range of possible outcomes for the Social Security trust fund. Social Security Financing: Implications of Government Stock Investing for the Trust Fund, the Federal Budget, and the Economy (GAO/AIMD/HEHS-98-74, April 22, 1998). Budget Issues: Long-Term Fiscal Outlook (GAE/T-A IMD/OCE-98/83, February 25, 1998) Social Security: Restoring Long-term Solvency Will Require Difficult Choices (GAo/T/A/HE/98/95, February 10, 1998); Social Security Reform: Implication for Women’s Retirement Income (GAW/HE HS/98-42, December 31, 1997). Social Security reform: Demographic Trends Underlie Long- Term Financing Shortage. Each day, GAO issues a list of newly available reports and testimony. To receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days, please call (202) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone. VISA and MasterCard credit cards are accepted, also. Orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent. U.S. General Accounting Office P.O. Box 37050 Washington, DC 20013 Room 1100 700 4th St. NW.