If confirmed, Elena Kagan would be the first serving Solicitor General to be appointed to the Court since the elevation of Thurgood Marshall in 1967. She would also be only the fifth of 111 Justices to come to the bench with such experience. Kagan is ultimately responsible for the government's appellate litigation before the Supreme Court. If confirmed, it is possible that she would have to recuse herself from a number cases in which the government took part during the 2010 Supreme Court term. to file an amicus brief without the consent of the parties. The Solicitor General may choose to confess error, meaning that she recommends that the Court overturn a "flawed" decision. According to one scholar, "[m]ost confessions of error involve criminal convictions, and happen for a range of reasons" It tests the strength of our belief that the office has a peculiar responsibility to the Court, former Solicitors General Archibald Cox said. It affects the. It tests our belief of the office's commitment to the court, he said. Some scholars argue that the Court has placed a great deal of confidence and trust in the judgment of the Solicitor General's office. This trust is more centrally reflected in the office's impressive success rate in securing review for and winning on the merits in the cases supported by the office. Some observers of the Court argue, however, that the relationship between the Court and the office is not a function of a "special relationship," but the skill of theOffice's advocates. The opportunity to argue multiple times before the Court not only hones one's skills, but also generates familiarity with the preferences of the Justices. The Solicitor General will be successful when she and a majority of the members of the Court have similar policy goals. One study found a 50% increase in the probability that the Court would decide a case in a manner consistent with a Solicitors General's amicus brief. Some argue that scholarly focus on the similarity of the policy preferences fails to recognize the important component of this interaction—the weight of the law. The greater the overt politicization of the Solicsitor General's office, the less effective the office will be before the Court on the merits, one study says. Only 4 of the 111 Justices have served as Solicitor General prior to their elevation to the Court. All practiced law in a private firm at some point in their careers, although the length of time each spent in private practice ranged from 4 years (Taft and Marshall) to 21 years (Jackson) Alone among these four, Marshall spent 21 years litigating public interest cases for the NAACP Legal Defense Fund. Two of these Justices, Chief Justice Taft and Justice Marshall, served as federal appellate judges. Justices Reed and Jackson did not. nominated by President Benjamin Harrison to be a circuit court judge on the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit. Taft had, what one scholar described as, an "immensely satisfying [eight-year]career" in which he wrote 200 opinions, only one of which was a dissent. President Taft lost his election for a second term in office in 1912 and, in 1913, joined the faculty at Yale Law School. While teaching at Yale, Taft also served as president of the American Bar Association and joint chairman of the National War Labor Board. President Taft was nominated to replace Chief Justice White on June 20, 1921, and confirmed on the same day by a 60-4 vote. Chief Justice Taft is principally responsible for the Judges' Bill of 1925, which gave the Supreme Court more power. Taft and his supporters engaged in a campaign to elevate Taft to the post, which included calling ailing Chief justice White to encourage him to resign. The Supreme Court "was and always had been the ambition" of Taft's life. Stanley Reed was the 77 th Justice and the second Solicitor General to be appointed to the Court. Reed began his legal career after studying law at Yale and the Sorbonne. During his first few years, Reed unsuccessfully defended the constitutionality of New Deal economic regulations, such as the National Industrial Recovery Act and the Agricultural Adjustment Act. Reed's nomination encountered very little opposition and was subject to a single hearing on January 10, 1938. He handled a good many cases before the Supreme Court of the United States. Reed served on the Court for 21 years before retiring in 1957. He was the 82 nd individual to be appointed to the Court. In 1934, he began his legal career at the age of 21 in 1913. Reed's nomination was unanimously confirmed five days later on January 25, 1938. Reed was confirmed as a Supreme Court Justice on January 26, 1938, by a vote of 9-0. He served on a Court that was established in 1789. He is the only person to have served on both the Supreme Court and the Court of Appeals. entered full-time service as a general counsel for the Bureau of Internal Revenue in the Treasury Department. In March 1936, Jackson became assistant Attorney General of the Tax Division. Less than two months later, he assumed the position of Assistant Attorney General for the Antitrust Division. In this position, he argued 10 cases before the Supreme Court. This arguably prepared Jackson well for his next position, that of Solicitor General of U.S. on March 4, 1938. He was noted for his ability to cut to the heart of a case when arguing before the Court. Robert Jackson was appointed to be the Attorney General in January 1940. He remained in that position until July 1941, when he was elevated to the Supreme Court. In total, Justice Jackson served as a government attorney in five different capacities within the Department of Justice. He argued before the Court on 37 separate occasions prior to joining the Court. During the four days of public hearings on Jackson's Supreme Court nomination, witnesses raised questions about certain actions taken by the Justice Department under Jackson's leadership. Senator Millard Tydings argued that Attorney General Jackson should have pursued the prosecution of radio show hosts who accused the Senator of using WPA money to improve his private property. Thurgood Marshall was the 96 th Justice and the first African-American to be appointed to the Court. Justice Jackson served as the chief U.S. prosecutor at the Nuremburg Trials at the request of President Harry S. Truman. Marshall spent much of his time volunteering with the Baltimore chapter of the NAACP. After serving over 13 years on the Court, Justice Jackson died suddenly of a heart attack on October 9, 1954. He is survived by his wife, Mildred, and their three children. Thurgood Marshall was one of the architects of the NAACP's legal strategy that eventually led to the landmark 1954 Supreme Court decision Brown v. Topeka Board of Education. He was appointed to be a circuit court judge on the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit in 1962. As Solicitor General, Marshall argued 19 cases before the Court in which the government was a party; of these, he won 14. President Johnson nominated Marshall to be Associate Justice of the Supreme Court. Elena Kagan is the 45 th Solicitor General of the United States. She is also the first woman to hold this position. Kagan served as a clerk for the Associate Justice Thurgood Marshall on the U.S. Supreme Court. In 1999, Kagan became Dean of the Harvard Law School. She was credited with building consensus across ideological lines at Harvard, including hiring professors with diverse political outlooks. She has been counsel of record for over a hundred merits briefs and has argued six cases before the Court. The question has arisen as to whether Elena Kagan, if confirmed as a Supreme Court Justice, would need to disqualify and recuse herself from cases with which she was involved during her tenure as Solicitor General. The issue of recusal of government attorneys because of prior involvement with a case has most often arisen where a judge had formerly been a prosecutor, and had been involved with criminal proceedings regarding a particular client. For instance, where a former prosecutor, now a judge, had was involved in. a criminal investigation concerning a defendant in a case now before him, the courts have held the judge may be disqualified. Similarly, where a judge was involved in his previous capacity in. preparing or signing an information or a complaint against the defendant, assisting the grand jury, preparing or. signing an indictment, participating in an arraignment, or other prosecutorial functions and actions, the. courts have generally ruled that the judge was disqualified from acting in a later criminal. proceeding involving the same defendant. In some state cases, courts have recognized that numerous statutes require attorneys general, regional district attorneys, and other supervisory personnel to sign all motions, briefs, appeals. their signatures affixed to various prosecutorial documents prior to becoming judges were not thereby disqualified from subsequently trying the defendant in the same case. It is not clear, however, that this exception would be available for federal judges under 28 U.S.C. §455. The role of the Solicitor General is unique in the American legal system. The office is also charged with assisting the Supreme Court in the exercise of its judicial function. Through repeated opportunities to argue before the Court, some suggest that the office has built a "special relationship" Only four former or current Solicitors General have been elevated to the highest bench. If Elena Kagan is confirmed, she would be the fifth Solicitor General to serve on the Court. Her lack of judicial and litigation experience has raised questions as to whether she is qualified to sit on the Supreme Court. But it is clear that the experience of serving in the office provides the occupant of the office with unique insights into the Supreme. Court.and providing the highest quality arguments for the Court's consideration.