From 1995 through 2002, WTO members brought 198 formal dispute settlement cases against other members. About one-third (64) of all WTO cases involved members’ trade remedies. The United States has been by far the most frequent defendant in trade remedy cases but relatively less active in filing complaints. U.S. agency officials say it is not surprising that the United States had been a defendant more often than a complainant in WTO disputes since it has the world’s biggest economy and most desirable market. Two U.S. laws, one regulation, and three practices were changed or are subject to change. In the 11 cases involving other WTO members, only one practice was subject to changes. The two laws are the Antidumping Act of 1916 and a section of the Tariff Act of 1930. The three changes involved a revision of the “arm’s- length” methodology in antidumping cases and two privatization methodologies that the Commerce Department used in countervailing duty cases. Most of the rulings in the 25 completed trade remedy cases involved a case-specific removal or revision of a WTO member’s trade remedy measure. In the 14 completed cases brought against the United States, 21 U.S. trade measures were subject to revision or removal. The 11 completed cases against other countries resulted in 7 trade measures being subject to revise or removal, as shown in table 2. The United States reduced antidumping margins on measures in response to 3 WTO rulings, removed countervailing duty measures in 1 case as a result of domestic litigation. U.S. officials indicated that some WTO rulings were confusing and difficult to implement. Officials said they are monitoring WTO rulings and recommendations in cases not involving the United States. They are preparing for similar, potential challenges against the U.S., they said. The U.N. trade agency says it has no immediate comment on the report's findings. The report was published by the World Trade Organization's Antidumping and Safeguards Committee. It is the first report of its kind to be released by the committee. The U.S. agencies most involved in trade remedy activities believe that article 17.6(ii) has been improperly applied in some trade remedy cases. A significant minority of experts with whom we spoke said the WTO was not properly applying the legal standard of review in the Antidumping Agreement. Despite the concerns above, the majority of the experts indicated that the panels and the Appellate Body had generally had their authority in applying the standards of review, the authors say. The authors say the issue of how the WTO has resolved important trade remedy issues is highly controversial in the United States. In its December 2002 report to Congress, the executive branch concluded that, overall, the United States had fared well in WTO dispute settlement. Nevertheless, the report raised concerns about how the WTO had applied standard of review in trade remedy cases. The report specifically criticized the Appellate Body ruling in United States—Antidumping Measures on Certain Hot-Rolled Steel Products from Japan for how it had applied the legal standard ofreview in article 17.6(ii). In its submission, the U.S. stated that panels have not accepted WTO members’ reasonable, permissible interpretations of the Antidumping Agreement. We requested comments on a draft of this report from the Secretary of Commerce, the Chairman of the U.S. International Trade Commission, and the US Trade Representative. The Commerce Department and the ITC provided written comments, which are reprinted in appendixes IV and V. The ITC had two main areas of concern regarding the report. It said that the report understated the full effect of WTO rulings on the ability of the United States to impose and maintain trade remedy measures. As a result, we modified our report to give more prominent treatment to U.s. agency positions. have properly applied the standard of review in article 17.6(ii) of the Antidumping Agreement. In response to this concern, we have incorporated the ITC’s views in our report. USTR provided technical comments such as clarification of certain terminology. For example, USTR noted that the term “domestic determination” usually connotes a final decision by the appropriate agency as to whether dumping has occurred or whether increased imports have caused injury or are threatening injury to domestic industry. GAO conducted a review of the World Trade Organization’s dispute settlement activity during the past 8 years. The report will be available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. To obtain the number 198 for formal dispute settlement cases filed with the WTO from 1995 through 2002, we combined multiple complaints against one WTO member on the same law, measure, or action into one distinct case. We excluded challenges to WTO members’ sunset reviews in our data on trade remedy measures in response to agency comments. In June 1994, Brazil initiated a countervailing duty (CVD) investigation to determine whether imports of desiccated coconut and coconut milk from Côte d’Ivoire, Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, and Sri Lanka had been subsidized. The Philippines challenged the Brazilian CVDs under various provisions of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1994 (GATT 1994) and the World Trade Organization (WTO) Agreement on Agriculture. Brazil’s principal argument was that none of the WTO provisions relied upon by the Philippines applies in this case because the Brazilian subsidy investigation was initiated on the basis of an application received before the WTO Agreement entered into force. on CVD investigations did not apply because this dispute involved application of a Brazilian CVD measure based on an investigation initiated prior to January 1, 1995. Mexico challenged both the initiation of Guatemala’s antidumping investigation of imports of grey portland cement from Mexico. The Appellate Body found that Guatemala had failed to comply with article 5.3 of the ADA by initiating the antidumping. investigation on the basis of insufficient evidence of dumping, injury, and casual link between dumping and injury. Korea reported to the WTO that it had effectively terminated the safeguard measure on imports of the dairy products on May 20, 2000. The EU argued that Korea’s safeguard measure was inconsistent with various provisions of the Safeguards Agreement as well as article XIX:1 of GATT 1994. The Appellate Body also reversed a panel finding on the issue of “unforeseen developments” Accordingly, it recommended that Korea bring its safeguard measure into conformity with thesafeguards agreement. By lifting the safeguard measure, Korea considers that it has implemented the recommendations and rulings of the Dispute Settlement Body. Korea challenged the U.S.’s failure to revoke an antidumping order on Korean dynamic random access memory semiconductors (DRAMS) of one megabyte or above. The parties did not appeal the panel findings. The United States deleted the “not likely’ criterion from its regulation and replaced it with a requirement that the Secretary of Commerce consider whether the continued application of the antidumping duty order is otherwise necessary to offset dumping. The EU challenged Argentina’s imposition of safeguards on imports of EU footwear. The safeguard measure took the form of minimum specific duties on these imports. The EU contended that the safeguard measure violated article XIX:1(a) of GATT 1994 and various provisions of the Safeguards Agreement. United States and Korea then notified the DSB of a mutually agreed- upon solution to the dispute, and the compliance panel proceeding was terminated. The Appellate Body upheld panel findings that Argentina's safeguard investigation and determinations of increased imports, serious injury, and causation were inconsistent with articles 2 and 4 of thesafeguards agreement. Poland challenged Thailand’s imposition of antidumping duties on imports of certain Polish steel products. The Appellate Body affirmed the panel's findings that Thailand had violated the ADA. Mexico challenged the U.S. imposition of duties on two grades of high-fructose corn syrup (HFCS) from the United States. The panel recommended that the DSB request that Mexico bring its antidumping measure into conformity with its obligations under the ADA, but Mexico revoked the measure in May 2002. Japan and the EU separately challenged section 801 of the Revenue Act of 1916 (1916 Act) Section 801 allows for private claims against, and criminal prosecutions of, parties that import or assist in importing goods into the United States at a price substantially less than actual market value or wholesale price. The Appellate Body affirmed the panel conclusions that antidumping legislation, including the 1916 Act, can be directly challenged, absent any particular application. It also upheld the panel findings that the 1915 Act itself was inconsistent with article VI of GATT 1994 and various provisions of the ADA. The United States continues to work to enact legislation to implement the WTO ruling. A number of bills have been introduced in the Congress calling for repeal of section 801 of the 1916 Act. As of July 15, 2003, the latest bills were H.R. 1073, S. 1080, and S. 1155. The bills are somewhat different in that the repeals would not affect pending cases, whereas the S.1080 repeal would apply to them. The United States imposed CVDs on imports of certain hot-rolled lead and bismuth carbon steel products originating in the United Kingdom. granted to British Steel Corporation, a state-owned company, between 1977 and 1986. The EU claimed that the U.S. methodology in calculating the amount of these subsidies was inconsistent with several provisions of the WTO SCM Agreement. The Appellate Body upheld the panel finding that the financial contributions provided to British. Steel did not confer a benefit on the new owners. In doing so, the panel found that a certain proportion of the subsidies granted to. British Steel had passed through to the new entities. faulted the Commerce Department’s methodology in presuming that a benefit had been provided to the new owners. It found that the U.S. CVDs were inconsistent with the SCM Agreement and recommended that the DSB request that the United States bring its measures into conformity with its obligations under that agreement. The panel suggested that the. United States take all appropriate steps, including revision of its administrative practices, to prevent a violation of the SC.M Agreement, but the Appellate Body did not make this specific recommendation. India argued that the imposition of antidumping duties was inconsistent with various provisions of the ADA. One of the principal issues involved the EU’s practice of zeroing in calculating antidumping margins. After the DSB adopted the Appellate Body report, the EU established lower dumping margins for Indian imports of bed linens. Although it also concluded that dumped imports from India were still causing material injury to the EU industry,. the EU suspended application of the duties for these imports. Although the panel in the article 21.5 proceeding determined that the EU had implemented the recommendation of the D SB, the Appelliate Body reversed and found the EU was still acting inconsistently. In 1999, Mexico challenged Guatemala’s imposition of an antidumping measure on imports of portland cement from Mexico. In its challenge, Mexico contended that the initiation and conduct of the antidumping investigation and the imposition of the measure violated article VI of GATT 1994 and various provisions of the ADA. The Appellate Body reversed the panel and found that the dispute was not properly before the panel. In December 2000, Guatemala informed the WTO that it had removed the antidumped measures in question and complied with its recommendations. Australia and New Zealand challenged a U.S. safeguard measure imposed on imports of fresh, chilled, and frozen lamb meat from New Zealand and Australia. The measure was in the form of a tariff rate quota that was to span 3 years. The Appellate Body found that the United States safeguard measure was applied inconsistently with the Safeguards Agreement and GATT 1994. In August 2001, the United states decided to end the application of the safeguard measure. The safeguard measure expired in June 2001. Korea challenged several aspects of the U.S. antidumping investigation and measures on imports of stainless steel plate in coils (plate) and stainless steel sheet and strip (sheet) from Korea. The panel found several parts of the investigation to be inconsistent with the ADA. As of April 2003, the antidumping orders were still in effect. According to officials from the Commerce Department, the United States made some revisions in its calculation of dumping margins in this case. The Appellate Body also made important statements about the standard of review in article 17.6 of theADA. calculations, the dumping margins for all three companies and all others were reduced. The United States also revised its rules regarding its arm’s-length test to determine if sales are “in the ordinary course of trade” The U.S. and Japan agreed to extend the deadline for implementation to December 2003, or until the end of the first session of the next Congress, whichever is earlier. The EU claimed that the antidumping measures were inconsistent with various provisions of the ADA. financial contributions, and thus potential subsidies, in violation of the SCM Agreement. Canada argued that export restraints could result in providing subsidies to other products that used or incorporated the restricted product. Canada’s challenge was only to U.S. legal measures and not to a particular instance in which an export restraint had been the subject of a CVD investigation. The panel found against Canada and concluded that U.s. CVD law is not inconsistent with the SCm Agreement. In addition, the panel suggested that three of the legal measures Canada contested could not be challenged independently of the relevant U.N. statute. Korea challenged the U.S. imposition of a safeguard measure on imports of certain line pipe from Korea. The safeguard measure that was imposed was in the form of a duty increase for 3 years. The measure applied to imports from all WTO members except Canada and Mexico. In July 2002, the United States and Korea agreed on several steps to implement the recommendations of the DSB. No compliance action was necessary. The panel findings were not appealed. The Appellate Body reversed the panel on one of its injury findings, which resulted in upholding a United States determination. Argentina made two distinct challenges to Chilean restrictions on imports of Argentine wheat, wheat flour, sugar, and edible vegetable oils. Argentina challenged both Chile’s price band system, which Chile applied to calculate tariff rates on these imports, and its imposition of safeguard measures. The panel determined that Chile had violated various provisions of the Safeguards Agreement and GATT 1994. But the panel did not make a recommendation regarding removal of the safeguard measures because they had been removed before the panel published its report. Turkey challenged Egypt’s imposition of antidumping duties on imports of steel rebar from Turkey. The panel upheld 19 determinations of the Egyptian investigating authority, but found that Egypt had violated articles 3.4 and 6.8 of the ADA. The EU claimed that a provision of U.S. countervailing law—section 771(5)(F)—violated the SCM Agreement. Chile's compliance with regard to its price band system involves the WTO Agreement on Agriculture. The panel found that where a privatization is at arm’s length and for fair market value, the benefit from a prior subsidy to a state-owned enterprise is not passed on to the privatized entity. The Appellate Body reversed the panel and found that section 771(5)(F) of the Tariff Act of 1930 was consistent with the SCM Agreement. On June 23, 2003, the Commerce Department published in the Federal Register its final modification to its privatization practice. European Union (EU) challenged provisions of U.S. countervailing law and regulations. Appellate Body upheld panel findings that laws were consistent with SCM Agreement. Canada directly challenged section 129(c)(1) of the U.N. Uruguay Round Agreements Act (URAA) Canada failed to establish that section 129 (c) is inconsistent with WTO rules. No compliance action was necessary. The panel findings were not appealed. The United States agreed to implement the panel’s finding on the likelihood of continuation or recurrence of subsidization. Canada claimed U.S. law and regulations concerning expedited and administrative reviews of CVD orders were inconsistent with the SCM Agreement and Article VI of GATT 1994. Panel upheld the United States on several issues, but found methodology the Commerce Department used to determine the subsidy benefit was inconsistent. The panel findings were not appealed. The United States notified the DSB that the CVD measures challenged by Canada were no longer in effect and that the provisional cash deposits were not in effect, the panel said. had been refunded. Canada, however, argued that Commerce’s final determination was substantially unchanged and subsequently brought another WTO complaint challenging that determination. The WTO panel's decision in that case is due to be made public around the time this report is issued. The data clearly indicate there have been few changes in WTO members’ laws, regulations, and practices to date. The Commerce Department raised concerns regarding the composition of the group of legal experts we consulted. We believe that our methodology for selecting these experts as outlined in appendix I is sound. views on article 17.6(ii) in the report’s section on expert views and U.S. agencies’ positions. In addition to those named above, Jason Bair, Josey Ballenger, Sharron Candon, Martin De Alteriis, Rona Mendelsohn, Mary Moutsos, Mark Speight, and Laura Turman made key contributions to this report. The fastest and easiest way to obtain copies of GAO documents at no cost is through the Internet. GAO issues a list of newly released reports, testimony, and correspondence each day. Web site features a search engine to help you locate documents using key words and phrases. You can print these documents in their entirety, including charts and other graphics. To have GAO e-mail this list to you every afternoon, go to www.gao.gov and select “Subscribe to e-mails alerts” under the “Order GAO Products” heading.e.gov.