Electronic commerce is still a small part of the U.S. economy. Retail electronic commerce dollar volume has increased in all but two of the last six quarters. Business-to-consumer Internet sales were estimated to increase to between $78 billion and $143 billion in 2003. GartnerGroup: Through 2006 the pace of innovation will increase as enterprises institutionalize electronic business, and small businesses “must embrace this transition or risk their long-term viability and survival.” The federal government is taking steps to increase its use of electronic commerce. On-line procurement is a multivendor Internet-based purchasing site, sometimes called an “electronic mall.” An example of an electronic mall is GSA Advantage!, in which government buyers can search listings, compare prices, and purchase items on-line. The federal government also supports electronic commerce by sponsoring programs that provide electronic commerce education to businesses. The government has taken, or plans to take, actions that are expected to address some of the government-specific obstacles to electronic commerce. Small businesses received a higher share of awards in the three on-line programs. Small businesses generally obtain a greater percentage of contract awards of $25,000 or less. Most of the contract awards made through DMLSS E-CAT and GSA Advantage! were small, which may at least partially account for the relatively large share of dollars awarded to small businesses in these programs. In fiscal year 2000, 91 percent of D MLSS E.CAT awards and 93 percent of GSA. Advantage! awards were $25k or less, compared to only 3% of ITSS awards. on-line procurement programs than the governmentwide share. Some small businesses still face reported obstacles to successfully participating in on-line government purchasing activities. Obstacles reported generally fall into two categories: general readiness and those specific to conducting procurements electronically with the federal government. While these obstacles were reported in the context of small businesses, some—such as security and privacy—also apply to all businesses. Still, it is essential that it consider the obstacles that some small businesses face and work to implement solutions that address these obstacles. GSA’s Federal Business Opportunities (FedBizOpps) Web site is the single governmentwide point of electronic entry on the Internet. Each of the four federally funded business assistance programs in our review provided electronic commerce education as part of its operations. Three of these programs are oriented toward management issues and addressed electronic commerce as only one part of their responsibilities. The fourth program, ECRC, focused entirely on electronic commerce. The ECRC program was terminated September 30, 2001. training as well as counseling or technical assistance to individual clients. Subjects covered by the three management-oriented programs’ local offices in their electronic commerce assistance activities are shown in table 6. According to local and regional office officials, offices tailor the types of topics offered to meet local and individual client needs. In fiscal year 2000, ECRCs reported providing 3,468 training courses with a total enrollment of 53,800 students of whom 37,968 were DOD staff and 15,832 were non-DOD staff. The ECRC program was discontinued on September 30, 2001. Reaction to this decision at the local offices of the management-oriented programs was mixed. Six were concerned about losing access to expertise or about not having the staff or resources to address issues handled by the ECRCs. Four did not have such concerns. Most of the remaining eight offices did not discontinue the program. The ECRC is no longer available to clients of the SBA Young Entrepreneur of the Year Award. The award is given to the person who wins the most entrepreneurial awards in the U.S. The four business assistance programs generally coordinated their efforts. At the headquarters level, there is no ongoing process for coordinating electronic commerce activities. Neither DLA’s Electronic Business Program Office nor its PTAC program plans to keep the course materials up to date. According to DLA officials, materials for the ECRC training courses will be turned over to itsPTAC program, which plans to make them available to local PTACs via downloads from a DLA Web site. Not universal in that we found instances in which such coordination was not occurring. programs. Small businesses successfully obtained a relatively large share of federal procurement dollars in three specific on-line procurement programs. The government has taken, or plans to take, actions that are expected to address some of these obstacles. Key to the success of small businesses’ participation in government electronic procurements is that both parties—the government and the businesses themselves—continue to work on overcoming these and any future obstacles that may arise. We are also sending copies of this report to the Chairman, Senate Committee on Small Business and Entrepreneurship. To determine the small business share of procurement dollars awarded by three on-line procurement programs, we obtained fiscal year 1999 and 2000 award data for these programs. To identify what, if any, obstacles exist for small businesses in conducting electronic procurements with the federal government, we performed a literature search. We also interviewed selected SBDCs, PTACs, ECRCs, and MEPs about their clients’ experiences with obstacles. We obtained comments from organizations representing or working with small businesses to obtain their views on obstacles. For each program, we judgmentally selected six offices from each program based on the following: chose at least one office from each of the four U.S. census regions. Overall, we chose at least two local offices from each census Division. The census divides the United States into four regions and nine divisions. Based on the above criteria, we interviewed officials from the following offices: ECRCs Bremerton, WA Cleveland, OH Dallas, TX Fairfax, VA Scranton, PA MEPs Arkansas Manufacturing Extension Network California Manufacturing Technology Center Idaho Techhelp Iowa MEP Maine MEP Maryland Technology Center PTACs Alabama Small Business Development Consortium California We conducted our review between January and August 2001 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Obstacles reported by various studies and surveys as well as from comments provided by officials in selected federal business assistance programs and organizations representing or working with small businesses. We performed our work at SBA headquarters in Washington, DC, GSA offices in Crystal City, VA, and Washington, D.C.; DLA headquarters at Fort Belvoir in VA; Defense Supply Center, Philadelphia; NIST in Gaithersburg, MD. Small businesses may have difficulty in making a business case for adopting electronic commerce. They may have little working knowledge of the Internet and other electronic commerce technologies. Small businesses, particularly in rural areas and on Indian reservations, have difficulty obtaining affordable high-speed Internet access. Ensuring the security of payments and proprietary information and privacy of personal data are a top priority for small businesses considering electronic commerce as a means to sell their products and services. The continuing expansion of electronic commerce requires widespread high- speed, high-capacity connection to the Internet. Small businesses may not be prepared to take on the kinds of security and privacy risks that larger companies can more easily face. Small businesses fear bidding on-line because they do not believe that it is secure. Information security has been designated a governmentwide high-risk area since 1997. Commonly cited obstacles in this category include the following. Monitoring Various Federal Procurement Information Web Sites for Business Opportunities. The federal government has multiple Web sites that list business opportunities for small businesses. They want assurances that their pricing and other proprietary information would be accessed only by intended recipients and not by competitors. Small businesses cannot afford to spend several hours a day “surfing the Net” for potential work. Federal Acquisition Regulation change designates FedBizOpps Web site as single governmentwide point of electronic entry on the Internet. After subscribing, vendors can receive various announcements automatically via email, including solicitations and post-award notices. Information about contracting opportunities expected to be $25,000 or less does not have to be posted on FedBzOpps, officials say. electronic catalogs to multiple sites, involving different formats and procedures. As of mid-August, GSA Advantage!, DMLSS E-CAT, and others were in the initial stages of considering implementing a single catalog process for medical materiel. Vendors who want to conduct business with more than one government office generally must complete multiple registrations and profiles, providing redundant business information to vendors. Some commodity suppliers may perceive an on-line catalog to be impractical, due to the sheer number of their products and the complexity of their pricing. DOD developed a centralized, electronic registration process for vendors that want to conduct business with DOD. SBA’s Procurement Marketing and Access Network (PRO-Net) is an Internet-based database of information on thousands of small businesses. Even if a single governmentwide registration system is implemented, small businesses may still wish to register on PRO-Net. A governmentwide single point of vendor registration should help to standardize the registration process, eliminate redundancies, and provide a common method of gathering and reporting vendor information. Small businesses find it difficult to find, download, and print on-line specifications and drawings. Problems include incomplete and inadequate technical data packages for manufactured items. Small businesses often have difficulty reaching someone at the buyer’s or program office who is able and willing to help. Government has pursued many different electronic commerce solutions and has not adopted a uniform “single face” approach to the vendor community, ECRC officials say. The National Electronic Commerce Coordinating Council suggests organizations implement a customer relations management structure.