The Railroad Retirement Act authorizes retirement, survivor, and disability benefits for railroad workers and their families. The Railroad Retirement Board (RRB), an independent federal agency, administers these benefits. Workers covered by the RRB include those employed by railroads engaged in interstate commerce and related subsidiaries, railroad associations, and railroad labor organizations. These benefits are earned by railroad workers in lieu of Social Security. The Tier I railroad retirement benefit that is equivalent to Social Security benefits is mainly finance by Tier I payroll taxes and Social Security's financial interchange transfers. Under the RRSIA, Tier II taxes on both employers and employees are automatically adjusted according to the average account benefits ratio. The ABR is the ratio of the combined fair market value of Railroad Retirement Account and Trust assets as of the close of the fiscal year to the total RRB benefits and administrative expenses paid. A higher average ABR will result in a lower Tier II tax rate and consequently lower future tax income, whereas a lower ABR result in higher Tier IITax rates and higher tax income. income. Depending on the average ABR, Tier II taxes for employers can range between 8.2% and 22.1% and the Tier II tax rate for employees is capped at 4.9%. Since the Trust's inception,Tier II tax rates have been lowered twice and increased twice (see Figure 1 ). In 2013, tax rates were raised to 12.6% and 4.4% on employers and employees, respectively. The maximum amount of earnings subject toTier II taxes is $98,700 in 2019. The Trust is an independent nongovernmental entity, and it is not subject to the same oversight as federal agencies. Outside investment managers hired by the Trust invest the assets according to these guidelines. The resulting investment performance is monitored by the trustees and the Trust's Chief Investment Officer. The Trust's target asset allocations change over time to reflect current market expectation (see Figure 2 ). For example, the Trust has continued its effort in moving away from fixed income investment, with a decline from 35 % of total investments in FY2006 to 20% in FY2017. and administrative control systems, and any other information necessary to inform Congress about the operations and financial condition of the Trust. The financial statements must be audited by independent public accountants. A copy of the annual report and audit must be submitted to the President, the RRB, and the Director of the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) The RRB has the authority to bring a civil action to enforce provisions of the act. In 2008, the OIG argued that the annual financial audit required "is not adequate to support theRRB's enforcement responsibility" than there are for the retirement investments of federal government and private-sector workers. For example, there is no requirement for performance audits of the Trust, which would assess program effectiveness, economy and efficiency, internal control, and compliance with the law. The lack of NRRIT investment fund management accountability, transparency, and stringent financial oversight can be precursors to fraud, waste and abuse, according to the OIG. The OIG asserted that lack of access to the Trust's auditor continued to be a problem in FY2018. be a concern, This lack of cooperation and communication prevents OIG auditors from obtaining sufficient appropriate audit evidence regarding the RRB's financial statements. As required in the RRSIA, Trust purchases and sales initially were treated as exchanges of assets of equal value. The law did not prescribe the treatment of unrealized capital gains and losses on the Trust's investments. The Congressional Budget Office (CBO) and OMB agreed that any capital loss or gain resulting from changes in market prices would be recognized in the year in which the price change occurs. From FY2003 to FY2017, the Trust's annual rates of return, net of fees, have averaged 8.3%. The Trust's administrative expenses steadily increased through FY2011 as its investment portfolio diversified. Beginning in FY2012, the trust's administrative expense ratio decreased, mirroring a national trend of decreasing expense ratios for mutual and money market funds. In FY 2017, thetrust's rate of return of 13.4% (net of fees) exceeded the benchmark of 12.3% points for equity funds, 48 basis points for bond funds, 70 basis point for hybrid funds, and 25 basis pointsFor money market funds, points for equity and bond funds are 48 and 70 basis points, respectively. For money market and hybrid funds respectively, points are 25 and 48, respectively, for Equity and Bond funds, Equity and Hybrid Funds, Hybrid Funds and Money Market Funds. For more, go to: http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-news/2013/01/30/money-market-funds-fees-rise-to-record-high-as-fund-rate-rises.html#storylink=cpy.