In November 2002, Congress passed and the President signed the Improper Payments Information Act of 2002 (IPIA), which was later amended by IPERA. The amended legislation requires executive branch agencies to identify programs and activities that may be susceptible to significant improper payments. Five years after the implementation of IPERA, 15 of the 24 agencies were reported as noncompliant under IPERA for fiscal year 2015. We found that the IGs’ compliance determinations for fiscal 2015 were not based on a consistent government-wide approach. improper payments. For example, certain IGs reported increases in improper payment rates because of factors such as improved sampling and emphasis on training. Significant improvements in sampling, training, and the ability to detect improper payments could considerably reduce the likelihood that an improper payment will be made, the VA says. The Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) IG reported in its fiscal year 2015 report that 2 VA programs—Community Care and Purchased Long-Term Services and Support—reported improper payment rate of 54.77 percent and 59.14 percent, respectively. agency will meet a predetermined reduction target or report an improper payment rate below 10 percent. For the past 5 years, IGs reported that there were 11 agencies that did not meet the IPERA criterion that required agencies to publish and meet reduction targets. For fiscal year 2015, 4 of the 11 agencies were compliant with the remaining five IPERA criteria. The IGs were not consistent with one another regarding how they determined and reported on compliance when issues were identified, we found. We found that the types of issues identified for both the compliant and noncompliant agencies were similar. We found that the variations in the IGs’ determinations reduce their usefulness for comparing compliance and progress across agencies. We identified 5 IGs that reported their respective agencies (DOD, GSA, OPM, USDA, and HUD) as compliant despite finding issues with the corrective action plans. For the two remaining IPERA criteria, which required agencies to publish and meet reduction targets and report improper payment rates below 10 percent, IGs consistently made pass/fail determinations. As shown in table 1, the number of agencies reported as noncompliant with this IPERA criterion could have decreased by 3 (from 5 to 2 agencies) or increased by 6 (from 4 to 10 agencies), respectively. The total annual number of IG-reported recommendations made by the 24 agencies’ IGs has stayed relatively steady for the IGs’ fiscal years 2011 through 2015 IPERA compliance reviews. The number of recommendations per agency varied from as little as no recommendations for one agency to 49 recommendations for another agency. One potential reason could be the extent to which the agencies were compliant under IPERA over the past 5 years. The majority of the open recommendations were made in the past 2 years, and the agencies may not have had sufficient time to address them. implement the necessary corrective actions, there was 1 recommendation from fiscal year 2011 that was still open at the time of our review. The open recommendations address a number of improper payment issues. Until HHS develops an improper payment estimate for TANF, HHS will continue to be reported as noncompliant with the IPERA criteria that agencies publish improper payment estimates and corrective action plans for all susceptible programs. In a June 2016 letter to Congress, HHS stated that it wanted to work with Congress to address a set of issues related to accountability and how funds are used. including compliance under IPERA. We reviewed the open recommendations for the 15 agencies reported as noncompliant for fiscal year 2015. If the agencies take the necessary corrective actions to address the IGs’ open recommendations, the number ofnoncompliant agencies could decrease in future fiscal years, if no new compliance issues arise. In addition, as shown in figure 11, recommendations designed to address noncompliance with certain IPERA criteria were closed by some IGs after their fiscal year2015 compliance reports were issued. 15 of the 24 CFO Act agencies were reported as noncompliant under IPERA for fiscal year 2015. The total amount of estimated improper payments reported government- wide has been estimated to total over $1.2 trillion from fiscal year 2003 through fiscal year 2016. The inconsistencies in IGs’ determinations of noncompliance may present potentially misleading information to individuals and entities interested in comparative government-wide compliance, the authors say. The authors recommend that the Director of OMB coordinate with CIGIE to develop and issue guidance. SSA, as well as from the IGs for DHS and HUD. These letters are reprinted in appendixes VIII through XIII. OMB’s liaison to GAO stated in an e-mail that they had no comments on the report or the recommendation to coordinate with CIGIE to develop guidance. We also received technical comments from the Department of Commerce, HHS, HUD, State, Treasury, EPA, NSF, SBA, and SSA, which we incorporated in the report as appropriate. of this report earlier, we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date. At that time, we will send copies to the appropriate congressional committees, the Secretary of Agriculture, the Director of the Office of Management and Budget, and other interested parties. In addition, the report will be available at no charge on the GAO website at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staff have any questions about this report, please contact me at (202) 512-2623. Improper Payments Elimination and Recovery Act of 2010 (IPERA), for fiscal years 2011 through 2015 as reported by their inspectors general. The criteria and programs that the IGs concluded were responsible for instances of agency noncompliance. The number of programs at the 24 CFO Act agencies that were reported as noncompliant under IPERA criteria by their IGs for 3 or more consecutive years as of fiscal year 2015. And the extent to which the responsible agencies submitted the required information to Congress. We identified procedures that agencies’ IGs were required to perform during their annual IPERA compliance reviews. We also reviewed IPIA, IPERA, IPERIA, and OMB guidance to identify a list of optional procedures. We corroborated our findings with OMB and all 24 CFO Act agencies and IGs. We did not evaluate the sufficiency of the optional procedures performed by the IGs nor did we determine whether IGs completed the required procedures, as outlined in IPIA and IPERA. submitted information to Congress to address IPERA noncompliance, such as reauthorization proposals, proposed statutory changes, or agency action plans. Lastly, we corroborated our findings with the respective agencies and their IGs. We conducted this performance audit from June 2016 to May 2017 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org. audit of the fiscal years 2016 and 2015 consolidated financial statements of the U.S. government. The IGs’ reports regarding these estimates are due in May 2017. The total government-wide improper payment estimate for fiscal year 2016 totaled $144.3 billion for 112 federal entity programs that reported estimates. In addition to the contact named above, Phillip McIntyre (Assistant Director), Michelle Philpott (Auditor in Charge), John Craig, Melanie Darnell, Sophie Geyer, Wilfred Holloway, Jason Kelly and Emily Matic made key contributions to this report.