The International Monetary Fund, conceived at the Bretton Woods conference in 1944, is the institutiondesigned tosupport global trade and economic growth. Initially, the IMF served primarily industrialized countries by supporting currency convertibility and providing them withshort-term financing. With the demise of the fixed exchange-rate system in 1973, industrial countries soon foundlittleneed to draw on the Fund. Most IMF lending draws from the Fund's permanent assets (some $283 billion) provided by member countries (the capitalsubscription or quota) power and borrowing capacity. IMF lending involves providing hard currencies to member countries with balance of payments problems based on need,willingness to adjust policies, and ability to repay. Three types of financing facilities are available under the generalresources account: 1) the stand-by arrangement; 2) the extended arrangement (these two constitute most IMFassistance);and 3) special facilities. Two programs created since December 1997, the Supplemental Reserve Facility (SRF) andtheContingent Credit Line (CCL), amount to special access policies to stand- by and extended arrangements underextenuatingcircumstances. Since the end of the BrettonWoods era in 1973, the IMF has redirected its attention towards the developing world. The IMF arrangementshavegrown in size and maturity, as it has taken on increasingly larger financial "bailouts" The Fund has expandedits roleas a development organization through concessional loan programs to very poor countries. Fourth, short-termbalance ofpayments lending has given way to global financial crisis management. (3) During the 1990s, the concentration of IMF lending was particularly evident. Meltzer Commission: IMF has overstepped its mission of supporting international financial stability. Report proposes that the IMF restrict its lending to only short-term liquidity needs of member countries. Report: IMF, the World Bank, and the regional development banks should write-off all the debt from the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPCs) Report makes the case for restructuring the IMF to as part of a more targeted and much reduced mission,with redefined obligations for members of the Fund. mean time, but athigh loanpenalty rates. Extraordinary circumstances for borrowing such as natural disasters, political turmoil, or emergencyassistance should be done through the relevant multilateral development institutions. IMF arrangements historically (e.g. the 1980s Latin American debt crisis and 1994 Mexican pesodevaluation) have kept private lenders and investors from realizing their full losses and having to implement debtrestructuring on their own. Countries should be strongly encouraged to adopt appropriate "stabilizing monetary and fiscal policies" Four members of the Meltzer Commission dissented from the report and three formally voted against it. Dissenting commissioners had varied opinions, but the collective dissenting statement challenges the report on its analysis,interpretation, and recommendations regarding the role of the IMF in the international economy. Dissenters argue that the report's key recommendation that the IMF restrict itsoperations only to countries that prequalify for assistance based on reforming their financial systems is a flawed strategy. To the extent that this might include large developing countries, theinternational economy may be at greater risk of systemic financial upheaval. The U.S. Treasury issued a formal report supporting the overallmission and effectiveness of the international financial institutions. The report acknowledged the need for reform, butdisagreeing with "the bulk of the Commission's reform prescriptions" Dissenters argued that the report failed to address some key issues, such as advocating for a better "early warning"system to respond in an anticipatory manner to future financial crises. The Treasury calls for adjusting the Contingent Credit Line (CCL), using a graduated scale of lending ratesbased on size of the draw. In a separately issued study prior to release of the Meltzer Commission report, the Council on Foreign Relationspresented the recommendations of another panel of experts on the global financial system. Believing that markets provide theclearestsignals of problems in the international financial system, the report recommends thatamarket-based approach guide reform efforts in borrowing countries. The "broad thrust," therefore, is to "place theprimaryresponsibility for crisis avoidance and resolution in emerging economies back where it belongs" Council on Foreign Relations says IMF assistance should not be used simply to bail out private sector lending and investment. Council report also recommends that the IMF not pursue large bailouts by limiting credit to levels defined inexisting Fund guidelines. The IMF should operate as a monetary institution focusing on fiscal, exchange rate, andmonetary policies and leave long-term structural reform to the development banks, the Council says. Less agreement exists on thedisposition of the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF) The Meltzer Commission would close it, the U.S. Treasury actively supports its continuation. and early twentieth century period with the1990s. The author documents how the United States endured a financial crisis on average every eight years before making sweeping changes to its financial operations. This experience points to the difficulty in making such deep structural reform that many developing countries now face, as did the U.S. a century ago. Financial capital, for various reasons, has repeatedly found its way backtotroubled countries, including theUnited States in the nineteenth century, despite numerous setbacks. The need forfinancialsector reform, however, may be more compelling. because of this trend; that is, financial sector reform is necessarynotbecause capital will fail to return to crisis countries, but precisely because it will return and hence be a disincentive. (18) Thissupports the universal call for financialsector reform, but notnecessarily the Meltzer Commission's implication that market discipline can force it. Second, the IMF is not the cause of financial crises. Crises were a part of the financial landscape long before BrettonWoods, when capital moved relatively freely among countries. "bailouts" may have some effect on hastening recovery in financially troubled countries, which canbe thoughtof as a "benefit" to counter the "cost" of moral hazard. Still, there is broad preference to find a better, more orderly, way to manage crisis situations. In today's world of pegged exchange rates with less thancredible promises, itappearsthere is little reason to believe that any of various alternatives to floating exchange rates or some extreme form offix(dollarization) is possible. It may be too much to ask the Fund to tame an international financial system wherecapitalmoves freely and speculatively. There is a growing body of literature seeking to find a middle path between continuing large IMF bailouts and leaving financially troubled countries to be disciplined by panicked capital markets. One thrust argues for changing lending rules to include specific contractual obligations that require a collective orderly debt workout if a crisis hits. It appears that oversight actions by the U.S. Congress and institutions representing the international community have beencritical in fostering the many changes. that are taking place within the IMF. Congress has its most leverage,however, whenconsidering appropriations legislation involving IMF funding increases. Since the quota review occurs only onceevery fiveyears and does not always result in a recommendation for an increase, in the interim, Congress must rely on thepublic forum and exerting policy pressure through U.S. representation. Continued oversight surely will be necessary to keep the reform process moving, but more time may be needed tosort outprecisely which policy options will suit the collective, but competing needs of the IMF member countries and otherconstituents.