The September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks on the U.S. prompted both sides of the Atlantic to reinvigorate their respective efforts to ensure homeland security and combat terrorism. This report examines homeland security measures in six selected European countries: Belgium, France, Germany, Italy, Spain, and the United Kingdom. None of these European countries currently has a single ministry or department equivalent to the United States Department of Homeland Security. Some analysts believe the EU should take a more active role in ensuring European homeland security, given the EU's largely open borders. U.S. policymakers and Members of Congress are taking an increasing interest in how European countries are organizing and managing homeland security issues and emergency preparedness. Some experts suggest that greater U.S.-European cooperation in the field of homeland security is necessary in order to better guarantee security on both sides of the Atlantic. After the Hurricane Katrina in August 2005, many European countries took steps to enhance security since September 11. The actions or inaction of the European allies can affect U.s. domestic security, especially given the U.N. Visa Waiver Program. Belgium showed early leadership in coordinating international counterterrorist activities. Belgium pushed within the Union for acceptance of EU-wide fast-track extradition procedures for serious crimes. Like other EU countries, Belgium has refused to deport suspected terrorists to countries where they might face the death penalty. Some observers believe that Brussels tends to place a great deal of emphasis on process, and, as a result, the government is slow and bureaucratic. In June 2002, the U.S. and Belgian governments initialed an agreement permitting U.K. Customs agents to be stationed in Antwerp. Until 1998, Belgian passports were issued by municipal officials. An estimated 3,500 passports were stolen annually from poorly-guarded city halls. The United States applied pressure, even indicating that it might begin requiring visas for Belgians. In 2004, Belgium became the first country to introduce biometric-based electronic passports; the new travel documents are compliant with both U.S. and EU requirements. In 2001, an article in the Wall Street Journal criticized Belgium for having "some of the weakest antiterrorism laws in the European Union[,] ... making it popular among terrorists as a place to hide out and plan attacks" Belgium's approach to homeland security is less unified than that adopted after 9/11. Belgium has no counterpart to the U.S. Department of Homeland Security. Individual components of homeland security, counter-terrorist, and emergency management responsibilities are spread throughout the government. Back burner in the 1980s. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from. Click here to read the full article. Back To the pageyou came from, click here toread the full story. Belgium's prime minister has the main responsibility for the country's antiterrorism policy. The Council of Ministers handles the development of strategic policy toward counterterrorism. In 2002, Belgium spent a total of 4,109 million euros—an estimated 4,000 million euros. Like all government activities, funding for homeland security-related functions are negotiated among a four-party governing coalition of mixed ethnicity (French/Flemish) and ideology. In all its law enforcement activities, Belgium places a strong emphasis on civil rights. Spending on counter-terrorism activities has expanded in recent years to cover funding for a new intelligence and policing agency. The lead Belgian agency for emergency response is the General Directorate of Civil Defense. The Directorate coordinates activities among federal ministries and among the various levels of government. In the event of a major act of terrorism, the Directorate, along with the Crisis Center, would be responsible forEmergency response and communications with the populace. The Governmental Coordination and Crisis Center was created in 1988 to gather and analyze information about and provide continuous monitoring of accidents. Belgium's national police force is part of the Ministry of the Interior. The force is divided into five sections, which are responsible for administrative, judicial, and operational support. There are approximately 15,000 officers serving in the federal force, and about 28,000 employed by nearly 200 police departments at the local level. In 1994, Belgium created a cadre of international liaison officers of the federal police. The Crisis Center also is the Belgian government's main agency for responding to a terrorist event. Anti-terrorist and homeland security intelligence is handled by the State Security and General Intelligence Service under the Ministry of Justice. The Ministry of Defense's intelligence service may only be called into play when there is a military aspect to a certain case. Threat analysis is performed by a new agency, the OCAM/CODA ( Organe de coordination pour l ' analyse de la menace/Coördinatieorgaan voor de dreigingsanalyse ). This organization, which is expected to be fully operational in a year, is an umbrella group that coordinates intelligence and policing efforts. It collects information from various organizations (including state security, intelligence and police services, customs, the transportation office, the treasury, and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs) Belgium has also demonstrated an interest in wider sharing of intelligence within Europe. After the March 2004 terrorist bombings in Madrid, Belgium joined Austria in proposing the establishment of a European intelligence agency. Other EU members opposed this initiative on national sovereignty grounds. The Crisis Center is the principal agency for monitoring and responding to a terrorist event. Two organizations are responsible for investigating and preventing the financing of terrorism. France does not have a department of homeland security. Potential chemical, biological, radiological, and nuclear threats from abroad are assessed by the Ministries of Defense and Foreign Affairs. Nuclear power plant security is split between the Interior Ministry and the Sub-directorate for Energy of the Ministry for Economics. While the United States has undertaken military action, France relies upon institutional practices in several ministries that have evolved over many years as a response to terrorist attacks. The French response to terrorism contrasts to that of the U.S. In France, with other EU governments, has concentrated on a response grounded in law enforcement. Long periods of political instability have also led to an emphasis on public order over civil liberties. France lacks the resources to undertake homeland security efforts comparable to those of the United States. In part to compensate for this relative lack of resources, the French government increasingly coordinates its anti-terror efforts with its EU partners, especially in border control. The Ministry of Interior (MOI) and Ministry of Defense (MOD) play key roles in managing the effort. France does not have a governmental entity comparable to the U.S. Department of Homeland Security. The Ministry of Interior is responsible for civil protection, and in most instances would manage a response to a terrorist threat or attack. France has 90 départements, or administrative regions, each led by a prefect who is an official of the central government in Paris. In 1986, a French law created special judicial and police authorities to respond to terrorism.. Unlike the United States, France uses the military domestically in extreme emergencies. levels, which can be activated by the president without legislative consent. The first level, "simple," is activated when a threat appears imminent. It remained in effect until the day after the attacks on the U.S. on September 11, 2001. At this level, President Chirac exercised his authority to direct the armed forces to deploy internally to ensure security. He put an additional 5400 police, gendarmes , and soldiers on the streets of Paris at strategic points, he says. In 2003, as a result of a dramatic loss of life during a heat wave, the government developed a new plan to respond to disasters. The plan ( Plan Canicule , "Heat Wave Plan") has four steps. The government maintains vigilance by having technological systems in place that may signal a potential disaster. For example, equipment for detection of radiation might be deployed in the event of a nuclear plant accident, or a radiological attack. The system remained at this level until December 31, 2003. Ministries concentrate available information in fewer hands. The prime minister decides that a body similar to a U.S. interagency group must be convened. The Gendarmerie might also be called upon to ensure public order and to assist in other ways, such as the movement of large numbers of people, supervision of traffic flow, and provision of transport. The fourth step is "requisition." In this step, the prime minister directs the prefects to take specific measures to prepare for a disaster. directs COGIC to use existing authority to seize all necessary transport (trains, planes, automobiles), and to direct the media to broadcast information to the population. The armed forces may be directed to engage in security operations. Through the prefects, the government can direct local officials, such as mayors, to provide needed information and resources. The government has installed radar near nuclear power installations to detect threats to the facilities. The special military unit is being prepared to aid in this effort. France has long placed air marshals on selected flights to counter an attempted hijacking. Under the Vigipirate system, security forces deploy at key sites, such as bridges and tunnels. When radioactive materials that may pose a threat to the population are transported, it is the Ministry of Economy and Finance that moves them. U.S. Customs inspectors have joined French counterparts in Le Havre and Marseille to examine sea cargo containers for the possible presence of weapons of mass destruction and illicit smuggling. France has a "biotox" plan to secure biological agents in laboratories. Since 2004, the government has carried out a number of large-scale exercises to test its response to a chemical or biological attack. The European Union plays an important role in the effort to counter terrorism in Europe. From the 1950s France has placed the EU at the center of its efforts to build a stable society and strong economy. Increasingly, France and other EU members have shared responsibility for counter-terrorism efforts. France and its EU partners maintain a common list of terrorists and terrorist organizations. One part of the list is directed against Al Qaeda and the Taliban. The EU has adopted U.N. Security Council sanctions against these groups. All EU members have agreed to freeze the assets of individuals and organizations on the list. In 2001 the EU agreed to eliminate extradition proceedings among member states for a range of crimes, including terrorism. EU members also agreed to strengthen EU police and judicial institutions. Since 1999, Europol has served elements of their sovereignty. France and other EU members are attempting to control illegal immigration. The effort has become enmeshed in a debate that sometimes links terrorism to illegal immigration from the Middle East. France tends to have several bilateral intelligence sharing arrangements that are stronger than any general policy of sharing among all member states. France is part of the Schengen plan, which allows EU citizens to cross borders of member states with minimal involvement with border officials. It has established joint border controls with Spain and Italy to capture and expel illegal immigrants. Strong central authority in France has traditionally meant that the government constrains civil liberties when there is a real or perceived threat. Under the Vigipirate system, the police frequently check individuals' identities and inspect carried items. While there is no requirement for a national identity card in France, it is difficult to undertake a range of casual activities, such as cashing a check, obtaining a loan, or applying for employment without one. At times of a high alert, police will stop and question people who appear to fit a description. French Interior Minister Nicholas Sarkozy has reacted strongly to the imams in France's Muslim population who have criticized France and other western countries. Sarkozy is also at the forefront of an effort in the French government to place restraints on immigration. He has said: Those who make excessive and violent remarks foreign to the values of our Republic will be expelled. The Republic is not a weak regime and does not have to accept speeches that, under the guise of being protected by being delivered in a place of worship, might call for hatred and murder. Only fragmentary information is available on French funding for homeland security. In 2002, parliament passed a bill that allocated $5.6 billion for the period 2003-2007 to hire 7,000 more gendarmes and 6,500 more police for localities. In 2003 the government allocated 52 million euros (approximately $65 million) through 2008 to programs to counter chemical, biological, radiological, and nuclear threats. By one estimate, France spends approximately one percent of its GDP on public order and safety. The French governmental system is significantly different from the U.S. system. The mixture of a presidential and a parliamentary system may explain the difficulty. The president and the government that he appoints have very strong executive authority. Resources come, as needed, on an ad hoc basis, from a range of government ministries and agencies to respond to disasters or terrorist attacks. The parliament does pass a yearly budget, and sometimes budget programs for a series of years, but the government normally presents a general budget that parliament largely embraces. Germany has no department or ministry for "homeland security" The country's long established organization for protecting security and responding to emergencies within its borders is defined by the 1949 Basic Law. Since 9/11, the government has viewed terrorism as the most immediate threat to German national security. Germany does have decades of experience with domestic terrorism by the Red Army Faction (RAF), a German left-wing anarchist group that operated from the beginning of the 1970s to the late 1990s. It is therefore much easier in France than in the United States to move funding around to respond to domestic or foreign developments. At the federal level, ministries involved most directly in "homeland security" functions include Interior, Justice, Defense, and Foreign Affairs. The most important intelligence authorities in Germany are the Federal Intelligence Service (BND) and the Federal Bureau for the Protection of the Constitution (BfV) Post-9/11, the BKA has the authority to lead its own investigations, replacing the former system which required a formal request from the BfV. German authorities have conducted computer-aided searches of the type that had proven successful in profiling and dismantling the Red Army Faction in the 1990s. German law enforcement and intelligence communities still face more bureaucratic hurdles, stricter constraints, and closer oversight than those in many other countries. Privacy rights of individuals and the protection of personal data are given prominent attention. Police are prohibited from collecting intelligence and can only begin an investigation when there is probable cause that a crime has been committed. Some experts believe that there may be little support for further centralizing Germany's "homeland security" efforts in the absence of an attack on German soil. The 16 federal states oppose further centralization at the federal level, not wanting to cede authority. The German structure for civil protection and emergency response has been in place since 1949. Responsibility for protecting the population in peacetime is assigned to the 16 states of the Federal Republic and their local jurisdictions. The primacy of the states was reemphasized in the 1997 Civil Defense Law. Each state has its own structures and laws for emergency planning and operations in peace time. The federal government provides the federal government with the primary responsibility in time of war or threat of war and even then implementation of federal orders is left largely to local authorities. After 9/11 and the disastrous floods in Germany in 2002, a new civil defense strategy was agreed. The new strategy called for a coordinated approach between the federal government and the states. A new Federal Office for Civil Protection and Disaster Response (BBK) was created in 2004, under the Ministry of Interior. Legal responsibility, however, was left with the states, under laws and regulations of most of the states; local authorities are responsible for crisis management in most cases. If a crisis is beyond a state's ability to cope or hits more than one state, the federal Ministry of the Interior is charged with coordinating. Germany's response to terrorism has been influenced by its experiences of the Nazi era. Germany has sought to protect rights and liberties of all those residing in Germany. Despite this focus on protection of civil liberties, the German government is determined to go after extremists. Germany's annual "Report on the Protection of the Constitution, 2004" estimated that about 32,000 German residents were members of some 24 Islamist organizations with extremist ties. The government banned and moved against twenty religious groups and conducted hundreds of raids. German authorities were given wider latitude in accessing financial data of terrorist groups. Steps were taken to curb international money laundering and improve bank customer screening procedures. Measures to prevent money laundering now include the checking of electronic databases to ensure that banks are properly screening their clients' business relationships. The Federal Criminal Police Office set up an independent unit responsible for the surveillance of suspicious financial flows. The German Federal Banking Supervisory Office, banks, financial service providers and others must monitor all financial flows for money laundering. In seeking to dry up the sources of terrorist financing, recent regulations aim to strengthen Germany's own capabilities. Germany has two borders to defend, its own and the EU's. Academic and job training programs may have allowed potential terrorists to obtain extended residency permits. Second generation immigrants may serve as a potential recruitment pool. Germany's approach to terrorism and homeland security is influenced by its geographic position in the heart of Europe and its membership in the European Union (EU) Germany has sought to shorten the period between passage of new EU anti-terror legislation and its coming into effect. The FATF has characterized Germany's anti-money laundering regulations as comprehensive and effective. Germany is pushing for wider use of biometric identifiers on passports, visas, and resident permits. Funding for "homeland security" functions is spread throughout the federal and state governments. There is not a spending category combining activities that would fall under the rubric of "Homeland security." The annual Budget Act is the vehicle through which budgets are set for federal government agencies and revenues are allocated between theFederal and state levels of government. The two chambers of the German parliament must pass the Budget Act and play a significant role. Italy does not have one government department responsible for all aspects of homeland security and counterterrorism. Each of the 16 states sets its own budget priorities and allocations to individual state ministries and agencies. Italy's inter-governmental approach to promoting domestic security has largely grown out of decades of first-hand experience, says the U.S. Embassy in Rome. The U.N. Security Council has called on Italy to increase its spending on domestic security and counter-terrorism in the wake of the attacks in Paris. The Red Brigades, an anarchist group, carried out numerous acts of violence in the 1970s and early 1980s against Italian political leaders, judges, and businessmen. Extremist Palestinian groups murdered U.S., European, and Israeli nationals in attacks on Italian airplanes and airports. Italy views prevention and strong law enforcement and intelligence efforts as key to ensuring domestic security, combating terrorism, and protecting the Italian public, infrastructure, and historical and cultural sites. Following the September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks on the United States, Italy stepped up efforts to disrupt terrorism. Italy is pursuing measures to promote Muslim integration to help prevent terrorist recruitment. The March 2004 terrorist attacks on commuter systems in Madrid, Spain, and the July 2005 bombings of London's metro and bus lines have galvanized further Italian action. As a member of the European Union (EU), Italy has also supported EU measures since September 11 to improve law enforcement and intelligence cooperation among its 25 member states. Italy is a major point of entry for illegal immigrants to Europe, also sought to tighten its immigration and border controls. Some right-wing Italian politicians claim that Italy is not doing enough to protect itself from the threat of international terrorism. They have pressed for an Italian "homeland security" ministry similar to the U.S. Department of Homeland Security. Many Italian officials, however, are cautious of the need to strike a balance between improving security measures and protecting personal freedoms. Various government leaders and ministries play a role in different aspects of Italian domestic security affairs and the fight against terrorism, writes Alessandro Girolamo. Italy's national budgeting system involves multiple ministries and departments. Italian spending on "public order and security" is roughly $34 billion per year. Italy's economy has been sluggish with little GDP growth and an unemployment rate of 7.5%. Italy is also under pressure from the EU to rein in its rising budget deficit to bring it back in line with EU rules governing the budget..enforcement bodies and the secret services. It appears to be similar to the U.S. National Counter Terrorism Center or the UK's Joint Intelligence Analysis Center. Italy has sought to enhance its law enforcement and intelligence tools against terrorism since September 11. Despite these financial difficulties, Italian officials insist that combating international terrorism is a top priority. Some experts suggest that Italy needs to improve further the coordination between and among its various law Enforcement and intelligence agencies. Italian officials have been considering establishing a national prosecuting office for terrorism offenses and a central terrorist suspect database, but disagreements appear to persist about its specific structure and functions. In addition, there is no central database of terrorist suspects, as there is for the Mafia, that would enable more efficient and comprehensive information-sharing. Critics question whether Italy is devoting sufficient resources to enhancing its intelligence capabilities. The September 11 attacks gave added momentum to Italy's efforts to tighten its border controls and clamp down on illegal immigration. Italy has not been shy about deporting radical imams and other Islamist extremists. Italian officials assert that maritime and rail security has been enhanced, especially following the July 2005 bombings of London's metro and bus lines. The Italian civil aviation authority was also granted roughly $3 million in additional funding to improve security at selected airports. Italy places emphasis on cooperation with other EU member states, both within and outside the EU framework. Italy participates in the EU's Schengen open border system, which allows EU citizens to cross into and out of Italy freely. Police presence has been increased on Italy's rail networks and around a number of sensitive railway stations and other rail transport systems, such as the Rome subway. Italy has advocated greater consular cooperation and information-sharing among EU members, and called on the EU to include repatriation agreements in its cooperation treaties with African countries. establish EU asylum centers outside EU territory to process refugee claims and to cut EU financial aid to countries of origin that fail to reduce the flow of illegal immigrants. Other EU member states remain opposed to such initiatives, however, viewing them as too draconian and counterproductive. Italy and France have established joint border controls to capture and expel illegal immigrants, and with Spain, are planning joint naval patrols in the Mediterranean to fight illegal immigration, drug-trafficking, and other criminal activity. Since September 11, Italy has further developed a national emergency plan to deal with the consequences of a possible CBRN incident. Italy has a network of 1,200 radiation monitoring stations across the country to facilitate the early detection of a radiological or nuclear event. CBRN training programs for firefighters, military personnel, and civilian medical personnel are long-standing. Italy has enhanced security around many sensitive targets, including government buildings, transport facilities, military barracks, public utilities, communication centers, and artistic and cultural sites. According to press reports, intelligence assessments view Rome and Milan as the most likely cities to fall victim to a terrorist attack. area, treating those contaminated, and evacuating adjoining areas. Spanish authorities later said that the Al-Qaeda-linked Moroccan Islamic Combatant Group was involved in the attacks. Many observers believe that the March 11 attacks helped determine the outcome of Spain's parliamentary election, held three days later. The Socialist Party won the election, although pre-election polls taken before the attack gave the then-ruling Popular Party a narrow majority. Prime Minister Zapatero has been careful to note that he does not see Islamist terrorism as a threat. Spain has rejected a wholesale reorganization of its homeland security institutions. This is due in large part to the decades-long struggle with the Basque terrorist movement Eta. Even before the 3/11 attacks, Spain had a substantial body of law and institutional capacity to fight terrorism, perhaps more than some European countries and the United States. Another factor conditioning Spain's approach to the issue of homeland security is that the Socialists, and many other Spaniards, are leery of a military solution. Unlike the United States, Spain has a highly centralized police structure. Civil liberty concerns have not been as prominent in Spain as they have been in the U.S. The National Police Corps is responsible for security in urban areas and handles national investigations. The more heavily armed paramilitary organization, the Civil Guard, is stationed in rural areas and along highways. The March 11 commission recommended that local police be given more training in counterterrorism, particularly involving Islamist groups. issues with Spain's homeland security have been debated in the context of the conflict with Eta. The Ministry of the Interior is also responsible for emergency preparedness and response in Spain. After the March 11 attacks, the Interior put together an anti-terrorism prevention and protection plan. Spain's foreign intelligence efforts are undertaken by the National Intelligence Center (CNI), which is subordinated directly to the Prime Minister's office. The CNI's personnel are overwhelmingly drawn from Spain's Ministry of Defense. The Defense Minister has prepared a rapid-response plan for CBRN threats. Over 250 soldiers are assigned to CBRN units in Valencia, Burgos, and Madrid. The 3/11 commission report bemoaned the lack of a true "intelligence community" in Spain. In response, the government has sharply increased resources for counterterrorism. In 2005, Spain spent 350 million Euros ($417 million) for counterterrorism efforts. The government budget for 2006 proposes a 5% increase to 368 million Euros (over $438 million) Spain has formed bilateral police investigative teams with France to fight terrorism, in part a legacy of the two countries' close cooperation in recent years in fighting Basque terrorist threat. Spain has pushed strongly for stronger law enforcement, intelligence, and border control cooperation within the European Union. The government has taken steps to disperse jihadists among Spanish prisons. Spain is also holding suspects related to the 9/11 attacks in the United States and in a planned attack on several government buildings and public landmarks in Madrid in October 2004. As of January 2006, over 200 men were imprisoned in Spain for offenses related to Islamist terrorism, according to the Spanish government. The United Kingdom does not have one department responsible for all aspects of homeland security and counterterrorism. UK policy toward terrorism and other security challenges is largely coordinated by inter-departmental committees of ministers and other government officials. September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks on the United States have focused greater UK attention on the threats posed by international terrorists. In April 2004, the British government unveiled a new comprehensive, cross-Departmental Counterterrorism Strategy (known as CONTEST) The "4Ps" seek to give greater coherence to UK counterterrorism measures and take advantage of existing expertise and resources throughout the UK government. The UK's emergency response system and capabilities were put to the test on July 7, 2005, when four young British Muslims attacked London's metro and bus lines. Despite the fatalities and the damage to the London metro system, many assess that the government and emergency services responded competently and effectively in the immediate aftermath of the crisis. As a result, the impact of the attacks on the daily life of the city and general population was marginal. The British government believes that its inter-governmental/committee approach to response to terrorist incidents can also be used in response to a terrorist incident. Some, including the opposition Conservative (Tory) party, have proposed creating a UK ministry equivalent to the U.S. Department of Homeland Security. In February 2006, UK Chancellor of the Exchequer pledged to examine the case for a single security budget in the UK's upcoming 2007 spending review. Some view this statement as an indication of the government's new "open-mindedness" toward the possibility of forming a new Homeland Security ministry. The UK Cabinet is the supreme, collective decision-making body in the British government, chaired by the Prime Minister. committees and subcommittees. The Cabinet Secretariat largely manages the day-to-day business of the Cabinet committees. The Defense and Overseas Policy (DOP) ministerial committee and two of its subcommittee play key roles in forging long-term UK domestic security and counterterrorism policies. The Intelligence Services ministerial committee reviews policy on the security and intelligence services, including their counterterrorist efforts. In the event of an actual terrorist incident, a Cabinet-level emergency crisis management body—known as COBR (for the Cabinet Office briefing room in which it meets)—is convened. The Civil Contingencies Committee (CCC) is heavily involved in longer-term emergency preparedness and response. It coordinates and continually reviews the preparation of plans for ensuring the prompt and effective delivery of supplies and services during an emergency. CCS was originally set up in response to several crises in 2000 (including fuel protests, the outbreak of foot and mouth disease, and severe flooding), but was given new impetus after the September 11 attacks. In July 2001, the UK government established a new Civil Contedencies Secretariat (CCS) within the Cabinet Secretariat. In June 2002, Prime Minister Blair created a new Security and Intelligence Coordinator within the Cabinet Office. Some have likened the position to a "homeland security chief," or the White House's now defunct Office of Homeland Security. The Coordinator is directly responsible to the Prime Minister and is tasked with coordinating and developing, across all government departments, work on counterterrorism and crisis management. Some suggest that this new position was created to give greater coherence to UK security efforts and emergency response capabilities. As the principal accounting officer for the Single Intelligence Account, the Coordinator plays a key role in setting priorities and budgets. The Home Office is the focal point for the response to the terrorist threat. It is also responsible for domestic security policies, planning for chemical, biological, radiological, and nuclear (CBRN) incidents. HM Revenue and Customs has the lead responsibility for detecting prohibited and restricted goods at import and export, including those goods that may be used by terrorists. The Department for Transport's Transport Security and Contingencies Directorate is responsible for the security of the traveling public and transport facilities through regulation of the aviation, maritime, and railway industries. Policing in the UK is largely decentralized. The Home Office has ministerial responsibility for the police services in England and Wales. Each police force also has its own Special Branch, which works in partnership with the Security Service (MI5) The UK has three main intelligence and security services engaged in the fight against terrorism, including MI5, MI6, and GCHQ. The British Transport Police (BTP) police the railway systems of England, Wales, and Scotland. The Civil Nuclear Constabulary is an armed police force that protects civil nuclear installations and nuclear materials. GCHQ operate under the statutory authority of the Foreign Secretary. The Joint Intelligence Committee advises the government on priorities for intelligence gathering and for assessing its results. In June 2003, in an effort to improve intelligence-sharing and cooperation against terrorism, the UK created the Joint Intelligence Analysis Center (JTAC) to collate and evaluate intelligence about potential threats. JTAC seeks to break down institutional barriers between analysts of the different security and intelligence agencies by drawing together about threats and provide early warning. The JIC is currently chaired by Sir Richard Mottram, the Security and Intelligence Coordinator. 100 officials from 11 government departments and agencies, including MI5, MI6, GCHQ, the police, and the defense and transport ministries. JTAC provides both long-term studies of international terrorism and immediate assessments of current threats; it is analogous to the U.S. National Counter Terrorism Center. Although the police and security services have the primary role in domestic protection against terrorism, the armed forces may be called upon domestically in the event of a major terrorist incident. The decision to deploy the military to assist the civil authorities in an emergency would be made by COBR. The UK's parliamentary system influences government decisions regarding homeland security budgetary priorities. The Prime Minister and his Cabinet are drawn from the political party with a majority in the House of Commons. There is no strict separation of the executive and legislative branches of government in the UK. UK spending on "public order and security" grew from roughly $40 to roughly $50 billion in the last five years, according to a report by the Royal Institute of International Affairs (RII) The RII says the UK government's proposed budgetary levels are usually contested in the same way as they often are in the United States. British government announced in its 2004 Spending Review that total spending on counterterrorism and resilience across departments will be over $3.6 billion by 2007-2008. In the immediate aftermath of September 11, 2001, the British government provided supplemental funding to enable departments, such as the military, the police, and the intelligence services to meet the increased need for heightened security measures. Extra funding of about $543 million in 2006-2007 and $614 million in 2007- 2008 will also be devoted to counterterrorist measures. In light of the July 2005 London bombings, the Chancellor of the Exchequer in December 2005 announced that a further $149 million will be provided to the security and intelligence services to aid their efforts in the fight against terrorism. The Blair government has also placed increased emphasis on promoting Muslim integration and combating extremism. Many UK officials view such efforts not only as necessary to address societal divisions, but also as key prevention strategies in the long-term fight against terror. The UK government has introduced a raft of new legislation and pursued a variety of measures to combat terrorism and improve UK homeland security. Since September 11, British authorities have stepped up their law enforcement efforts against Al Qaeda and members of other radical groups. Hundreds of suspects have been questioned and arrested, and UK police and security services have increased their monitoring of mosques. UK authorities have disrupted several potential terrorist plots over the last few years, such as breaking up an Al Qaeda-affiliated cell in 2003 accused of producing ricin and other chemical weapons. However, the evidentiary bar for convictions in the UK remains set high given Britain's strong civil liberty traditions and democratic ideals. The increased funding for the security and intelligence agencies has been aimed largely at enhancing training and boosting recruitment. MI5 has begun a recruitment campaign to increase its size by 50% (to 3,000 staff) by 2008. Some observers question whether the UK is devoting sufficient resources to improving its intelligence capabilities. Others point out that even with expanded resources, GCHQ has been forced to reduce its collection activities in many non-priority geographical areas and even on some aspects of counterproliferation. The September 11 terrorist attacks gave added momentum to UK efforts to tighten its immigration and asylum procedures. The UK also has long-standing legislation and security programs focused on preventing acts of violence from being perpetrated against UK air, maritime, and rail transport systems. Some of these security measures, especially in the aviation sector, were instituted after the bombing of Pan Am Flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland in 1988. Following the July 2005 London bombings, the UK government announced plans to: make it easier to deport or exclude foreign individuals from the UK who advocate violence. In 2002, the UK announced a program to train armed sky marshals for use on UK-registered aircraft. Press reports suggest that they are now operating on some transatlantic flights. New rules allow law enforcement agencies to request information about passengers and goods from air and sea carriers. New technology at the Channel Tunnel to check for people concealed in lorries or trains; introduction of equipment at all UK ports and airports to screen for illicit importations of radioactive materials. Several UK ports also participate in the U.S. Container Security Initiative, which stations customs officers in foreign ports. British government asserts that most UK ports, including all major and high risk ports, are in compliance with a new International Maritime Organization (IMO) code. IMO code requires international ships and port facilities to implement tighter security regimes, train staff, and draw up plans for responding to a terrorist threat. London expects that all remaining UK ports will soon be in compliance also. As for rail security, in the wake of the March 2004 bombings of commuter trains in Madrid, Spain, the British government initiated a review of counterterrorist security on the UK's railway network. UK will conduct trial screenings of passengers and baggage at a small number of national rail and London Underground stations during 2006. Some analysts point to a lack of personnel resources to ensure that all UK border control and security measures are properly implemented. Others note that the UK has been struggling to balance new transport security requirements with the costs to the transport industry and the traveling public. For instance, press reports suggest that the Home Office was forced to scale back its original plans to require air and sea carriers to obtain additional personal data from passengers. would be cost-prohibitive and inconvenience passengers given the extra processing time it would require. The British government has also put priority on countering the CBRN aspect of terrorism and improving the ability of emergency service providers to respond quickly and effectively to a CBRN incident. The UK has also devoted increased funding over the last several years to counter bio-terrorism and stockpile extra vaccines and antibiotics. Press reports indicate that MI5 has identified nuclear power stations, oil depots, and high-profile London buildings as priority terrorist targets. Home Office: improving ability of police, fire, and ambulance services to deal with terrorist attacks has been a top priority. In 2002, the UK established a cross-governmental Capabilities Program, coordinated by the Civil Contingencies Secretariat. The Program is divided into 17 different "workstreams," the focus of which ranges from maintaining essential services to dealing with CBRN incidents or infectious diseases. The CCS has also established a national risk assessment process to identify risks over a five-year period and form the basis for emergency preparedness. In 2004, the UK Parliament passed the Civil Contingencies Act. This act represented the first wholesale revision of UK emergency legislation since the 1920s. It was intended to set out clear expectations and responsibilities of first responders, local and regional authorities, and the central government. The act encountered some resistance from human rights and civil liberty groups concerned that its definition of an "emergency" was too broad and that it could lead to an unnecessary curtailment of freedoms. Although analysts assess that the UK has made significant progress in enhancing its emergency preparedness and response abilities, they also point out that some challenges remain.