The Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) was founded in 1989 for the purpose of promoting trade and investment liberalization. APEC currently has 21 members: Australia, Brunei, Canada, Chile, China, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Japan, Malaysia, Mexico, New Zealand, Papua New Guinea, Peru, the Philippines, Russia, Singapore, South Korea, Taiwan (officially, Chinese Taipei), Thailand, the United States, and Vietnam. During the 1994 Economic Leaders' Meeting in Bogor, Indonesia,. APEC members agreed to the Bogor Goals of "free and open trade and. investment in the Asia- Pacific by 2010 for developed economies and 2020 for developing economies" Every year, a different APEC member organizes and hosts a series of meetings. The host member usually picks a theme for the year. The Obama Administration has signaled that the Asia-Pacific region is a foreign policy priority. The U.S. may use the event to inform the APEC members about the status of the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) negotiations and possibly publicly announce a significant landmark in the TPP talks. The agenda of the Economic Leaders' Meeting usually is based on the host's theme. The EAS was created in 2010 to promote trade and investment expansion. The U.S. and Russia were invited to join the organization in 2010. China is suspicious that the United States joined the EAS to prevent it from creating an Asian-based free trade association that excludes the U.K. and Japan. China and Malaysia have been active proponents of the "10 + 3" approach to Asian economic integration.. The United States would prefer to avoid needless duplication of agendas and obtain more clarity of purpose between APEC and EAS. The United States agreed in 2007 to join APEC's Business Travel Card (ABTC) program. The card allows business travelers pre-cleared, facilitated short-term entry to participating member economies. H.R. 2042 would partially fulfill the U.S. commitment to join the ABTC program by requiring the Secretary of Homeland Security to establish a program to issue APEC business travel cards. It would integrate it with existing registered traveler programs, such as Global Entry, NEXUS, and SENTRI. Representatives passed H.R. 2042 by a voice vote. The bill has been sent to the Senate for consideration. Over the last few years, APEC has emerged as an issue in U.S. relations with China. Some Chinese officials and scholars view the U.s. effort to use APEC to promote an FTAAP and negotiate a TPP without China's participation as part of a greater U.N. strategy of containment of China. As an APEC member, the United States must contribute to the annual budget of APEC. to finance preparations and programs related to hosting APEC in 2011. To finance preparations for the 2011 APEC summit in Japan, the Japanese government has set up a joint account with the Japan Bank for International Cooperation. The joint account will be used to help pay for the cost of hosting the 2011 summit. The fund will also help fund programs and activities related to the 2011 event, such as the APEC Economic Forum and APEC Business Forum, in Japan. For more information, go to: http://www.jointaccount.org/APEC2011.