VA’s mission is to promote the health, welfare, and dignity of all veterans. The department relies extensively on IT to meet the day-to-day operational needs of its medical centers. VHA provides health care services, including primary care and specialized care, and it performs research and development to improve veterans’ needs. VBA provides a variety of benefits to veterans and their families, including disability compensation, educational opportunities, assistance with home ownership, and life insurance. NCA provides burial and memorial benefits. Since 2007, VA has been operating a centralized organization in which most key functions intended for effective management of IT are performed by OI&T. Figure 2 presents a simplified organizational chart for VA. Office provides strategy and technical direction, guidance, and policy related to how IT resources are to be acquired and managed for the department. The CIO is expected to serve as the principal advisor to top management officials, such as the Under Secretaries of each of the three administrations, on matters relating to IT management. The organization is intended to improve both service delivery and the veteran experience. The organization is to institute a data governance strategy and engage with VA staff to ensure the accuracy and security of collected data. OI&T also intends for the organization to identify trends in the data collected on each veteran that could improve their health care by providing predictive care and anticipating needs. This function is responsible for establishing an approach to fulfilling the department’s requirements with vendors that provide solutions to those requirements, managing vendor selection, tracking vendor performance and contract deliverables. The VA Under Secretary for Health is the head of VHA. The Strategic Investment Management office was established to support VHA's IT needs. This office advocates for VHA’s IT needs within the Planning, Programming, Budgeting, and Execution process. The office also works with program offices such as Pharmacy Benefits Management Services, Veterans Access to Care (scheduling and consults), and Community Care. The Executive Director of this office is responsible for identifying functional needs for medical center pharmacies and consolidated mail outpatient pharmacies. The VA health care system is in danger of becoming obsolete, says the VA Commission on Care. The commission’s recommendations were intended to serve as a foundation for organizational transformation at VA. The department generally concurred with our recommendations, but has not provided information about its actions to implement four of the six recommendations, the commission says. VA has established IT management processes that are partially consistent with leading IT practices, the report says. But these plans do not include metrics that the department could use to track performance. VHA has an IT investment management process that is consistent with leading practices. VA’s department-level IT investment board has been inactive and investment selection criteria have not been defined. VA has taken steps to show alignment between the IT strategic goals and objectives and the VA Strategic Plan. An IT strategic plan outlines the agency's goals and identifies performance metrics that permit the agency to determine whether IT is making a difference in improving performance. The resulting plan effectively guides modernization efforts by serving as an agency's vision and road map. OI&T produced these strategic plans, road maps, and supplementary guidance related to IT. None of the documents includes specific results-oriented performance metrics that are called for by VA’s IT strategic planning directive and leading practices. VHA has taken steps to define a strategic direction for health IT by issuing its Health Information Strategic Plan for Veterans Health Administration Supporting VA Health Care Version 4.3 (HISP) According to the HISP, this strategy is to inform OI &T’S IRM Strategic Plan. VA has taken steps to establish a systematic and organized approach to IT investment management. The department has integrated its investment management approach with its IT Multi-Year Programming cycle. Within VHA, the administration has developed a governance structure for prioritizing business needs and selecting its IT investments based on those needs. VHA’s Architecture and Requirements Investment Work Group supports these governance boards by normalizing and analyzing the submitted IT needs and providing data and cost estimates to help the governance bodies make informed decisions. evolving process and they plan to continue to improve the process for selecting IT investments and the budgeting process as the department builds the upcoming fiscal year 2019 through fiscal year 2023 budget submissions. Without using a department-level board to govern IT investments, the department risks wasting limited resources and funding investments that may not fully support VHA’s most important business functions and priorities. Leading enterprise architecture and investment management practices maintain that enterprise architecture can be used to link the organization's strategic mission value (performance results and outcomes) to its technical resources. The VA Business Function Framework is the architectural model that describes the core business functions that are necessary to the mission of delivering health care. VASI shows that the vast majority of VHA’s 262 core business. functions are supported by current IT systems or, according to department. officials, do not have a need for system support. VHA had 2,772 requests for IT needs documented in the NSR database since 1998. Of these, approximately 817 were open requests—IT needs identified throughout VHA that had not been met. Database consists of requests ranging from the creation or modification of reports to the development of new systems. Pharmacy benefits management, scheduling, and community care all have open requests that represent long-standing, unmet IT needs. These programs are responsible for key functions and IT systems related to health service delivery. As of November 2016, the program office tracked more than 280 open requests to meet IT needs, approximately 38 percent of which were identified 5 or more years ago. The office had a request from 2000 for an inpatient pharmacy order interface to share pharmacy order information with external and commercial systems. VA spends a significant amount of money on sustaining existing systems, which has limited the funds available for enhancing or modernizing those systems. VA’s partial implementation of effective IT strategic planning, investment management, and enterprise architecture has put the department at risk of being unable to fully support VHA with the information systems it needs to perform its mission of providing high- quality health care to veterans. Weaknesses in key processes leave VA unable to gauge the extent to which it is providing information systems that meet VHA's needs. The objectives of this study were to determine the extent to which the Department of Veterans Affairs’ (VA) (1) information technology (IT)appropriately documented and effectively implemented. The report is available at no charge on the GAO website at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staffs have any questions on matters discussed in this report, please contact me at (202) 512-9286 or pownerd@gao,gov. Contact points for our Offices of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of this report. management processes are consistent with leading practices and (2) current IT systems support the Veterans Health Administration’s (VHA) core business functions. To address the first objective, we compared VA's IT management processes for IT strategic planning, investment management, and enterprise architecture to leading practices that federal statutes, prior GAO reports, and the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) have identified. This comparison focused on the specific aspects of the processes that are intended to ensure that IT investments meet the business needs of the VHA organization. We analyzed department data to understand how VA might demonstrate that its IT systems are designed to meet its objectives. We compared this list of core business functions to data in the VA Systems Inventory (VASI) database. There were 5 functions (from a total of 262 functions) that could not be reconciled. We determined that this number, which represented less than 2 percent of the total number of functions, was not significant to our findings. We analyzed data from VHA’s new service request (NSR) database, which captures information related to business needs such as IT enhancements. NSR database to identify the number of requests in the database, when requests were entered. Analysis could not provide insight into the depth of work required for requests themselves, nor the weight the business owners assigned to each open need. NSR database does not include data on the importance, level of impact, and work effort required to address each request. For each data set, we reviewed documentation related to the databases, such as the data dictionary, tested the data sets to look for duplicate records and missing data in key fields. relationship between data elements. We also interviewed department officials about data reliability and internal controls procedures for the database. We conducted additional analyses of three programs related to health service delivery on which we have previously reported. The results of this analysis are not generalizable to all functional areas, but provide insight into the extent of IT support for VHA programs.. We interviewed cognizant officials from VHA regarding the IT systems used by the three programs, the needs identification and management process, and about the extent to which VHA business needs are being addressed. for the three specific programs. We conducted this performance audit from December 2015 to June 2017 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. In addition to the contact named above, Mark Bird (Assistant Director), Jennifer Stavros-Turner (Analyst in Charge), Chris Businsky, Rebecca Eyler, Jacqueline Mai, Dwayne Staten, and Charles Youman made key contributions to this report.