Oil exploration and production in Iraq began in the 1920s under the terms of a wide-ranging concession granted to a consortium of international oil companies. Iraq's highest-ever production level of 3.5 million barrels per day (mbd) was reached in 1990 immediately prior to the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait. Crude oil is the source of over 90% of Iraq's domestic energy consumption. International firms are not expected to begin to make investments and carry out substantial infrastructure work until after the Iraqi elections scheduled for March 2010. In late 2007, the Kurdistan Regional Government (KRG) finalized its own regional oil and gas investment law. Under the terms of the KRG's model PSC, foreign firms manage oil production in given fields, recovering their costs from the sale of specific percentages of the oil produced. The KRG opposes proposals to require federal approval of its existing or future contracts, but notes that it is committed to revenue sharing as defined in the constitution. U.S. government efforts continue to encourage development of legal and regulatory frameworks for the oil sector. The SIGIR has reported that Iraq's operational funds for its Oil Ministry increased over 800% from 2008 to 2009 reaching the level of $950 million. Oil sector investment funding for 2009 remained roughly static at $2.2 billion. Observers have noted that significant investments in port, road, rail, water, and power infrastructure also are necessary in order for Iraq to achieve its ambitious oil production expansion targets. The main points of contention among Iraqi politicians and citizen groups with regard to energy policy include the main points. Iraqi, U.S., and other observers have expressed concern that the violence and political tension that have prevailed in Iraq in recent years have not been conducive to careful consideration of detailed hydrocarbon sector legislation. The Iraqi constitution's ambiguity about the roles and powers of federal, regional, and governorate authorities has fueled division. Disagreements between officials in the national government and the KRG continue to flare concerning the legality and terms of each government's oil contracts. It remains unclear whether the new interest among Iraqi leaders in resolving the dispute will be enough to reach an agreement. IMF: Iraq's public finances have been "fragile" in recent years. Iraqi government has "little room for fiscal slippage" until oil output increases. IMF estimated that Iraqi budget deficits in 2010 and 2011 would create a $5 billion financing gap after domestic resources have been tapped. U.S. to continue to assist Iraq with its request to the UN to extend related protections for energy proceeds and the DFI. The International Monetary Fund (IMF) warned in a January 2008 report that Iraq's finances were fragile. a planned Iraqi government bond issue and in part though recently negotiated external support agreements such as the IMF Stand-by Arrangement and World Bank loans. The central role of the oil sector in Iraq's economy, the uneven geographic distribution of Iraq's oil resources, and the legacy of communal favoritism practiced under Saddam Hussein have created lasting concerns among Iraqis about the future equitable distribution of oil revenues. While significant oil revenue may be available to Iraq over the medium term, its availability remains a function of both Iraq's production and export capacity and prevailing global market prices. An equitable, mutually accepted revenue distribution formula will be critically important to Iraq's future economic health and political stability. Article 112 of Iraq's constitution requires the Iraqi government to distribute revenues: in a fair manner in proportion to the population distribution in all parts of the country. Debate over distribution formulas reflects efforts to agree on quantitative terms for ensuring equitable per capita. The principal issues remain formulas for ensure equitable distribution of revenues to Iraq’s population and the mechanisms through which revenue will be collected and distributed. Distribution and providing for "damaged" and "unjustly deprived" regions in line with Article 112 of the constitution. At present, a baseline arrangement that sends 17% of revenues to the KRG has been reflected in recent budgets. The 2010 budget also includes a provision that will deliver $1 to producing governorates for each barrel of oil and refined fuel they produce. By all accounts, Iraq will have to meet significant logistical and technical requirements in order to expand its oil production to planned levels. Iraq has issued new decrees and reformed administrative bodies to grant greater contracting authority to ministries and provinces. U.S. and coalition budget assistance programs have been reorganized to improve coordination. The security of Iraq's oil infrastructure has improved markedly since 2007 because of the introduction of an infrastructure protection system that includes several Pipeline Exclusion Zones (PEZs) U.s.-funded components of the PEZ program were completed in late June 2008, according to the SIGIR and the Department of Defense. Iraq was a leading member of OPEC with a production quota that mirrored that of its neighbor, Iran. The introduction of significant Iraqi oil supplies onto the international market absent corresponding cuts in production from other OPEC or non-OPEC producers could exert downward pressure on global oil prices. As new oil infrastructure and pipelines are constructed to support Iraq's planned expansion of production, new investments in security infrastructure and security personnel will be necessary. The extent of needed investment will be determined in relation to the size and scope of the actual expansion and the broader security situation in Iraq. Section 3301 of the act states that no funds appropriated by the act or any other act may be used "to exercise United States control over any oil resource of Iraq" On July 12, 2007, the Administration released an interim report on the Iraq benchmarks. The September 2007 report stated that Iraq's government "has not made satisfactory progress toward enacting and implementing legislation to ensure the equitable distribution of hydrocarbon revenue" The report also stressed that "it is difficult to predict what further progress might occur" when Iraq's parliament reconvenes and considers proposed legislation. President Bush issued signing statements stating that the executive branch would "construe such provisions in a manner consistent with the constitutional authority of the President" Iraq's Council of Ministers (cabinet) approved a draft version of the hydrocarbon framework law in February 2007. Subsequent negotiations among Iraqi leaders sought to clarify the responsibilities of federal and regional authorities as well as contracting procedures for oil. The bill was passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate in 2008. The Senate passed the bill in 2009. On July 3, 2007, Iraqi Prime Minister Nouri al Maliki announced that the Council of Ministers had approved a final version of the framework law. Kurdish officials protested the changes, arguing that they are substantive, rather than semantic, and have tentatively withdrawn their support for the legislation. The boycott of cabinet and parliamentary proceedings by various Iraqi entities at the time of the cabinet's approval of the law added to the controversy surrounding the proposed legislation. As of November 2009, statements from Iraqi government officials and members of the. Council of Representatives suggest that parliamentary consideration of the legislation continues to be delayed by disagreements between key political figures. until the election of a new parliament in national elections scheduled for early 2010. The Council of Ministers reportedly is considering new draft legislation, but no timetable has been announced for its consideration. Skepticism about the performance of Oil Minister Shahristani appears to be significant within the Council of Representatives. opposition to the conduct of the investment bidding round conducted in July 2009 and to contracts signed by the Kurdistan Regional Government. As such the applicability of the compromises reached prior to the announcement of draft legislation may be in doubt. Federal Oil and Gas Council (FOGC) to determine all national oil and gas sector policies and plans. FOGC would become the most powerful body in Iraq's oil sector, with power to review all contracts. Some observers have warned that the makeup of the council could potentially contribute to sectarian or regional tensions. Draft would create two funds for oil revenues: first, an "Oil Revenue Fund," and the second, a "Future Fund" to hold an unspecified percentage of oil revenue for long-term development goals. piece of legislation following further negotiation among federal, regional, and governorate representatives. Ministry of Oil and Iraq National Oil Company Laws are necessary to ensure proper oversight, accountability, and separation of powers between the two entities. As of November 2009, a draft INOC law had been approved by the Council of Ministers, but was not considered by the House of Representatives before the 2010 national election. Under the hydrocarbon framework law, the responsibilities and authorities of the Ministry of oil and the INOC would be altered significantly.