Federal departments and agencies receive funding through regular annual appropriations acts. If one or more of the regular appropriations acts are not enacted, a funding gap may result and agencies may lack sufficient funding to continue operations. Congress enacts CRs to maintain a level of service in government operations and programs until Congress and the President reach agreement on regular appropriations. CRs generally do not specify an amount for programs and activities but permit agencies to continuing operations at a certain “rate for operations’ The average length of the CR period was about 3 months. final funding prerogatives, agencies are directed to take only the most limited funding actions. Congress added two new standard provisions since 1999. In 2007, Congress enacted the furlough provision in the CR for the first time. This provision permits OMB and other authorized government officials to apportion up to the full amount of the rate for operations to avoid a furloughed civilian employees. This authority may not be used until after an agency has taken all necessary action to defer or reduce nonpersonnel-related administrative expenses. personnel expenses with limited funding may be exacerbated when a CR crosses the calendar year and a mandatory salary increase becomes effective. We identified approximately 280 anomalies enacted in CRs since fiscal year 1999. The number of anomalies generally increased as the duration of initial CRs increased in recent years. Over one-third of the legislative anomalies enacted since 1999 provided an agency, program, or activity an amount different from that provided in the standard provisions. In some cases, CRs provided full-year appropriations for a program or activity. entire year for Low Income Home Energy Assistance Program (LIHEAP) payments. LIHEAP provides assistance for low-income families in meeting their home energy needs. 90 percent of LI HEAP funding is obligated in the first quarter to cover winter heating costs. Most federal programs and activities faced uncertainty during the CR period about when and how much funding would be provided in their regular appropriations. Another large share of legislative anomalies enacted since fiscal year 1999 extended expiring authorities through the specified termination date of the CR. of programs extended during the years of our review are diverse, including the National Flood Insurance Program. CRs also have extended the authority to collect and obligate fees, such as for mining, or to collect certain copayments from veterans for medications. In some cases, Congress lifted or added restrictions on the authorized purpose for which funds could be used during the CR period or amended other laws. Also, there have been a few legislative anomalies for activities not funded in the prior year. In sum, the number and range of anomalies demonstrate that while CRs are helpful, they can also be problematic. All six case study agencies reported that the most common inefficiencies were delays to certain activities, such as hiring, and repetitive work. The effects of the delays and the amount of additional work varied by agency and by activity and depended in large part on the number and duration of CRs. Agencies were largely unable to identify any specific foregone opportunities that may have resulted from a delay in hiring related to CRs, but they did describe some general effects. For example, VHA medical facilities did not start nonrecurring maintenance projects designed to improve and maintain the quality of VA Medical Centers during the CR period. during a CR. Delays resulting from CRs contributed to delays in the availability of additional prison capacity at a time when prison facilities were already overcrowded. As of July 9, 2009, BOP facilities were 37 percent over capacity systemwide. According to BOP, delaying contract awards for new BOP prisons and renovations to existing facilities prevented the agency from locking in prices and resulted in higher construction costs. Some agency officials said that contracting delays resulting from longer CRs have also affected their ability to fully compete and award contracts. Longer CRs also have contributed to distortions in agencies’ spending, adding to the rush to obligate funds late in the fiscal year before they expire. A longer CR period also may compress the application time available for discretionary grants. We reviewed the application times for 277 grants awarded by four ACF discretionary grant programs between 2005 and 2008. We found that while application times varied considerably, they were on average 11 days more in fiscal years when the agency’s regular appropriation was enacted before the end of the first quarter. during a CR to avoid having to solicit proposals multiple times. If the amount of funding provided by a formula grant is based on a certain percentage of the total amount appropriated, the grant may be delayed until the department has received its final funding. An ACF official told us that nonprofit organizations providing shelter to unaccompanied alien children have used lines of credit to bridge gaps in federal funding during a CR. In March 2009, a shelter in Texas informed ACF’s Office of Refugee Resettlement that its credit was at its lowest level. limit and it was in immediate need of additional funds to sustain operations for the next 45 to 60 days. The Office of Refugee Resettlement made an emergency grant to this organization to maintain operations with the CR funding remaining. In addition to delays described above, some agency officials told us that they delayed making program enhancements because of funding constraints related to the CR. For example, FBI officials said that over $440 million in enhancements to existing programs and activities were delayed in 2009 because the CR instructs agencies to implement only the most limited funding actions. work to manage within the constraints of the CR. The most common type of additional work that agencies reported was having to enter into new contracts or exercise contract options. Agencies often made contract awards monthly or in direct proportion to the amount and timing of funds provided by theCR. In general, shorter and more numerous CRs led to more repetitive work for agencies managing contracts than longer CRs did. Numerous shorter CRs were particularly challenging for agencies, such as VHA and BOP, that have to maintain an inventory of food, medicine and other essential supplies. ACF issues multiple grants to the same grant recipient during the CR period, officials say. The longer the CR lasts, a Head Start official said, the greater the number of grants they have to award. In 2008, 185 (about 35 percent) of Head Start Project grants administered to recipients through Head Start’s 10 regional offices received a grant during theCR period and a second grant award shortly after ACF”s regular appropriation for the year (p.4). We could not establish a clear causal link between CRs and specific instances where a grant recipient received multiple awards. An agency’s ability to shift its contract cycle depends on a number of factors, including the type of services being acquired. The Federal Acquisition Streamlining Act of 1994 allows agencies to enter into 1-year contracts for severable services that cross fiscal years. Using this contract flexibility, an agency can shift itscontract cycle so that annual contracts for Severable services are executed in the third and fourth quarters of the fiscal year when agencies are less likely to be under a CR. However, some agencies’ able to shift their contract cycle to mitigate the effects of CRs was limited. to do only once had they received their regular appropriation on October 1st. FDA reported that CRs increased the amount of administrative work required to allot funds. VBA and VHA reported that they did not allot specific dollar amounts during a CR but rather provided guidance that all offices operate at a certain percentage of the previous year’s appropriations (see fig. 6). The types of administrative tasks affected by CRs varied by the agency and the type of funding it was allocated to them. agency but included the following: issuing guidance to various programs and offices; providing information to Congress and OMB; creating, disseminating, and revising spending plans; and responding to questions and requests for additional funding. Departmental CFOs and others who participated in our panel discussion said that CRs led to similar repetitive work activities at their agencies. VHA estimated that a 1-month CR results in over $1 million in lost productivity at VA medical facilities. FBI estimated that the Accounting, Budget, and Procurement Sections spent over 600 hours in 2009 on activities related to managing during the CR. Some agency officials said that a single, long-term CR allowed for better planning in the near term. Others said that operating under the specified rate for operations for a prolonged period limited their decision-making options. FBI officials reported that the number of contract requests that it receives to address emergency situations increases the longer the CR period lasts. FBI often has to reprioritize funds from other operations to fund these contracts, placing a strain on agency operations. Some agency officials also said that it was difficult to implement unexpected changes in their regular appropriations. usual budget and planning cycle, which can take several months, had be completed in just 6 weeks to meet the deadline that FBI has established for completing all of its large dollar contracts by the end of the fiscal year. Since 1999, the CR period has extended into January four times, and the cost of the salary increase has ranged from 1.7 percent to 4.1 percent (see table 1) For those agencies that ultimately receive a funding increase, absorbing the annual salary increase may strain already tight budgets. fiscal year—was helpful for managing funds in the compressed time period after regular appropriations were enacted. VBA and VHA said that having the authority to carry over funds into the next fiscal year has been helpful in years with lengthy CRs. OMB has also helped agencies manage during a CR by providing more than the automatic apportionment when justified. Two of our case study agencies, VHA and ACF, received exception apportionments during the study period—fiscal years 1999 to 2009. VHA apportioned funding for VHA’s medical administration account to reflect its seasonal rate of obligations in 2008. agencies operated with the automatically apportioned amount during CR periods since fiscal year 1999. CRs enable federal agencies to continue carrying out their missions and delivering services until agreement is reached on their regular appropriations. Agencies reported that CRs inhibited them from hiring staff and providing a higher level of service than if they were operating under a regular appropriation. When the CR period is long, the time for planning and program execution is compressed, which can be especially challenging when trying to implement new programs or program enhancements. the experiences of these six agencies provide useful insights for Congress about agency operations under CRs. We requested comments on a draft of this report from the Departments of Health and Human Services, Justice, and Veterans Affairs. The departments provided comments that were clarifying or technical in nature and we incorporated them as appropriate. This report will also be available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staff have any questions about this report, please contact Denise M. Fantone at (202) 512–6806. The objectives of this report are to describe: 1. the history and characteristics of continuing resolutions (CR), and 2. how CRs have affected agency operations. To achieve our first objective, we analyzed how provisions in CRs enacted from fiscal years 1999-2009 direct agencies to operate during the CR period. Our analysis also covered the number and type of provisions inCRs that provided specific directives or funding levels to particular departments, agencies, and programs. We refer to these provisions in the report. as “legislative anomalies.” To achieve our second objective, we conducted a case study review analyzing the effects of CRs on select agency operations. In selecting case study agencies, we focused on agencies with extensive experience managing under CRs. We used a multistep process to select these departments and agencies. We eliminated from further consideration the District of Columbia because it receives significant amounts of funding outside of the regular appropriations process that may have mitigated the effect ofCRs on its operations. contracts or grants to third parties, and through the use of federal facilities. We analyzed obligations of the remaining departments based on the following four budget object class categories that were used as proxies for different types of service delivery. To maximize the usefulness of each department selected for review, we selected departments that appeared in the top three for more than one object class. Based on this analysis, the following departments were selected: VA (personnel, contractual services and acquisition); DOJ (person personnel, acquisition); and HHS (contractual services, grants). a set of criteria that were developed in part from previous GAO work. The criteria included the number of accounts, the amount of multiyear funding, whether the appropriation provided a lump sum, and whether the agency had transfer authority. Overall, our six case study agencies received more than $46 billion in discretionary budget authority in 2007, accounting for approximately 10 percent of all nondefense discretionary spending. All three of our case study departments were in the top 10 in federal contract dollars by executive department and independent agencies in 2006. related documentation for each estimate and corroborating the estimate with related interviews and other documents where possible. In general, there were too many variables for agencies to isolate the effects of CRs from other factors. ACF conducted this performance audit from September 2008 to September 2009 in accordance with generally accepted government standards. To better understand the potential effects ofCRs on entities receiving federal funding, we interviewed officials representing states and contractors, including the National Association of State Budget Officers, National Conference of State Legislatures, Federal Funds Information for States. auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. Since 1999, continuing resolutions (CR) have contained the same nine standard provisions that govern most agencies, programs, and activities covered by the CR. Two new standard provisions were added during this time period, the appropriated entitlement provision and the furlough restriction. These standard provisions are listed and described in table 4. Projects or activities for which appropriations, funds, or authority were not available during the prior fiscal year. Agencies are directed to implement only the most limited funding action to continue operations at the enacted rate. Authorizes entitlements and other mandatory payments whose budget authority was provided in the prior year appropriations acts to continue at a rate to maintain program levels under current law. Amounts available for payments due on or about the first of each month after October are to continue to be made 30 days after the termination date of the CR. at different rates depending upon the status of the appropriations bill. OMB issues apportionment guidance directing agencies how to calculate the amount of funds available to obligate and spend during the CR period. The formula used to determine the apportionments has generally remained the same since fiscal year 1999. The calculation of the annualized amount will change depending on the rate for operations provided by the CR and other provisions. In figure 8, a project or activity may operate at the lower of either the rates for operations not exceeding the current rate or the rate based upon the amounts provided by House and Senate bills passed before October 1, 2005. addition to the contacts named above, Carol Henn, Julie Matta, Melissa Wolf, Sheila Rajabiun, Aglae Cantave; Juan Cristiani; Felicia Lopez; and Tom McCabe made key contributions to this report. Leah Querimit Nash, Albert Sim, and Jessica Thomsen also contributed to the report. For confidential support on suicide matters call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org.