Nearly all nursing homes accept residents with either Medicare or Medicaid. The federal government has responsibility for establishing requirements that nursing homes must meet to participate in the Medicare and Medicaid programs. The Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1987 revised the standards for homes’ participation in these federal programs. In 1998, the federal government paid states about $210 million for the nursing home survey and certification process, including about $42 million (20 percent) for investigating complaints. Both federal and state funds finance the costs state agencies incur in inspecting nursing homes. history of poor performance relative to the allegations. States sometimes place complaints in an inappropriately low investigation category, thus postponing a prompt review. Some states have explicit procedures or operating practices that result in the downgrading of a complaint’s severity. Maryland placed most complaints in its lowest-priority category–to be investigated at the next on-site survey. Washington categorized nearly 90 percent of its complaints to be investigated within either 2 or 10 workdays. The number of complaints considered immediate jeopardy in that state had dropped considerably during the first quarter of 1998 in comparison to earlier years. a complaint low priority if the resident is no longer at the nursing home when the complaint is received. The state may investigate these complaints during the home’s next survey or not at all. Failure to investigate such a complaint in a timely manner may compromise the health and safety of other residents who may also be affected by problems cited in the complaint. We identified several cases in which a resident had died or been transferred from the nursingHome that were uninvestigated for several months, or had not yet been investigated. State auditors’ reports identified additional complaints that the auditors found should have been placed in a higher category. Kansas’ auditors said that about 10 percent of 213 complaints reviewed were classified too low. Pennsylvania’s auditors identified several complaints as categorized too low, including one filed by a licensed practical nurse recently employed by the home. The nurse alleged that there had been at least 12 deaths at the home over a 2-week period, including a resident who choked to death because she had mistakenly been given solid food.  states often do not conduct investigations of complaints within the time frames they assign. Some of these complaints, despite alleging serious risk to resident health and safety, remained uninvestigated for several months after the deadline for investigation. Failure by states to investigate complaints promptly can delay the identification of serious problems in nursing homes and postpone needed corrective actions. delayed investigations can prolong, for extended periods, situations in which residents are.entirely within her stomach; and a resident who had received 10 times the prescribed dosage of a medication. HCFA funds, on average, 71 percent of state agencies’ complaint investigation costs. HCFA established a taskforce in 1993 to develop more stringent federal policies for complaint investigations. The task force was disbanded in 1995, and formal policies were not revised. In Maryland and Michigan, a large percentage of such cases was not investigated for extended periods. The HCFA does not provide additional guidance to states on ways to manage complaint workloads efficiently, how to categorize complaints, or when to expand a review beyond the original complaint.  HCFA’s major efforts to monitor states’ performance in surveying and certifying nursing homes are largely focused on annual surveys. Nearly all of the state nursing home inspections that HCFA monitors are annual surveys rather than complaint investigations. Even though HCFA has begun requiring states to include complaint investigations as part of their performance measurement and improvement programs, some states have not yet begun to do so. HCFA requires its regional investigators to replicate or observe a 5-percent sample of state investigators’ nursing home investigations. New York had not yet established performance standards for nursing home complaints. North Carolina’s 1998 quality improvement report acknowledged that the state agency “has fallen behind significantly on investigating complaints within 60 days for nursing homes.” Tracking of complaints is integral to identifying the status of complaint investigations and to managing complaint workloads to appropriately protect residents’ health, authors say. The combination of extensive state practices and limited HCFA oversight has resulted in extensive delays in investigating serious complaints, they say.  AHCA and AAHSA officials noted that the report summarizes some uninvestigated complaints and that the allegations had not yet been substantiated or unsubstantiated. We are making copies of this report available to the honorable Nancy-Ann Min DeParle, the HCFA Administrator; appropriate congressional committees; and interested parties upon request. This report was prepared by Jack Brennan, Mary Ann Curran, C. Robert DeRoy, Gloria Eldridge, and Chick Walter under the direction of John Dicken. For each state, we reviewed laws, regulations, and policies and interviewed leading state agency officials and complaint investigators. In fiscal year 1998, about $300 million was spent by the federal and state governments to certify and perform state licensing functions of federally certified nursing homes. Nearly $60 million, about 20 percent of total nursing home certification and licensing expenditures, was spent on complaint investigations. The federal government contributed about $42 million, or 71 percent, of the costs associated with investigating complaints. Most nursing homes (77 percent) are dually certified for both the Medicare and Medicaid programs. As of December 14, 1998, there were 101 complaints received between 101 and 1,000 beds. January and November 1998, filed against 56 nursing homes in the Baltimore metropolitan area that had not yet been assigned to an investigator. The following table summarizes the complaints filed against 12 of these homes that received three or more such complaints. Table III.1: Unassigned Complaints for Nursing Homes in Baltimore With Three or More Such Complaints Summary of allegation(s) A nurse allowed a respite resident with Alzheimer’s disease to leave the nursing home. Blind resident does not get needed assistance, such as identifying food provided. Nursing home and complainant agreed on a time to discharge a 91-year-old resident with dementia. Home discharged the resident earlier, and the new nursing home was unprepared for resident's arrival. Family was not notified that resident was transferred early and arrived to help the resident move to find that resident had already been transferred. Resident was admitted to the hospital 4 times in 10 years with dehydration and a urinary tract infection. Hospital staff found resident’s intravenous line dirty and clogged because nursing home staff did not flush the line. Home was to investigate and report to the state survey agency. However, as of December 1998, the state did not have the home’s investigative report. Aide smokes in the home and around residents. Same aide mishandled residents—threw them into bed and used nasty language. Understaffing, resulting in the dining room being closed for 2 days. During this time, there were only 3 aides for 70 to 80 residents. Resident had discoloration of chest that family believed was bruise caused by physical abuse. Complainant saw a nursing home. employee shaking resident. Employee terminated by home. Hygiene inadequate--resident was not bathed, teeth not cleaned, and hair not combed. Weight loss from April to June, was 134 lbs. to 120 lbs. Home said resident spit food out and that home had recommended a stomach tube. Caregiver handled resident roughly causing her to “suffer all night” The resident was in a rehabilitation unit receiving treatment for a fractured hip. The resident suffers pain to the touch of bruised areas. As of January 11, 1999, there were 129 complaints, received between February and November 1998, filed against 62 nursing homes in the Detroit metropolitan area that had not been investigated. The following table summarizes the complaints filed against 17 of these homes that received three or more such complaints. This column represents the number of days from the date the complaint was received to the day GAO visited the state agency. The home changed its billing formula resulting in a large increase in fees. The air conditioning does not work properly in one of the wings of the home. A resident's feeding tube was running and vomit was evident in her mouth and on her hands and face. She was found lying in a urine-soaked sheet, and a pressure sore was also urine soaked. A third resident entered the home with no visible skin problems but developed bedsores that led to the amputation of a limb. The home failed to assess a resident’s injury in a timely manner. A resident sustained a fracture of her wrist while taking a shower without supervision. that the home nevertheless bills Medicare for oxygen; resident was advised that his family should come and help to feed him; the resident’s belongings were missing and he was wearing the clothes of other residents; complainant was told by staff that the laundry in the home is done infrequently. A resident was brought into the hospital and was not breathing, was severely dehydrated, and had acute rib fractures and pneumonia. The resident signed himself out of the home and did not return. The complainant indicated that the staff intentionally hid the resident's condition from her for possibly up to one year. 100+ degrees for three days without the home contacting the family. The home schedules only one aide per floor on the midnight shift. One resident was found to have maggots in the sores on his feet, but the home would not send him to the hospital because it was afraid the hospital would call the state. The Director of Nursing specifically told the staff that the resident was not to go anywhere “because the state would be called in to investigate and we do not need that right now” Home was understaffed; a resident was found sitting in the dining room with wet pants; resident found in a gown with no underwear; resident’s clothing missing; resident not helped to bathroom in a timely manner; no therapeutic activities for residents; meals are inadequate; a dog is allowed to roam through the nursing home; offensive odors in the home; resident has been injured as a result of falls. The family also alleges that they have been denied access to her clinical records. hospital emergency room because he had gotten out of bed and fallen. When the family saw him, his arm was completely black and blue. He was also constantly overmedicated. The resident was not properly groomed; food was observed in the heaters; staff did not answer call bells. Staff harassed the resident and his family if they complained about care. Resident developed pressure sores on both feet and had to have part of one leg amputated due to improper care of the sores. The home was short of staff and was falsifying the books. fell down, struck her head, and suffered cracked ribs and various cuts and bruises. Several residents fell out of bed one evening because the side rails were not put up. Food was served cold and there was no staff person to help residents eat. The home was very short staffed and on several nights the complainant was the only nonresident adult in the wing. The resident had bed sores on his heels; he was refused readmission to the home following a hospital stay. He was not properly groomed (bathed and shaved); dirty bed linens were not changed. The home did not check the blood sugar level of a diabetic resident for three days following his admission. On the third day he received two units of insulin when he should have received 100 units. The home gave him potassium pills to normalize his sugar level, but his heart rate went so high that he was taken to the hospital, where he died. Nursing home staff would not permit the resident to go to the bathroom on his own. They did not take proper precautions for pressure sores and did not treat the resident with dignity and respect. Resident fell out of bed and suffered a cut on her head. Staff bandaged the cut but because she had no other marks on her body and could move her arms and legs, X-rays were not taken. Three days later she was taken to the emergency room with elevated heart rate, blood pressure, and sugar level. X-ray confirmed a hip fracture, necessitating hip surgery. The complaint also alleges that the resident previously had experienced dehydration and a urinary tract infection, had two hearing aids and her dentures lost in the home. home and was found a block away by a passerby. He had fallen and suffered a swollen eye, a bruised hand, and a knee abrasion. An employee was verbally abusive to a resident. A resident developed a cut on his foot that became infected. It was left unchecked and spread into the bone. The heel had to be amputated. The resident had a condition that, if vomiting takes place, dictates that the resident should be taken immediately to the emergency room. Although the resident was suffering spells of vomiting, the nursing home failed to send her to the hospital until she was found unconscious. The resident had bruises on her chin, her stomach, and her arms and legs. She suffered a stroke but was not sent to the hospital until the family observed the problem and insisted on hospitalization. The home failed to provide proper dental care. Despite the home’s assurance to the complainant that its dentist was capable of providing care, the resident had to visit an oral surgeon to resolve the problem that had lasted for 15 months. The resident was so over-medicated that the doctor was unable to perform needed gall bladder surgery. found on the floor bleeding from an injury to her head that required 17 stitches. Complaint included 28 separate allegations about the care provided to 17 residents. 90 percent of the home’s beds are old and faulty (big gaps in the side rails), the complaint says. A resident got her head caught in the bed and later died. The administrator would not order needed equipment (such as recliners and geri-chairs) which forced the residents to stay in their beds, the complaint alleges. told staff to call EMS (the community emergency medical service) instead of 911 when a resident was nonresponsive, possibly to save money. One resident was sent to the hospital due to malnutrition and dehydration and died two weeks later. A resident who entered the home with both legs is now a bilateral amputee because he developed pressure sores when staff failed to turn and reposition him or provide heel protection or foot elevation. It was later determined that he had deep vein thrombosis. A resident was admitted with no pressure sores, but developed sores on her heels and legs, became septic, and died. A resident with very bad teeth and gums has received no dental care. Residents complain that their food trays are removed before they are finished eating. A nurse aide was seen striking a resident with a towel. A former employee said the home fired her after 3 weeks of employment because she refused to falsify documents. The home is understaffed; wound care is put off for two to three days. necessary dental care to ensure that his new dentures fit properly. At 10:00 a.m., family members arrived at the home to take the resident to a medical appointment and found her lying in bed, totally soaked in urine, including her hair and pillow. She was lying on top of the made bed, dressed in a hospital gown with her bare feet and legs totally exposed. Complainant believes she was left this way all night because no other beds on the ward were made. problem with her blood sugar. Complainant believes it is possible that the resident was accidentally or intentionally injected with insulin (possibly that of her roommate, who is a diabetic) This column represents the number of days from the date the complaint was received to the day GAO visited the agency. Because Michigan measures its time frame in calender days, not in workdays, we show only calendar days for Michigan. As of January 6, 1999, there were 40 complaints, received between September 1998 and December 1998, filed against 11 nursing homes in the Seattle metropolitan area. Floor of resident’s room was dirty; urine on floor at noon was still there at 4:30 p.m. Staff told resident he could not have bed rails because it was against the law. Staff member slapped resident on leg, which already had nerve damage. Verbal abuse and public humiliation of talkative resident by therapist. Facility reeks of urine. Resident lies on floor in front of elevator and attacks visitors. Catheter leaked and soaked resident, but aide left resident wet; so resident called 911. Staffing inadequate to meet needs of residents. Call lights not answered, or answered late. Reportable incidents not reported and recorded properly. Medication mix-up so that resident received own medications and another resident’s on same morning. Staff shortages leading toward burnout. Resident says young man fractured his hand. Staff treated resident roughly and tried to force him to eat. Doctor unable to answer questions about medications or other care questions. Doctor and nurses intervened, and close monitoring of vital signs followed. check or money order made out to the Superintendent of Documents, when necessary, VISA and MasterCard credit cards are accepted, also. Orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent. Each day, GAO issues a list of newly available reports and testimony. To receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days, please call (202) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone. A recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists.