Recognizing the human capital challenges facing federal agencies, Congress, the administration, and others are focusing increased attention on strategic human capital management. Congress has underscored the consequences of human capital weaknesses in federal agencies. The President, in August 2001, placed human capital at the top of his management agenda. The Office of Management and Budget is assessing agencies’ progress in addressing their individual human capital problems. The federal government needs to adopt a consistent strategic approach to marshaling, managing, and protecting human capital. The 8th Quadrennial Review of Military Compensation, completed in 1997, strongly advocated that DOD adopt a strategic human capital planning approach. DOD and service studies, including those by the Defense Science Board Task Force on Human Resources Strategy, endorsed the concept of human capital strategic planning. In April 2002, DOD also published A New Social Compact: A Reciprocal Partnership Between the Department of Defense, Service Members and Families. The two plans constitute a positive step forward in DOD’s strategic management of the military workforce. are working to improve the integration of the human capital plans by developing an “umbrella’ plan. High-performing organizations use relevant and reliable data to determine key performance objectives and goals that enable them to evaluate the success of their human capital approaches. The military personnel strategic plan provides measures of effectiveness for each initiative, but these measures are not adequate to assess the effectiveness of a human capital approach, the authors say. They say a fact-based, performance-oriented approach is crucial for maximizing the value of human capital. DOD has faced challenges in providing benefits to service members that respond to their changing needs. A major demographic change has been the growing proportion of service members who are women. In 2000, women comprised about 15 percent of the active duty force, compared with 4 percent in 1974. Up to 10 percent of women in the military become pregnant each year. If these trends continue, DOD may need to take into account the benefits that this population values to better retain these trained, experienced service members, authors say. written statement of the actions taken on our recommendations to the Senate Committee on Governmental Affairs. A written statement also must be sent to the House and Senate Committees on Appropriations with the agency’s first request for appropriations made more than 60 days after the date of the report. We are sending copies to appropriate congressional committees and the Director, Office of Management and Budget. We will make copies available to other interested parties on request. In addition, the report will be available at no charge at the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov.