The Telecommunications Act of 1996 (1996 Act) is virtually silent with respect to Internet Protocol (IP), broadband networks, and online voice, data, and video services. New technologies have driven changes in market structure throughout the communications sector that were not contemplated by the 1996 Act. The statutory framework imposes obligations and prohibitions on certain networks and service providers, but also provides privileges and rights. There is no consensus about the changes needed, but there is agreement that the statutory framework should foster innovation, investment, and competition. how to accommodate technological change that already has taken place and, more dynamically, how to make the framework flexible enough to accommodate future technological change. Given that scale economies allow for only a very small number of efficient facilities-based network competitors. How to give those few network providers the incentive to invest and innovate while also constraining their ability to impede downstream competition from independent service providers who must use their networks. And how to implement a framework that fosters efficient spectrum use and management. Congress will be addressing these three broad questions during a time of great market uncertainty. The communications sector does not look at all as it did when the Telecommunications Act was passed in 1996. Consumer behavior in 2013 bears little resemblance to that in 1996, says. Many incumbents enjoying record revenues and profits, and many new entrants enjoying rapid revenue gains though they may not yet have attained profitability. It is difficult to predict which business models ultimately will succeed, and therefore it is hard to predict the ultimate impact of proposed statutory changes, he says. The need for caution should not necessarily be justification for inaction, he adds. eMarketer: Average adult will spend over 5 hours per day online, on nonvoice mobile activities or with other digital media this year. Verizon Communications chief financial officer Francis Shammo reportedly has stated that its recent deal with the National Football League for the rights to live-stream football games on 7.5-inch devices or smaller was "pretty significant for us" James Dolan, chief executive officer of Cablevision Systems, a major cable company, has reportedly stated that "Ultimately over the long term I think that the whole video product is eventually going to go over the Internet" Digital technologies have led to the "convergence" of networks. This has fundamentally changed market structure. "True convergence" is not the offering of a "bundle" of several products into a single service offering. It is a technological spillover that reduces entry costs so that existing firms find it profitable to extend their network into related markets, a decision that would not be profitable without the spillover. The impact has had substantial impact on U.S. markets and on the efficacy of the existing communications statutory framework. those firms with assets in a related market that have been affected by the spillover can afford to enter. Network providers that are able to exploit these technological spillovers can enter new service markets. Second, independent efforts by a wide variety of large and small entrepreneurs, using unlicensed as well as licensed spectrum, have yielded a mobile wireless alternative to local wireline broadband networks that is viable for most popular consumer and small business applications. But providers whose service-specific networks could not be readily modified to exploit spillovers, such as satellite operators unable to offer quality high speed Internet access or voice services, have failed to gain new business opportunities. This new mobile wireless ecosystem includes (1) cellular broadband wireless networks (sometimes referred to as macro networks) (2) femtocell and other small cell networks that extend the reach of macro networks. (3) WiFi networks that sometimes compete with macro networks but more often provide essential offloading and backhaul capabilities. Most digital services are applications that ride on existing wireline or wireless broadband networks; although they directly or indirectly compensate broadband network providers for use of their networks, digital service providers do not. not face the substantial fixed upfront costs associated with constructing a network. Technology-driven reduction in content distribution costs has fostered entry into the distribution of all types of content. This has created incentives for distributors to merge with content providers, for example, for Comcast to acquire NBC Universal. Dish Network, which cannot offer broadband services over its satellite network, in recent months has made (unsuccessful) offers to buy the wireless broadband providers Clearwire, Sprint, and LightSquared. The American Cable Association, Time Warner Cable, and DirecTV have filed with the FCC a petition to deny the transfer of five stations from Belo to Gannett. Broadcaster consolidation may be triggering countervailing consolidation in the video distribution market. Liberty Media, which owns 27% of Charter Communications, seeks to have Charter purchase Time Warner Cable and then additional cable systems. SNLFinancial reports that "Time Warner Cable, which reportedly showed little interest in a deal with Charter, is reportedly eyeing mergers with Cablevision Systems Corp., which Charter also is eyeing, and Cox Communications Inc." Charter CEO Thomas Rutledge predicted that only "two major players" will eventually emerge in the U.S. cable industry. Charlie Ergen of Dish Network has suggested that a merger of Dish and DirecTV, which was rejected by the antitrust authorities in the past, might be possible now. If ownership consolidation by broadcasters triggers countervailing consolidation by video distributors, many programmer-distributor negotiations will feature large companies on both sides of the table. This may make it more difficult for either party to impose its will on the other. But a battle between two companies, each with sufficiently deep pockets to be willing and able to withstand an extended blackout may injure consumers.  operator is across the table from an independent broadcast television station, with the smaller entity at a negotiating disadvantage. If the broadcast television stations in a local market are part of a large television group, and especially if that group owns more than one station in that market, local retailers and other local advertisers may find themselves at a disadvantage when attempting to negotiate local advertising rates. The new market opportunities and new market forces generated by technological change have, overall, been a boon to stakeholders in the communications sector, with incumbents as well as new entrants benefiting. There has been nearly $250 billion in private capital investment in U.S. wired and wireless broadband networks since 2009. SNLFinancial forecasts a long-term decline in cable companies' capital expenditures, from a peak of $13.1 billion in 2012 to $11.4 billion in 2016. The decline may, in part, be the result of consolidation as mergers and joint marketing agreements reduce the number of competitors that must build out national networks. But there are some indications that network capital expenditures will fall. SNLFinancial has begun to construct a database on five types of OTT deployments. OTT aggregators include Netflix, Hulu, Amazon, Apple's iTunes, Redbox, Automated Retail LLC, Verizon's Redbox Instant, Time Warner's Warner Archive, Sony Entertainment Network. As the OTT segment matures, more data may be collected to help policy makers analyze the impact of alternative public policies on the health and viability of applications markets, says SNLFinancial's John Defterios. There is no consensus on the extent to which households that had been subscribers to a pay cable, satellite, or telephone multi-channel video have "cut the cord" But such cord-cutting is an identifiable trend. A recent study by GfK reportedly found that 19.3% of television homes (22.4 million) have broadcast-only reception (though they may also get programming online), compared with 17.8% in 2012. The current statutory framework was shaped by negotiations among the many stakeholders present at the time the statutes were being developed. Existing statutory provisions may no longer be effectively fostering competition, public safety. In a technologically dynamic sector, the statutory framework cannot be modified every time there is a significant technological change. Existing statutes are silent on digital technology, Internet protocol, broadband networks, and online services, forcing the FCC, FCC and Copyright Office to implement the provisions. The challenge is to create statutory language that is flexible enough to continue to foster articulated public policy objectives in the face of technological change, without artificially favoring either legacy technology or new technology. Copyright Office, and courts to extrapolate to these new technologies provisions explicitly crafted for legacy technologies. Online video distributors do not meet the statutory definitions of a "multichannel video programming distributor (MVPD)," "cable company," or "satellite carrier," and thus are treated differently than their distribution competitors. These differences in rights and obligations are likely to distort, and may undermine, potential competition from over-the-top online video distributors, CRS says. CRS has explored in detail the policy issues that this has created in the video distribution market. Broadcast Music Inc. (BMI), which represents 600,000 songwriters, composers, and music publishers, filed an action asking a federal court to set royalty rates for Internet radio service Pandora. Similar analysis can be performed of other technology-specific definitions and provisions in current statute to determine whether they favor some competing services over others. For example, the statutory treatment of copyright for the public performance rights for sound recordings is different for terrestrial broadcast radio (that is, AM and FM radio stations) than for satellite radio. Composers, Authors and Publishers (ASCAP) has filed with the FCC a petition to deny the license transfer. A cable or satellite operator must obtain a copyright license to retransmit the copyrighted material on broadcast signals to its subscribers. But a consuming household does not have to pay a license fee to capture the same broadcast programming. For example, the public performance of copyrighted works on broadcast television signals is subject to copyright licensing, but the private performance of such works is not. A company that is constrained by regulatory restrictions or prohibitions, or by patent or copyright restrictions, can "invent around" the impediment. directly over the air with use of a rooftop antenna. Video distributors therefore have the incentive to develop and deploy technologies that mimic the household's rooftop antenna or in some other fashion allow the consuming household to directly capture the broadcast signal. A start-up company, Aereo, now has deployed thousands of mini-antennas, which, though maintained at Aereo's own premises, are assigned to individual subscribers as their personal antennas. Aereo claims that it is not a video distributor but rather a technology rental company and that the programs received by its subscribers are private performances. Aereo has been able to continue to offer its service to residents of New York, Connecticut, and Vermont. AereoKiller/FilmOnX cases are expected to threaten Aereo's expansion plans. If the broadcasters are unsuccessful on this issue and lose copyright revenues, they are likely to pursue alternate compensation, most likely by seeking to make Aereo and similarly situated video distributors subject to retransmission consent requirements. Currently, online video distributors such as Aereo do not meet the definition of an MVPD. broadcasters would have to seek a statutory change. Congress may choose to address this issue through legislation. In another copyright case involving new technology, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit has affirmed the denial of a preliminary injunction against a Dish Network product, Auto-Hop. The court found that the plaintiffs "did not establish a likelihood of success on its claim of secondary infringement," the appeals court said in its ruling. The current legal uncertainty is making it more difficult for both programmers and distributors to make business decisions, the court said. on its affirmative defense that the customers' copying was a 'fair use' The case will proceed, but whatever its outcome Congress may want to review copyright law in light of new technologies being developed by video distributors. In the digital age, it is very cheap and easy to copy and distribute works, so copyright laws must set up a framework for protecting the intellectual property rights of the copyright holders. Digital technology provides unique opportunities for unleashing the value in existing works that may be denied if the creator of the work is allowed to curtail innovative uses. The Department of Commerce Internet Policy Task Force has released a report, Copyright Policy, Creativity, and Innovation in the Digital Economy. The report tends to focus more on protecting copyright holders' intellectual property than on removing disincentives for third party use of copyrighted materials. Some of the issues identified in the report, which Congress may want to investigate, include the following: A proposal supported by the Administration to extend the public performance right for sound recordings to cover broadcasting. Assessing the appropriateness of different rate-setting standards for thepublic performance of sound recordings by different types of digital music services. public performance right—such as streaming copyrighted materials without a license—a felony, rather than a misdemeanor. Reviewing the relevance and scope of the "first-sale doctrine" in the digital environment. A proposal supported by the Administration to ensure that consumers have the ability to unlock their cell phones, subject to applicable service agreements. A review of the legal framework for the creation of remixes, which some observers claim is being unacceptably impeded by legal uncertainty. The administration is also considering a proposal to allow music fans to download songs without paying for them. is embodied (a book or a CD) is exhausted; the owner of that material object can thereafter dispose of the object as she sees fit. But unlike a tangible transfer, a digital transfer between two end users results in a reproduction of the work. The reproduction right is not subject to the first-sale doctrine limitation, so such transfers are a copyright infringement. Reviewing the application of statutory damages in the context of individual file-sharers and secondary liability for large-scale online infringement. the private sector improve the online licensing environment. Derek Khanna raises several additional copyright issues that may affect innovation. The original copyright term was 14 years, plus a 14 year renewal if the author were still alive. Over time it has been extended and now the term is the lifetime of the author plus 70 years. Khanna suggests that these time periods may be inconsistent with the constitutional language restricting exclusive rights to "limited times" He claims that these lengthy terms benefit content producers, but harm other, added-value services. Khanna proposes more stringent requirements for requests that content be removed from websites. He also argues for an expansion of what is legally fair use. Khanna also proposes penalties for fake takedown requests, which have a chilling effect on legitimate speech. The current federal statutory framework for communications contains many provisions intended to foster specific public policy objectives, Khanna says. But most of those provisions only apply to a subset of communications networks that are "telecommunications carriers," that is providers of telecommunications services, he says. IP networks offer voice services in direct competition with the voice services provided by telecommunications carriers. The latter may be subject to regulations that do not apply to the former. Among telecommunications carriers, there is a statutory hierarchy, with some carriers subject to greater regulation than others. Many state regulatory agencies require ILECs (and sometimes all LECs) to be "carriers of the voice of the people they are supposed to serve" and "carrier of the data they are meant to transmit" last resort" and to serve all requesting customers in their service areas upon demand. In the on-going broadband transition, many network providers are migrating from legacy circuit-switched, largely copper networks that use time division multiplexing technology. AT&T has announced its intention to upgrade all of its wireline and wireless facilities to IP, which may result in it no longer serving about one percent of its customers. But in some cases the network providers, which have invested billions of dollars to deploy these new networks, are required by federal or state law to maintain their legacy networks. legacy customers. It has asked the FCC to open a proceeding to address transition issues. The FCC has opened a proceeding and also has created an internal Technology Transitions Policy Task Force. But the FCC will deliberate in the absence of congressional guidance about which of the statutory requirements on legacy networks should apply to new networks. Some issues of potential interest to Congress include the following: VoIP Interconnection: IP networks rely on negotiated "peering agreements" for the exchange of traffic. But there have been instances of " peering disputes" in which networks refuse to exchange traffic. FCC plans to have trials to determine how VoIP and other IP-based networks can interconnect with emergency service IP networks (ESInets) Congress may want to review statutory requirements to make sure they are not impeding the E911 to NG911 transition. Some ILECs are replacing existing customer voice and broadband services delivered over legacy circuit switched wireline networks with similar product offerings delivered over fiber and/or wireless IP networks. There are a number of federal and state statutory requirements, first enacted during the long period of government-sanctioned monopoly provision of telephone service. FCC certifies that the public interest will not be adversely affected in the present or future. Many states impose "carrier of last resort" service obligations that require ILECs to serve customers in their service areas on demand. Congress may want to provide the FCC with guidance on how to weigh the tradeoff between rapid IP deployment and protection of end users who may not wish to adopt new technologies. The transition to an IP world is inevitable, but late adopters will prefer to control the timing of their change-over. In 1996, Congress passed the Telecommunications Act (1996 Act), which sought to open up markets to competition by removing unnecessary regulatory barriers to entry. The 1996 Act attempted to foster competition among providers that used similar underlying network technologies to offer a single type of service. Technological advances not envisioned by, or addressed in, the 1996 Act, however, created spillovers that began to allow for inter modal competition. Increasingly, both the legacy telephone companies and the legacy cable networks are migrating their traffic onto IP networks. AT&T has had challenges meeting long-standing regulatory requirements. Wireless networks do not have the same bandwidth capability as optical fiber networks and upgraded coaxial cable networks. But they do offer sufficient bandwidth for many applications, and especially for many consumer and small business users. They also provide complementary mobile services for enterprise customers and other heavy-bandwidth users. It has been able to deploy its FiOS service, but neither has been unable to provide high bandwidth landline broadband service universally throughout its service area. In September 2012 Verizon announced that it would not expand its FiOS fiber-optic network beyond its existing contractual obligations. Yet Tony Melone, Verizon's chief technical officer, explicitly included the FiOS network among the four platforms the company plans to use in the future. The high cost of FiOS deployment appears to be constraining the footprint on which such deployment will take place. The decision of the cable companies to forgo entry into the wireless market, and Verizon's acquisition of an important block of wireless broadband spectrum, may reduce the amount of investment. The Verizon/cable company transactions highlight the possibility that the enter/don't enter/exit decisions of incumbent network providers can markedly change market forces and incentives. Congress may want to consider whether structural constraints (such as spectrum caps) and/or behavioral constraints are needed to limit the market power of vertically integrated network providers. Given the spectrum available to independent wireless carriers and limit Verizon's participation in the video market to those geographic markets in which it already offers FiOS service, this could be a problem. Congress may want to be sure that its statutory framework is able to address competition and other public policy issues. There are four general approaches that a statutory framework could take. Ex ante rules and ex post adjudication both typically focus on anti-competitive discrimination that harms consumers, but in distinct ways. The dominant cost characteristic of the communications sector is the substantial fixed costs, and associated scale and scope economies, of large networks. Both wireline and wireless broadband markets are highly competitive, with many players. broadband networks are subject to economies of scale that limit the number of efficient competitors that can participate in the market. Historically the statutory framework for communications has focused on market structure. Given recent enter/don't enter/exit decisions by major network providers, there has been increased interest in structural regulation. Some observers have alleged that the two dominant carriers may have the incentive to strategically hoard spectrum, depriving smaller carriers of access to the low frequency spectrum that has superior propagation characteristics. The basic principle behind a network non-discrimination regime is to give users the right to use non-harmful attachments or applications. In December 2010, the FCC adopted its Open Internet Order, establishing ex ante rules to govern the network management practices of broadband Internet access providers. Proponents claim that such a regime avoids some of the costs of structural regulation by allowing for efficient vertical integration so long as the rights granted to the users of the network are not compromised. There are three primary components: transparency, no blocking, and no disclosure of performance terms to consumers and to content, application, service, and device providers. It therefore applies both to end users and to independent applications providers. Network management. Mobile providers are prohibited from blocking consumers from accessing lawful websites, subject to reasonable network management. No unreasonable discrimination: fixed (but not mobile) broadband Internet service providers may not unreasonably discriminate in transmitting lawful network traffic over a consumer's broadband Internet access service. Reasonable network management shall not constitute unreasonable discrimination. Multiple appeals of the order, challenging the FCC's authority to impose these rules, have been filed and subsequently consolidated for review in the U.S. Court of Appeals, D.C. Circuit. Proponents of non-discrimination rules argue that the restrictions harm consumers and applications providers. Critics of e x ante non- discrimination rules claim that such rules would intrude too much into the business plans of broadband network providers. An alternative approach would adjudicate alleged abuses of market power ex post on a case-by-case basis, they say. The Progress and Freedom Foundation has proposed an ex post approach modeled after the Federal Trade Commission Act which would give the FCC authority to adjudicate allegations of "unfair methods of competition" Representative Sensenbrenner, stated concern that the decision not be "perceived as giving a green light to all manner of anticompetitive behavior by the Bells" Then-ranking minority member of the House Judiciary Committee Conyers called for legislation to address the "Supreme Court's horrible blunder" Representatives Sensen brenner and Conyers introduced a bill in May 2004 that would have added a section to the Clayton Act to make unlawful actions such as those that had been taken by Verizon. The bill did not move forward. utility commissions], rather than judges all across the country." It may be that, when Congress inserted the "antitrust savings" clause in the 1996 Act, many Members believed that the clause was preserving an unlimited private right of action on the part of other-than-directly affected parties to sue. But, as this case indicates, the clause may be of little effect in instances such as this in which it is found that traditional antitrust principles and standards are not implicated. Under current FCC and court interpretations of law, IP network providers and providers of information services are not subject to the provisions in Title II of the Communications Act. The Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992 (1992 Cable Act, P.L. 102-385 ) established rules that govern the carriage (retransmission) of television signals by cable operators. Congress was concerned that cable companies might refuse to carry the signals of local broadcast stations. The regulatory framework also includes broadcast media ownership rules (some explicitly in statute, some implemented by the FCC but later referred to in statute) There are separate rules addressing the number of television stations that a single entity may own or control in a local market. In 1992, there were only limited multichannel pay television alternatives to cable. Today, Dish Network operates in all 210 U.S. markets, DirecTV in about 195 markets. As a result, the cable companies have lost some of their leverage when negotiating retransmission consent agreements with broadcasters, authors say. The terms, conditions, and rates that had to be negotiated within retransmissions consent agreements increased exponentially, they say. They say this created many more elements that potentially could create a new business model. In recent years, many television stations have entered into sharing arrangements with other stations in their local market. Such agreements have resulted in so-called "virtual duopolies" that would not be allowed under the local ownership rule if the first station had control. In part to create a negotiating impasse, the FCC has not deemed a station to have control over another station in the same market even if such control is considered to exist, and must be reported, under generally accepted accounting practices. In some cases, these larger station groups also will enjoy duopoly or virtual duopoly positions in some local markets. 86% of households nationwide subscribe to a multichannel video service, down from 88% in 2010. Of the television households that do not subscribe to an MVPD service, 42% get one or more of the three major over-the-top services (Netflix, Amazon Prime, and Hulu Plus) About 1.4% of all television households discontinued subscription to a MVPD over the past year, suggesting no great surge in "cord cutting" households. Online video distributors do not qualify as MVPDs and therefore are not subject to the retransmission consent requirements. negotiations more contentious, with greater risk of impasses. SNLFinancial has identified 35 retransmission consent blackouts between 2005 and 2013 that lasted 28 days or longer. Congress is more likely to be concerned about broadcast-related blackouts because of its long-standing commitment to localism and diversity of voices, authors say. They say Congress may want to review the current statutory framework to determine whether any changes are needed to make it more effective in the new market environment characterized by greater consolidation. By statute, an entity may own and operate local broadcast stations that reach, in total, up to 39% of U.S. television households. But when calculating the total audience reach by an entity's stations, the so-called "UHF discount" is applied. This discount had been imposed because in the pre-digital analog world UHF stations had less reach than VHF stations. The FCC has issued for public comment a Notice of Proposed Rulemaking that tentatively concludes the UHF discount should be eliminated. Small cable operators say they are at a distinct disadvantage in retransmission consent negotiations. They cite a study by Professor William P. Rogerson that claims that smaller MVPDs pay twice as high per subscriber. The Television Consumer Freedom Act would indirectly address some of the complexities that are affecting broadcaster/MVPD negotiations, says John Avlon. Avlon: There are market forces at play that could constrain the recent increase in programmer-distributor impasses and blackouts without any government intervention. actual and threatened blackouts therefore may increase the rate of "cord-cutting"—of households abandoning MVPDs altogether. Any significant migration of MVPD customers to over-the-top alternatives is likely to harm the financial position of broadcasters. Spectrum, by itself, is not of any use. It has value when technology is applied to it to create services. But the direction that the applied technology takes determines its value. As never before, there will be costs to society if the statutory framework does not foster efficient spectrum use. Will depend on the way spectrum is allocated for use and rules about such use. Technology development will take a very different path if spectrum users are assigned exclusive licenses to specific spectrum. There are already a number of spectrum sharing solutions in the market, says Peter Ravy. But what must be understood is that the spectrum-sharing approaches must be simple to use in extremely complex circumstances, Ravy says. The FCC has moved toward a hybrid approach to spectrum allocation in the "white spaces" that exist between licensed television broadcasters. blocks to specific licensees based on public interest criteria. Once allocated and assigned, spectrum could not readily be reallocated to a different use. As a result, much spectrum has been underutilized or available only for a relatively low-value use. Setting a price on spectrum and allowing its transfer to higher valued uses increases incentives for licensees to use their spectrum efficiently, authors say. They say public safety organizations and first responders need a reliable communications network, but may not have the funds to compete with commercial interests in spectrum auctions.  Spectrum is essential for the development of new network and application technologies and services. Some of that research is performed by established firms using their own available licensed spectrum. But some is done by start-up firms working on the technology frontier that do not have spectrum licenses. Even established firms may not have licenses for spectrum with the characteristics needed to perform their research. To foster innovation, it may be beneficial to set aside some spectrum for experimental, unlicensed, shared use constrained only by specified non-interference criteria. Major wireless carriers to transition from 2G to 3G and then 4G networks. Making sufficient spectrum available for experimentation and unlicensed services. Wi-Fi was able to develop in the unlicensed spectrum block set aside for spread spectrum. There is a long history of concern that competition could be constrained if a few wireless providers control so much of the bands that other providers are effectively foreclosed from the market, they say. The FCC first introduced a spectrum cap on mobile spectrum holdings in 1994 to promote diversity and competition. a transmitter in a particular spectrum frequency band is prohibited from allowing its signal to stray into an adjacent band. If the licensee is allowing this to happen, it would be ordered to discontinue transmission. In contrast, if the licensee's signal is not straying into an. adjacent band, but receivers in that adjacent band are not sufficiently well-tuned to pick up. only the signals from their own frequency band, there is no rule that would require the licensee to discontinues its transmission. Inexpensive GPS devices may well lack filters that keep them from picking up signals from adjacent channels. In 2011, testing of LightSquared's plan to offer terrestrial broadband service using a satellite band that is located next to the band used for GPS devices indicated some GPS receivers were subject to interference. Because of this impact on GPS owners, the FCC ultimately did not approve LightSquaring's proposal and that spectrum band has remained largely unused. More generally, the lack of rules that set requirements for receivers to be selective in the signals they pick up leads to valuable portions of the electromagnetic spectrum being kept out of service or only sparsely utilized. In absence of receiver ground rules, "moral hazard" may encourage risky behavior, authors say. Rules that "grandfather" inefficient legacy spectrum use may impose costs on future spectrum users, they say. Technological innovation and efficiency are important public policy objectives, but there are other policy goals that may not always be consistent with innovation, they write. Congress may want to provide guidance to the FCC on how best to weigh the tradeoffs between maximizing auction revenues and meeting these other public policy objective. A frequent way to avoid such harm is to "grandfather" the old regulation for those legacy providers or customers. If the proposed change would further a policy goal, then to the extent providers or consumers are excluded from the change, the public benefits will be reduced. These grandfather clauses, some explicit, some implied, are common in communications statutes and regulations or in how agencies choose to construct new rules. Many of the media ownership rules, such as the newspaper-broadcast cross ownership rule, grandfathered pre-existing cross ownership combinations. is possible that in some situations the overall public interest calculus will not allow for such grandfathering. It is also possible that it is not in the public interest to grandfather in the elderly or the disabled. It's possible that the grandfathering of the elderly would be in the best interests of the public. It could also be detrimental to the elderly to grandfather the elderly in the first place, as it could lead to an increase in the cost of health care for the elderly, for example. It would be possible to grandfather elderly people in the future, but it would be difficult to grandfather them now.