EPA has initiated actions that would substantially reduce air pollutants (particularlynitrogenoxides - NOx) emitted by some electric generating facilities. The initiatives would further control NOx to assist states in the Northeast in meeting the existing, statutory 1-hourozoneNational Ambient Air Quality Standard (NAAQS) The Ozone Transport Rule includes all or part of 19 easternstates and the District of Columbia. The enforcement initiative is not legally or procedurally related to the above initiatives. Call is the most wideranging of the initiatives, with estimated costs of $1.7 billion annually and estimated quantifiable benefits of$1.1-$4.2billion annually. Because EPA's methodology uses cost-effectiveness for determining emission budgets, the lion'sshare of the costs would be borne by the utility industry. The smaller scope of the Section 126 determinations reducesemissionsabatement and benefits, but also costs. Of course, this scope could increase if additional petitions submitted to EPAresultin more states being implicated as sources of transported ozone. In January 2000, EPA decided to indefinitely stay its original final determinations with respect to the 8-hour ozone standard. In February 2001, the Supreme Court ruled that although EPA has the authority to set a new 8- hour ozone standard, itsinterpretation of the relationship between the 1-hour standard's statutory implementation strategy and its new 8 hour standard was unreasonable and unlawful. On January 15, 2002, the EPA announced itwould delay the compliance deadline for the Section 126 rule from May 1, 2003, to May 31, 2004, in line with thedeadlinefor the NOx SIP Call. impact of the Bush Administration's June 2002 recommendations to revise the New Source Review process. Of particular interest is an EPA recommendation that a newrulemaking be commenced on the definition of "routine maintenance," a key point of contention in the abovelawsuits. No formal rulemaking has been proposed by EPA as the drafting process has not beencompleted. The continuing difficulties in the Northeast both in meeting the ozone NAAQS and in reducing acid precipitation havefocused attention on emissions from fossil fuel-fired utilities. action has beenscheduled. The event is scheduled to take place in the spring of 2015. For more information on the event, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2015/01/28/cnn-action-in-the-spring-of-2015/index.html. The action will take place at a location to be announced in the near future. The date and location of the event has not yet been announced. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org.