Pandemics occur when an influenza virus mutates into a novel strain that is highly transmissible among humans. Pandemics arise periodically but unpredictably and can cause successive waves of disease lasting for up to 3 years. Vaccines reduce the severity of disease or provide immunity by causing the body to produce protective antibodies to fight off a particular virus strain. Antivirals can reduce symptoms and help prevent the spread of influenza by suppressing the growth of the influenza virus. It is likely that seasonal influenza vaccine manufacturers will produce the vaccine used during a pandemic. months to produce, and the lead time needed to scale up production capacity may make it difficult to meet any large-scale, unanticipated demand immediately. Current antiviral production capacity is inadequate to meet expected demand during a pandemic. antivirals can be expensive to stockpile and difficult to administer, depending on the form in which they are given. Since 2000, we and others have reported that federal, state, and local officials need to have information on target groups that have priority for receiving pharmaceutical interventions to know how, where, and to whom to distribute the interventions. such as during a pandemic, when a lack of specific guidance makes it difficult for federal, state, and local officials to plan. For example, in a prior report, we noted that health officials in one state did not know exactly how many individuals were considered a priority for receiving a vaccine. In that case, it took state officials nearly a month to compile data on high-risk individuals, to decide how many doses of vaccine were needed in local areas, and to receive and ship vaccine to counties. CDC’s changes decreased the targeted population from approximately 188 million to 98 million. Surge capacity in public health departments and hospitals will be critical to pandemic response. During a pandemic, hospitals will need to provide care for influenza patients as well as continue providing care for other patients. Seasonal influenza results in more than 200,000 hospital admissions and 36,000 deaths in the U.S. every year, and hospitals were stretched to capacity in some past seasonal influenza outbreaks. pandemic would occur in the context of existing health care provider shortages. 2006, hospitals across the country reported having an estimated 116,000 registered nurse vacancies. Congress passed the Pandemic and All-Hazards Preparedness Act (PAHPA) in December 2006. Nonpharmaceutical interventions are measures used to reduce the impact of a communitywide infectious disease outbreak without the use of pharmaceuticals. Slowing the spread of disease during a pandemic will be particularly important given anticipated shortages of pharmaceutical interventions and the expectation that a severe pandemic would overwhelm the health care system. New admissions, appeared to be useful in Canada’s management of the SARS outbreak. Communication with the public about a public health emergency by federal officials is a critical component of national preparedness. A pandemic will generate immediate, intense, and sustained demand for information. The public will look to CDC as the source for health-related information during the anthrax incidents, but that CDC was not always able to successfully convey the information that it had. In July 2003, we reported that effective communication between health care providers and the public reinforced the need to adhere to infectious disease control measures. Public-sector stockpiles of antivirals are intended to be used primarily for the treatment of sick individuals. HHS intends to oversee the distribution and administration of federally owned pre-pandemic vaccine to individuals identified as members of the critical workforce. HHS recommends that state and local jurisdictions follow its list of targeted groups in administering the pandemic vaccine. But HHS faces challenges with implementing its strategy for using pharmaceutical interventions, such as the lack of vaccine manufacturing capacity within U.S. borders and the length of time experts anticipate will be needed to manufacture a pandemic Vaccine. The appropriate dosage of antivirals or the exact length of the treatment course needed to make them effective will not be known until the actual pandemic-causing strain emerges. There is also the potential for adverse outcomes that may result from large-scale administration of a newly developed vaccine. The government’s success in vaccinating large numbers of the public with the swine flu vaccine was negated by the development of Guillain-Barré syndrome among hundreds of immunized individuals, leading to several deaths. event only became apparent when the vaccine had been administered to large numbers of people. The United States lacks vaccine manufacturing capacity. HHS estimates that it may take as long as 20 to 23 weeks after the start of the pandemic for the first doses of pandemic vaccine to become available. The high costs of purchasing and storing antivirals calls into question HHS’s plan to rely on state and local jurisdictions to acquire and store their own stockpiles of antiviral. In response, HHS is planning to centralize its distribution system through a single distributor. use of pandemic vaccine, but has not finalized guidance for using antivirals and pre-pandemic vaccine. State and local public health officials and others have stressed that federal guidance on target groups is needed to aid in their pandemic planning efforts. HHS has initiated efforts to improve the surge capacity of health care providers, but these efforts will be challenged during a severe pandemic. In a severe Pandemic, existing health-care provider shortages would worsen as providers become infected through exposure to infected patients or reach exhaustion. Care for and monitor patients at home with the use of electronic information and telecommunications technologies. Call centers will allow patients to contact health care providers in hospitals in order to obtain medical advice regarding home care. HHS has issued two guidance documents to assist health care facilities to plan for providing altered standards of care. With altered standards, instead of treating the sickest or most injured patients first, providers would identify and treat patients who have a critical need for treatment and would be likely to survive, authors say. PAHPA calls for HHS’s Assistant Secretary for Preparedness and Response to lead and coordinate HHS emergency preparedness and response activities. PAHPA authorizes HHS to award grants to states to assist in operating public health workforce loan repayment programs. HHS will rely on state and local jurisdictions to utilize nonpharmaceutical interventions to help slow the spread of disease and to lessen the burden on the nation”s health care system until a pandemic vaccine is widely available, the authors say.  restrictions on public activities to combat a pandemic may need to be in place for several months. During the 1918-19 pandemic, nonpharmaceutical interventions were implemented for 2 to 8 weeks. In some cases, the public became fatigued with the interventions, leading to public opposition and noncompliance. These restrictions may have negative impacts on the nation’s economy and on the financial well-being of individual households. A fifth challenge for HHS is the lack of trust by U.S. citizens of public health authorities. of the U.S. population would trust federal government public health authorities as a source for accurate information. Under the National Response Framework, HHS is the lead federal agency for public health and medical services. HHS has named spokespersons within HHS to deliver messages to the public before and during an outbreak. HHS will use a departmental public affairs conference line to provide telephone connections for public affairs staff throughout the department. During a pandemic, the HHS communications effort will operate out of its Emergency Communications Center. HHS has identified some of the critical information that the general public will require during a pandemic. HHS has developed message maps to convey that information in a concise format before an outbreak. HHS manages www.pandemicflu.gov, the official U.S. government Web site for disseminating information on pandemics to the public. Survey: 58 percent of the public in the United States did not know what aPandemic is. The public is less willing or is unable to follow some recommendations that HHS plans to communicate. A severe pandemic, such as that of 1918-19, has the potential to result in widespread illness and death and is expected to overwhelm the nation’s ability to respond. According to HHS, initial batches of the most effective protective measure may take as long as 20 to 23 weeks after the start of the pandemic to become available. We believe that finalizing guidance on the use of pharmaceutical interventions will be crucial for responding to a pandemic outbreak and that the necessary guidance documents should be finalized as soon as possible. of federal medical responders to supplement the number of health care providers. HHS noted that the federal government does not have adequate health care personnel to provide surge capacity. HHS also noted that its planning documents for allocating scarce health care resources were intended as “…planning documents for consideration by communities, not for the purposes of establishing definitive standards” Finally, HHS proposed alternate terms for some of the concepts in our report (we have noted these instances in the report). For example, HHS disagreed with our use of the term “altered standards of care” and said that the more appropriate term is “standards of care appropriate to the situation” its guidance to state and local jurisdictions, we did not make this change. The National Response Framework lays out, in part, the manner in which the federal government responds to domestic incidents. The plan is a guide for an all-hazards response, categorizing the types of federal assistance into specific emergency support functions. Primary and supporting agencies are listed for each emergency support function. The report will be available at no charge on GAO’s Web site at http://www.gao.gov. National Strategy for Pandemic Influenza provides a framework for future planning efforts for how the country will prepare for, detect, and respond to an influenza pandemic. Preparing for and responding to a pandemic will not be purely a federal responsibility; it will primarily be a local response. Homeland Security Presidential Directive-21: Public Health and Medical Preparedness provides a strategy for protecting the health of the U.S. population against all disasters, including a Pandemic. HHS has released five updates regarding the progress of the department’s preparedness efforts. According to HHS officials, it is important to have a stockpile of pharmaceutical interventions, when possible, for use during the early stages of a pandemic. The greatest challenge to preparing for an influenza pandemic is the lack of vaccine manufacturing capacity within the United States. HHS has invested over $1 billion in development of a cell-based approach to influenza vaccine manufacturing, which it claims will modernize the current egg-based production process. According to HHS, it anticipates that a licensed cell- based influenza vaccine will be manufactured in 2010. Report: Federal Agencies Should Continue to Assist States to Address Gaps in Pandemic Planning. States Are Planning for Medical Surge, but Could Benefit from Shared Guidance for Allocating Scarce Medical Resources. Report: Efforts Under Way to Address Constraints on Using Antivirals and Vaccines to Forestall a Pandemic. The Federal Workforce: Additional Steps Needed to Take advantage of Federal Executive Boards’ Ability to Contribute to Emergency Operations. The report was compiled by the Government Accountability Office.