Coal combustion residuals (CCRs) are the inorganic material that remains after pulverized coal is burned. EPA proposed for public comment two regulatory options applicable to the material. The Subtitle C option would create federal standards enforceable by EPA, but likely adopted and implemented by individual states. Another legislative option would amend Subtitle D of RCRA by adding Section 4011, Management and Disposal of Coal Combustion Residuals. and create a permit program for CCR management. The proposed Coal Residuals Reuse and Management Act is being debated in the conference over the transportation reauthorization legislation. Unique to the proposal would be the creation of a permit program in federal statute, absent the promulgation of related federally enforceable standards. Requirements applicable to the program's adoption and implementation would be those created within the amendment to RCRA. It would not authorize the agency with jurisdiction over RCRA's implementation (EPA) to promulgate regulations detailing permit program requirements or regulations applicable to facilities. requirements applicable to the proposed statutory CCR permit program would draw upon selected existing regulations. The report distinguishes between EPA and state agency authorities in regulating nonhazardous solid wastes under Subtitle D. In 2010, 45% of the electricity generated in the United States used coal as its source of fuel. Pulverized coal burned for electricity production generates a tremendous amount of residual inorganic material. in 2010, industry generated more than $1 billion in revenue from the sale of coal-based electricity. As much as 130 million tons of coal fly ash were generated in the United States. Disposal of CCRs on-site at individual power plants may involve decades-long accumulation of waste. In 2008, a breach in a surface impoundment pond at the Tennessee Valley Authority's (TVA's) Kingston, TN, plant released 1.1 billion gallons ofcoal fly ash slurry, covering more than 300 acres. TVA estimates that cleanup will continue into 2014 and will cost $1.2 billion. The Kingston release also brought attention to the fact that the management of CCRs is essentially unregulated at the federal level. The chemical composition of C CRs generated at a given plant depends on the type and source of the coal burned, as well as the combustion technology and air pollution control technology used at the plant. In data maintained by EPA, the agency has identified more than 40 toxic constituents that may be present in CCRS, including antimony, arsenic, barium, beryllium, cadmium, chromium, lead, mercury and selenium. Toxic constituents are present in a waste does not in itself mean that it poses a risk to humans or the environment. The degree to which there is actual risk depends on whether those constituents can find a pathway of human exposure and whether the resulting level of exposure is likely to be high enough to cause harm. Human exposure to contaminants has been demonstrated through the direct discharge or release of liquid waste to surface water. The most common pathway of exposure has occurred through contaminant leaching when the waste was deposited in an unlined landfill or surface impoundment. In March 2000, EPA submitted a draft "Regulatory Determination on Wastes from Fossil Fuel Combustion" In it, EPA stated that CCRs warranted regulation as a hazardous waste under Subtitle C of RCRA. In the wake of events at Kingston, after 10 years of additional study, debate, and controversy, EPA did propose to revise its May 2000 determination. On October 16, 2009, EPA again submitted a proposed regulatory determination to list the material as hazardous waste. In its draft regulatory determination, EPA recognized that its March 2000 proposal was a departure from its previous opinions. high risk of human exposure to carcinogens, such as lead, selenium, and arsenic. The risk assessment showed that CCRs can be managed safely with the use of composite liners. EPA updated its list of damages to include 27 cases of proven damages to surface and groundwater and 40 cases of potential damage associated with the improper management of C CRs. In addition to impacts on human health, EPA's damage cases document adverse effects to plants and wildlife. The threat of a catastrophic release. similar, smaller incident in 2005 in Martins Creek, PA, were considered evidence that current management practices can pose additional risks. EPA determined that 75% of surface impoundments in use today are more than 25 years old. Such units are unlikely to have a liner or groundwater monitoring, and are more likely to leach contaminants. EPA estimated that with an average life expectancy of approximately 31 years, those older disposal facilities would likely continue to operate without necessary protections in place well into the future. EPA's Subtitle D approach to regulating CCR disposal facilities is generally supported by state regulatory agencies and industry groups. EPA would have no direct enforcement authority to ensure facility compliance or to require states to adopt a permit program. Instead, the standards could be enforced by states or citizens, pursuant to RCRA citizen suit authority. The proposed CCR permit program would draw from certain waste management standards promulgated or proposed by EPA pursuant to Sub Title D. It is useful to understand the requirements from which the proposal would be drawn to understand which states would have the primary authority to implement and enforce the proposal. criteria would be those necessary to ensure that ''no reasonable probability of adverse effects on health or the environment'' will result from disposal facilities or practices. The standards would apply to owners and operators of CCR landfills and surface impoundments. If implemented, CCR facilities that fail to satisfy the Subtitle D standards would be operating in violation of RCRA's prohibition of open dumping. EPA would have no authority to require states to adopt and apply them to CCR disposal facilities. Proposed amendment to RCRA would add a Section 4011, Management and Disposal of Coal Combustion Residuals. Under that section, a permit program for the management and disposal of CCRs would be created. States would have the option of adopting a CCR permit program, and EPA would be required to implement the program in states that decline to do so. EPA has stated that, if enacted, all states with coal-fired power plants would likely choose to adopt the CCR program. The proposed amendment to RCRA would create a state-based permit program. It would use the MSW landfill requirements as its basis, but does not direct EPA to develop standards. Congress may give EPA express authority to both promulgate certain standards and enforce them. It is unclear whether a CCR permit program implemented under the proposed Section 4011 would result in a state applying regulatory standards to CCR landfills or surface impoundments that would differ appreciably from those it currently applies. First and second columns in Table A -1 list existing regulatory criteria applicable to MSW landfills. The third column lists CCR Permit Program Specifications included under the "Minimum Requirements" and "Revised Criteria" that would apply to the permit program in the proposed Section 4011 of RCRA. It is unclear whether or to what degree a state's CCR permit program would be comparable to an approved MSW permit program (as defined under current law) If a state did choose to apply those criteria to owners and operators of CCR structures, implementation would still likely be significantly different. As a result, the identification of comparable provisions that are not included among the requirements applicable to the permit program proposed in statute would likely not apply to a state's program or may be applied at its discretion. The identification of similar provisions is a way to determine whether a state has a permit program that is similar to the one proposed in the statute. The state's permit program may be similar to that proposed by the federal government, but not the same as the state's permitting program, the law says. The law could be applied in a variety of ways.