GPRA is intended to shift the focus of government decisionmaking, management, and accountability from activities and processes to the results and outcomes achieved by federal programs. Under GPRA, annual performance plans are to clearly inform the Congress and the public of the annual performance goals for agencies’ major programs and activities. These annual plans, issued soon after the transmittal of the president’s budget, provide a direct linkage between an agency's longer-term goals and mission and day-to-day activities. Annual performance reports are to report on the degree to which performance goals were met. Justice fell short of achieving its performance targets for four measures. Overall progress made by Justice toward achieving less drug- and gang- related violence is difficult to ascertain. Three of nine performance measures did not have fiscal year 2000 targets to measure success. Justice’s responsibilities are divided among a number of major components, including the DEA, FBI, INS, the Office of Justice Programs (OJP), and the United States Marshals Service (USMS), as well as the Department of Justice. Justice did not set performance targets for these measures because it considered two of the measures to be new measures. Justice did not want to set performance levels because it believes that setting performance targets could cause the public to perceive law enforcement as engaging in “bounty hunting” or pursuing arbitrary targets merely for the sake of meeting particular goals. Justice fell short of achieving the performance targets. for four measures. For example, although close, Justice didn't meet its performance target to dismantle Asian criminal enterprises. perform 4.81 million criminal background checks. Justice did not meet its performance target to prevent 140,244 persons with criminal backgrounds from purchasing firearms. Justice reported that only 27 states have become full participants in the National Instant Criminal Background Check System. In an April 2000 report, we reported that the states generally are better positioned than the FBI to conduct background checks and that there are potential barriers to states participating in NICS.. Justice’s performance report does not articulate the implications of potential barriers. Justice reported that in fiscal year 2000, it had initiated 19,549 new Interpol cases and entered into 8 treaties. Justice noted that it had not met its performance targets for these measures because there are a number of outside entities that have key roles in these efforts. Justice did not discuss any actions that it might take to mitigate the effects of external factors. If the intent is for all states to participate, agencies should show how strategies will be implemented, the report said. The report suggested that to improve the usefulness of annual plans, agencies show how Strategies will be deployed. used to achieve goals that include describing approaches to leverage or mitigate the effects of external factors on the accomplishment of performance goals. Justice’s strategies and initiatives to achieve less drug- and gang-related violence generally seem reasonable and clear. Justice could improve its performance strategies by exploring potential coordination efforts that might be used to mitigate external factors and by considering the use of performance evaluations to better assess its progress toward achieving the outcome, the authors say. They suggest that Justice could compare the relative effectiveness of programs using a program evaluation approach to provide an indication of its progress. Justice fell short of achieving the performance targets for three measures. Justice did not include specific strategies or goals for mitigating the implications of FBI and OCDETF resource constraints. Justice’s strategies and initiatives to reduce the availability and/or use of drugs generally seem reasonable and clear. Justice reported that it has developed a number of programs through which investigators can coordinate. However, the plan does not include strategies for enhancing or measuring the contribution of these programs to the overall achievement of the outcome of the drug war. fully gauge because the measures did not enable us to assess progress toward achieving this planned outcome. Justice did not explicitly discuss the reason for missing the performance target for average case processing time, but implied that it was a resource issue. Justice’s performance report indicated data limitations and efforts to improve the accuracy and timeliness of the data. In a May 2001 report, we said that aliens face long waits for a resolution to their case and have difficulty obtaining accurate information on how long they can expect to wait. We recommended that INS develop the capability to begin to calculate and report actual processing times. strategies and initiatives do not sufficiently discuss achieving the outcome to provide timely, consistent, fair, and high-quality services. INS has quality standards that it is using as a measure, but the performance plan does not articulate the specific quality standards. Justice did not discuss the implications of using strategic human capital management as a strategy to help achieve this outcome even though one performance target was not achieved until resources were realigned. Thus, the deployment of available staff appears to be critical to achieving the timeliness performance targets. Justice identified that it is deploying CLAIMS 4 software to field offices in fiscal year 2001. The performance report does not explain how the information technology improvements will contribute to achieving better INS services. Overall progress made by INS towards achieving this outcome is difficult to fully gauge because INS has a new performance measure for which there was no fiscal year 2000 performance target, and the other two performance measures did not enable us to assess progress. In our February 1999 report, we note that the listing of current programs and initiatives that were often included in agencies’ plans were useful. Justice did not set a performance target for high-priority border corridors demonstrating optimum deterrence. Justice’s strategy to secure U.S. borders from illegal immigration does not adequately discuss integration of resources to achieve the outcome. Justice exceeded, by a significant number, its performance targets for intercepting undocumented offshore travelers en route to the United States. The agency does not believe that overseas efforts have produced long-term impacts because training that INS personnel provided to foreign air carrier and law enforcement personnel diminished within a few months. Justice's fiscal year 2000 report and fiscal year 2002 plan address concerns, recommendations. Justice’s performance report included historical data to provide perspective on its progress. Justice identified personnel skills that supported each strategic goal, but did not discuss whether it needed to acquire or develop staff to meet agency needs. Justice did not address human capital strategies in relation to achieving programmatic outcomes for drug trafficking organizations and providing timely processing of naturalization applications. The plan does not explain how the strategies are mutually reinforcing, nor does it explain common or complementary performance indicators. can explore the benefits of a program as well as ways to improve program performance by examining a broader range of information. For example, a program evaluation was conducted of an INS border control initiative in El Paso, Texas. Operation Hold the Line was a new INS enforcement approach introduced in 1993. The evaluation collected data to assess the effects on illegal and legal crossings, business activity, crime, education, births, and the use of social services. It also looked at the effects of Operation Hold The Line on a number of outcomes. The fiscal year 2002 performance plan clearly identified the OIG management challenges and Justice designated areas of material weaknesses. The plan does not consistently identify our recommendations or concerns in relation to achieving goals and performance measures. The agency outcomes that were used as the basis for our review were identified by the Ranking Minority Member of the Senate Committee on Governmental Affairs as important mission areas for the agency. The major management challenges confronting Justice, including the governmentwide high-risk areas of strategic human capital management and information security, were identified in our January 2001 performance and accountability series. Justice: Report focuses heavily on what its performance report and plan do not discuss. Justice believes that our report does not focus on improvements the agency has made. Justice acknowledged that the outcomes we used in our analysis were prescribed. But other than the example Justice cited in its comments, the historical data for the other measures did not clearly demonstrate improvements. We addressed many of the improvements that Justice made under the section comparing the performance report, plan with the previous year’s report, and plan. We revised the text to include the historicalData regarding reported improvement to reduce the processing time of naturalization cases. Justice believes that the outcome of reduced availability and/or use of illegal drugs is not part of its mission. If drug trafficking organizations are disrupted and dismantled, clearly this will affect the availability of drugs on the street. Justice believes that its performance measures have matured over time and indicated that it has discontinued old and old and outdated goals and measures. In our opinion, reducing drug- and gang-related violence is part of Justice’s mission, but only four of its measures should have been used in our analysis. added new measures as appropriate. Since some measures are new in fiscal year 2002, performance targets did not exist for the fiscal year 2000 plan. Nevertheless, Justice reported on its accomplishments by providing historical data for fiscal years 1999 and 2000 whenever possible. Justice believes that this is particularly significant for two outcomes: (1) timely, consistent, fair, and high-quality services provided by INS and (2) U.S. borders secure from illegal immigration. It believes that it is unfair for us to report that its performance was not considered sufficient to assess progress merely because there was no performance target to measure. believes that it is particularly discouraging for the managers and analysts that worked to develop a measure which Justice believes is an excellent example of reporting outcomes. Justice believes that the format used in appendix I of our report did not lend itself to an accurate description of its performance report and plan. In the column describing how Justice assessed its progress in resolving the management challenges, we sometimes indicated that progress relative to a management challenge was not discussed. Justice suggested that, where appropriate, we should indicate in the report column that information about a particular challenge is included under the “plan” column. Department of Justice's fiscal year 2002 performance plan includes goals and measures to address the challenges that we and the OIG identified. Justice officials pointed out that progress for these management challenges are not discussed in the fiscal year 2000 performance report because there were no goals, measures, or strategies in the plan. Of the agency’s 19 major management challenges identified by us and Justice's OIG, Justice's performance plan (1) had goals and Measures that were directly related to ten challenges; (2) had a goal but no measures that were indirectly applicable to two of the challenges. goals and measures related to two of the challenges, but discussed strategies to address them; or (5) had no goals, measures, or strategies toaddress four of the challenge. or (6) discussed strategies, but did not have goals or measures to address two or more of the Challenges. The challenges were to improve the quality of life for people living in the U.S. and to reduce the number of people who live in poverty. For more information, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/29/health/healthcare/focus-on-the-poor/index.html#storylink=c.