The National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2008 (NDAA) directed DOD to establish centers of excellence for traumatic brain injury and post-traumatic stress disorder. Senior-level DOD officials convened representatives from the Army, Navy, Air Force, Marines, and Department of Veterans Affairs to determine how to establish the centers. Informally, this group was known as the “Red Cell’ and its primary mission was to address recommendations related to PH and TBI. According to one representative, the Red Cell also debated whether to establish a combined center for both TBI and PH. The military services, TMA, and DCOE receive PH and TBI funding through the Defense Health Program (DHP) appropriation account. The Army received the largest portion of funds, about $279 million or 44 percent, while DCOE received approximately $168 million or 26 percent. In fiscal year 2010 a total of $638 million in DHP operations and maintenance funding was allotted for PH, TBI across the military services. Of all PH andTBI funding allotted, $96 million or 15 percent was suballoted to component centers within the DCOE network. DOD budget formulation occurs in the programming phase of the Planning, Programming, Budgeting and Execution Process. DCOE had a limited role in budget decision making for the fiscal year 2012 POM process. Ultimately, senior DOD officials decided to fund 1 of 18 PH and TBI requests, which did not include DCOE’s. For this POM, DCOE headquarters solicited and received budget requests from component centers.. The relationship between component centers and DCOE and the missions of two component centers, T2 and the National Intrepid Center of Excellence (NICOE), were unclear. Congressional hearing expressed differing visions of DCOE’s mission. Members voiced concern about the amount of time needed to establish DCOE and achieve results. DCOE is a relatively small entity and it does not typically appear in DOD DHP budget presentation materials. While PH and TBI information is reported to congressional decision makers, DCOE specific funding and activities are not visible. The Government Performance Results Act (GPRA) Modernization Act of 2010 further requires agencies to consult with the congressional committees that receive their plans. The committee provided a draft of this report to the Secretary of the Department of Defense for official review and comment. The Assistant Secretary of Defense of Health Affairs and Director of TRICARE Management Activity provided us with written comments, which are summarized below and reprinted in appendix III. DOD concurred with all of our recommendations. DOD stated that DCOE is appropriately informed of budget execution data through formal systems, as well as informal coordination and managerial reporting. The data provided for fiscal year 2010 remain incomplete and the information provided has not been sufficient to confirm its accuracy or reliability. unable to describe the process used to identify and resolve errors in source data from multiple financial systems. TMA stated that it could not confirm the accuracy of data from financial systems it does not administrate. This raises questions about DCOE and TMA’s oversight and use of these data to inform budget formulation. DOD agreed with the recommendation to expand its review and analysis process to include component centers. But it did not plan to include two component centers, the Center for the Study of Traumatic Stress and the Centre for Deployment Psychology. of DCOE, DOD appropriations acts from fiscal years 2007, 2008, 2009, and 2010, and accompanying committee reports. We reviewed DCOE’s mission, strategic goals, and performance measures. We interviewed officials at Health Affairs, Force Health, Protection and Readiness, and the Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences. We conducted this performance audit from June 2010 through June 2011 in accordance with the National Defense Authorization Act on PH conditions and TBI. The Defense Health Program appropriation includes three accounts, Operations and Maintenance, Procurement, and Research, Development, Test and Evaluation. Six directorates carry out activities related to psychological health conditions and traumatic brain injury. GAO: Evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. DOD was not readily able to provide us with basic information on funding and obligations. The data provided for fiscal year 2010 remain incomplete and the information provided has not been sufficient to confirm its accuracy and reliability. Accurate and reliable status of funding data should be used as the starting point to inform, justify, and prioritize future budget requests. common understanding of budget terminology, such as allotments and obligations. DOD provided numerous revisions to data provided after February 15, 2011, and continued to do so even in comments to the draft of this report. DOD was unable to describe the process used to identify and resolve errors in source data from multiple financial systems, and TMA stated that it could not confirm the accuracy of data from financial systems it does not administrate. In addition to the individual listed above, Carol M. Henn, Assistant Director; Erinn L. Sauer; Michael Aksman; Alexandra Edwards; Robert Gebhart; Jyoti Gupta; Chelsa Gurkin; Felicia Lopez; and Steven Putansu made major contributions to thisReport.