The 1967 President’s Commission on Budget Concepts recommended a dual system of accounting for federal receipts. Congress grants agencies authority to spend offsetting collections either through permanent or current appropriations. Offsetting receipts offset budget authority and outlays, but at a level other than at the expenditure account. The agencies we reviewed increased the overall amount of fees they collected and these fees constituted a larger proportion of their budgets in fiscal 1991 than in fiscal 1996 among the 27 agencies among the agencies we examined. The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service's migratory bird conservation activities are funded through appropriated offsetting receipts. appropriated to carry out provisions of the Central Valley Project Improvement Act. The Congress increased the reliance of the U.S. Mint and INS on user fees, though not to the extent of the agencies noted above. Most new user fees enacted in fiscal years 1991 and 1996 were funded by user fees. With four agencies, the percentage of their budgets funded through user fees remained stable between fiscal years1991 and 1996. In fiscal year 1996, the. U.s. Mint was restructured to operate with a single revolving fund. between fiscal years 1991 and 1996 were designated as offsets to discretionary spending for BEA purposes. In fiscal year 1991, 6 of the 27 agencies, the Postal Service, APHIS, SEC, NRC, INS and FCC, had 90 percent or more of their total spending classified as discretionary spending. By fiscal year 1996, four additional agencies, PTO, NTIS, FTC, and the Panama Canal Commission, had more than 90 percent of theirtotal spendingclassified as discretionary. Spending for two of these additional agencies went from 100 percent mandatory spending to 100 percent discretionary spending by 1996. The current trend to net fees against spending at the account or agency level offers agencies some stability, even potential growth. Fee-reliant agencies face management issues not faced by those that depend primarily on general fund appropriations. Agencies’ reliance on fees may raise expectations that these agencies will be self-supporting, the authors say. They ask: What rules make sense for comparable types of activities? What are the best ways of presenting user fees in a unified budget that will be inclusive and consistent? that is, offsetting that results from business-like activities, does not inhibit tradeoffs between programs or limit congressional flexibility in decision-making. This type of spending is self-controlling. A clear line between governmental and business-type activities is even less likely to be applied in the future given the overwhelming benefits of offsetting under BEA discretionary spending limits. We are sending copies of this report to other interested Members of the Congress and the Director of the Office of Management and Budget. We will make copies available to others on Fees for business or regulatory services to the public provided a significant and continuing source of funding. Twenty-seven agencies met our criteria. We defined our universe of fee-reliant agencies using the following criteria: (1) fees from the public must be used to support the agency that generated the fee, (2) services, goods, or benefits must be provided in exchange for fees and the exchange should be closely linked in time, and (3) budget authority from fees must represent 20 percent or more of the budget. agency’s gross outlays from federal sources averaged over fiscal years 1991 through 1996. This excludes offsetting collections and associated outlaysfrom federal sources. Insurance and retirement programs were excluded because of the delay between when a fee is paid and when there is a pay out. Certain accounts of the agencies we identified as fee-reliant were excluded from subsequent analyses. The Funds for Strengthening Markets, Income, and Supply account was excluded because most of its funding is transferred to other programs, principally child nutrition. account were excluded from Federal Communication Commission totals. The 27 agencies span 7 of the 13 appropriations subcommittees. To review the classification and treatment of fees in budget accounts, we used OMB codes created for the President’s annual budget request. We also conducted interviews in six agencies: Agricultural Marketing Service, National Technical Information Service, Nuclear Regulatory Commission, Patent and Trademark Office and U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. This work describes overall trends in 27 fee-financed agencies, but is not generalizable to all agencies with fees. Table III.1 shows the change in classification from fiscal year 1991 to fiscal year 1996 for accounts in the 27 agencies we reviewed. Four agencies showed decreases in spending classified as discretionary, while spending classifications for nine agencies in our survey did not change. Table includes only those agency accounts that have fees from the public. An agency may have additional accounts that only get general fund appropriations or were excluded as noted in appendix I. Revolving funds include public enterprise and trust revolving funds. The Budget Enforcement Act of 1990, as amended, divided spending at the budget account level into two broad categories: discretionary and mandatory. sequestration had occurred in fiscal year 1996, all of FCC’s budget authority in its Salaries and Expenses account would have been subject to sequestration. However, without the need for sequestration, only $59 million, or the net budget authority, is counted as discretionary spending. Current and permanent appropriations refer to the timing of legislative action in making budget authority available to an agency. When budget authority is enacted permanently, it is available until spent. Such authority can be the result of substantive legislation or appropriations acts. Spending authorized as permanent increased for 13 of the 27 agencies in our survey. Twelve other agencies did not see changes in the percent of the their funding classified as either permanent or current. GIPSA and APHIS had small declines in funding from what was permanently appropriated. NTIS received small appropriations in fiscal years 1993 and 1995. Under the broadest definition of the term, a department, agency, or instrumentality of the U.S. government is under the jurisdiction of authorizing committees. There are six types of federal budget accounts and all can receive user fees from the public. General Fund Accounts are composed of all federal funds not allocated to any other account. Special Fund Accounts: These accounts record receipts collected from a specific source and earmarked by law for a specific purpose. Nonrevolving trust fund accounts finance programs such as Social Security, Medicare, and Superfund. The basic forms of budget authority include the following: Appropriations: An act of the Congress that permits federal agencies to incur obligations. Borrowing Authority: Statutory authority that permits a federal agency to make payments for specified purposes out of money borrowed from the Treasury. year in which it ends; for example fiscal year 1998 is the year beginning October 1, 1997, and ending September 30, 1998. The purpose of the IOAA, also called the “User Charge Statute,’ was to distribute the costs of government services to those who received benefits beyond those provided to the general public. The statute gave agencies for the first time broad statutory authority to set fees through administrative regulation. Any fees collected under this authority are deposited in the general fund of the Treasury and not credited to the agency. transfer of funds made to liquidate a federal obligation. Outlays also occur when interest on the Treasury debt held by the public accrues. Also, under credit reform, the credit subsidy cost is recorded as an outlay when a direct or guaranteed loan is disbursed. Under the Budget Enforcement Act, the principle that all direct spending and tax legislation enacted after BEA for a fiscal year must be deficit-neutral in the aggregate. If the Congress enacts direct spending or receipts legislation that is not deficit- neutral, it is not considered an expenditure. causes a net increase in the deficit, it must offset that increase by either increasing revenues or decreasing another direct spending program in the same fiscal year. This requirement is enforced by sequestration. Federal Electricity Activities: The Federal Government’s Net Cost and Potential for Future Losses, Volumes I and II. Intellectual Property: Fees Are Not Always Commensurate With the Costs of Services (GAO/RCED-97-113, May 9, 1997). Food-Related Services: Opportunities Exist to Recover Costs by Charging Beneficiaries. Airport and Airway Trust Fund: Issues Related to Determining How Best to Finance FAA. GAO issues a list of newly available reports and testimony each day. To receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days, please call (202) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone. Orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent. The U.S. General Accounting Office is located at 37050 4th St. NW, Washington, DC 20013. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org.