In cases of significant differences with the President over foreign policy, especially deployments of U.S. military forces abroad, Congress has generally found that use of its Constitutionally-based "power of the purse" to be the most effective way to compel a President to take actions. Congress has used funding cutoffs or significant restrictions on the use of funds as a means of ending or circumscribing use of military personnel for foreign operations. During the last years of the Vietnam War era, Congress used such cutoffs and restrictions to curtail or terminate the President's use of US military force abroad. There were a number of efforts in Congress to restrict military actions by the United States in the Indochina region. Nearly all of these proposals did not pass more than one House of Congress due to vigorous opposition from the President to them. Those that did succeed in enactment into law are as follows: On December 22, 1970, Congress cleared the Special Foreign Assistance Act of 1971. On July 1, 1973, the President signed H.R. 9055 , P.L. 93-50 ; 87 Stat 99, the second Supplemental Appropriations Act for FY1973. More recent examples of congressional funding limitations aimed at preventing or reducing U.S. military deployments overseas relate to Somalia and to Rwanda. Since its enactment in 1973, there is no specific instance when the Congress has successfully utilized the War Powers Resolution. Every President from President Nixon forward has taken the position that the Warpowers Resolution is an unconstitutional infringement on the authority of the President, as Commander-in-Chief, to utilize the Armed Forces of the United States. Within one year of enactment.within one year after enactment. President Reagan signed P.L. 98-119 on October 12, 1983. 241 U.S. Marines in Lebanon were killed on October 23, 1983 by a suicide truck bombing. On February 7, 1984, President Reagan announced the Marines would be redeployed. On March 30, 1984,. reported to Congress that U.s. participation in the Multinational Force in Lebanon had ended. It is also important to note that President Reagan signed the resolution after the Marines had been killed. President Bush deployed U.S. military personnel to Saudi Arabia in 1990s. Bush's actions were taken without express authorization by Congress. In 1991, Congress passed H.J.Res. 77, Authorization for Use of Military Force Against Iraq. President Bush signed bill on January 14, 1991, but didn't say he needed Congress' support for his actions, author says. He says he did not characterize request for "congressional support" for actions as a request for authorization of them. Controversy over U.S. military involvement in Kosovo led to an effort to use the War Powers Resolution as a means to address the question of whether the President could order combat activity abroad in the absence of Congressional authorization. Congress also attempted to use denial of funding for the Kosovo operation. Part, characterized its action as a requisite "authorization" for the President to take military action abroad. The House of Representatives passed H.R. 1569 on April 28, 1999, by a vote of 249-180. The Senate tabled S.J.Res. 20 on May 4, 1999. area of hostilities occur after 60 days in the absence of congressional authorization to continue, or a presidential request to Congress for an extra 30 day period to safely withdraw. The President did not seek such a 30 day extension, noting instead that the War Powers Resolution is constitutionally defective. Although not directly analogous to efforts to seek withdrawal of American military forces from abroad by use of funding cutoffs, Congress has used funding restrictions to limit or prevent foreign activities of a military or paramilitary nature. As such, these actions represent alternative actions. Controversy over U.S. covert assistance to paramilitary forces in Angola led to legislative bans on such action. Congress provided for a ban in permanent law in the International Security Assistance and Arms Export Control Act of 1976. In 1984, controversy over assistance to the opponents of the Nicaraguan government led to a prohibition on such assistance in a continuing appropriations bill. This legislative ban is summarized below. The continuing appropriations resolution for FY1985, P.L. 98-473 , 98 Stat 1935-1937, provided that no funds available to the Central Intelligence Agency, the Department of Defense, or any other agency or entity of the United States. after February 28, 1985, if the President made a report to Congress specifying certain criteria, including the need to provide further assistance for "military or paramilitary operations" prohibited by this statute, he could expend $14 million in funds. If Congress passed a joint resolution approving such action, the President could spend the money. The President could use the money to pay for military operations that were prohibited by the statute. The funds could be spent on military operations in Iraq, Afghanistan, or elsewhere in the world.