PSI is a multinational effort to prevent the trafficking of WMD, their delivery systems, and related materials. U.S. agencies are involved in the PSI as a set of activities, rather than a program. International participation is voluntary, and there are no binding treaties on those who choose to participate. According to the principles, PSI participants use existing national and international authorities to put an end to WMD-related trafficking and take steps to strengthen those authorities, as necessary, State says. The administration has not issued a directive to U.S. agencies that perform PSI functions to take actions to expand and strengthen PSI. The administration issued a required PSI implementation report to Congress in July 2008, 5 months after the mandated issuance date of February 2008. The report does not fully specify the steps taken to implement GAO’s previous recommendations or other provisions of the law. The agency has not submitted a PSI budget report for fiscal year 2009 detailing PSI-related expenditures in the past 3 fiscal years. State and U.S. law enforcement agencies do not all have the policies, procedures, or budgets in place to facilitate their participation in PSI activities. DOD has taken more steps to address some of the law’s provisions, such as establishing clearer PSI policies and procedures, structures, and budgets, compared with other agencies such as State and law Enforcement agencies. U.s. agencies have not established performance indicators to measure the results of PSi activities. The revised Joint Staff guidance does not clearly address some areas of COCOM responsibility. State placed responsibility for PSI in the Office of Counter Proliferation Initiatives. The FBI has budgeted $40,000 to support staff travel costs to PSI meetings and exercises for fiscal year 2008. The Coast Guard has not established a PSI funding line and uses operational funds to travel. PSI exercises, multilateral PSI planning meetings and workshops are focused on law enforcement issues, including customs, and legal authorities to detain and detain cargo of shipboardings and cargo inspections. These officials said that law enforcement agencies are key participants in PSI activities. countries, instead of their militaries, are increasingly participating in PSI exercises. According to agency officials, it can be challenging to find countries willing to exercise PSI law enforcement issues with the U.S. military. Constitutions or political considerations of some countries preclude their military’s involvement in exercises with a law enforcement component. For example, one COCOM planned to add a PSI component into an existing DOD military exercise, but the foreign country participants refused to allow such a component to be added. None of the agencies participating in PSI activities has established performance indicators to measure the results of their activities. U.S. agencies have not built and expanded relationships in the same way with their counterparts from the more than 70 PSI countries who are not invited to these meetings. According to DOD, multilateral PSI planning meetings are to be held three to four times annually as delegations from 20 leading PSi countries (including the United States) meet to consider ways to enhance WMD interdiction capabilities of PSI participants. consent to board and search each other’s vessels suspected of carrying WMD and related materials. Since PSI was announced in 2003, the U.S. has signed a total of nine PSI shipboarding agreements. In addition, the United States helped negotiate an amendment to the Convention on the Suppression of Unlawful Acts Against the Safety of Maritime Navigation. The amendment created an international framework for nations that are party to the amended convention to board ships believed to be engaged in WMD proliferation. U.S. agencies, with other members of the International Civil Aviation Organization, are currently examining ways to amend the Montreal Convention of 1971. The FBI sponsored a workshop in 2006 to train law enforcement officials from the 19 other leading PSI countries to identify WMD items. According to State and DOD officials, the departments have not developed a formal, written strategy to resolve interdiction issues. The administration has only partially addressed the provisions of the Implementing Recommendations of the 9/11 Commission Act of 2007. State concurred with our second recommendation, recognizing the need to deepen the involvement and knowledge of all PSI endorsing countries. State maintained that a PSI directive is not necessary to strengthen and expand PSI because an existing WMD interdiction process created by a classified National Security Presidential Directive is sufficient. State said that foremost among future plans of the leading PSI countries that attend the multilateral meetings is to focus on regional PSI activities and outreach workshops to increase the participation of those PSi countries who are not invited to attend. the number of countries endorsing PSI, the number and complexity of PSI exercises, and the conclusion of PSi shipboarding agreements as indicators to measure PSI performance. A good internal control environment calls for agencies to create their own means to monitor and evaluate their own efforts to identify areas needing improvement. We reaffirm the recommendation from our 2006 report that DOD and State should better organize their efforts for performing PSI activities. It is not feasible or effective to develop a single comprehensive written strategy to deal with issues arising after interdictions because every interdiction must be dealt with on a case-by- case basis. that are beyond the control of the United States, as noted in our 2006 classified report. State also stated that it has policies and procedures in place for PSI activities, although they are not recorded in a single document. We are sending copies of this report to interested congressional committees. We also will make copies available to others on request. In addition, this report will be available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staff have any questions about this report, please contact me at (202) 512-8979. We assessed the extent to which the administration issued a PSI directive, a sense of Congress provision in the law, and submitted to Congress required PSI- related reports. We reviewed various documents produced by the U.S. delegation to multilateral PSI planning meetings. We interviewed officials and military personnel at five DOD Combatant Commands (COCOM) We discussed how DOD manages and coordinates its involvement in PSI activities, including preparation and execution of PSI components within existing DOD exercises, as well as stand-alone PSI exercises. The PSI is a response to the growing challenges posed by the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction (WMD), their delivery systems, and related materials worldwide. PSI participants are deeply concerned about this threat and of the danger that these items could fall into the hands of terrorists. The increasingly aggressive efforts by proliferators to stand outside or to circumvent existing nonproliferation norms, and to profit from such trade, requires new and stronger actions by the international community. They call on all states concerned with this threat to international peace and security to join in similarly committing to interdiction efforts. The following multilateral PSI planning meetings are also known as Operational Expert Group (OEG) meetings: 1. Brisbane, Australia (July) 2. Paris, France (September) 4. London, United Kingdom (October) 5. Washington, D.C., United States (December) 1. Ottawa, Canada (April) 2, Oslo, Norway (August) 3, Copenhagen, Denmark ( July) 3. Hamburg, Germany (November) – Regional OEG meeting 1. Auckland, New Zealand (March) 2,. Rhodes, Greece ( October) GAO: U.S. Agencies Have Taken Some Steps, but More Effort Is Needed to Strengthen and Expand the Proliferation Security Initiative. DOD and State should take steps to increase cooperation and coordination between the United States and the more than 70 PSI countries who are not invited to multilateral PSI planning meetings. GAO Statement: The Administration has not issued a PSI directive that directs agencies to establish clear PSI authorities, responsibilities, policies and procedures, including budget requests for PSI activities. strategy to resolve interdiction issues. U.S. agencies have developed tools and use standard procedures to plan and execute interdictions, officials say. "We have not found it feasible or effective to develop a single, comprehensive written strategy," they say. Each case is unique and must be dealt with on a case-by-case basis depending on the specific circumstances, they add. The involvement of the U.s. delegation at the multilateral meetings is part of an attempt to resolve these issues. State has an existing structure but does not have policies, procedures, or a budget in place for PSI activities. The PSI is based on the concept of cooperation and coordination among PSI partners in countering WMD- related trafficking. State updates its PSI plans and strategies frequently to take developments into account. State has provided funding to support four complex interdiction-related PSI exercises hosted by PSi partners Poland and Ukraine, as authorized under section 504(a) of the FREEDOM Support Act. meetings of the 20-nation OEG are not based on or involved with establishing legal obligations, so it is meaningless to refer to compliance mechanisms in this context. The operational experts meet to discuss and resolve issues related to interdictions, and to plan exercises and outreach events. This forum for experts to meet regularly with their counterparts from other countries has proven very valuable for strengthening the PSI network. We are working on ways to expand the benefits of the OEG to all PSI countries by holding more regionally-focused meetings. GAO: Existing WMD interdiction process covers how U.S. agencies should coordinate efforts. GAO: Process predates creation of PSI and does not cover PSI involvement in three broad PSI activities: multilateral planning meetings, exercises, and other outreach efforts. State has not worked with DOD to implement the second recommendation from our 2006 report, as called for in the law, GAO says. State said that it has PSI policies and procedures that are not recorded in a single document. PSI exercises, State has not requested funds necessary for PSI-related activities, as called for in the law. This statement was based on information from U.S. agency officials. We have added information to the report noting the 2009 PSI events DOD will be sponsoring. In addition to the individual named above, Godwin Agbara, Assistant Director; Ian Ferguson; Yana Golburt; Helen Hwang; and Lynn Cothern made key contributions to this report. The following are GAO's comments on the Department of Defense’s letter dated October 10, 2008.