On December 16, 2014, the President signed into law the Consolidated and Further Continuing Appropriations Act of FY2015 ( P.L. 113-235 ), which included $3.066 billion for the Department of Housing and Urban Development's Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) program. The CDBG program is the federal government's largest and most widely available source of financial assistance supporting state and local government-directed neighborhood revitalization, housing rehabilitation, and economic development activities. The Obama Administration's budget request for FY2015 included $2.870 billion for activities funded under HUD's CDF account.  RIPIGs would have been competitively awarded to states, counties, metropolitan regions, and cities to support metropolitan-wide housing, transportation, economic development, energy, and land use planning. The Administration again proposed the creation of Project Rebuild, a $15 billion program that would build upon the success of the Neighborhood Stabilization Initiative. This was envisioned as a multi-agency initiative involving the Department of Transportation, the Environmental Protection Agency, and other federal agencies. It was the same amount requested, but not funded, in the FY2014 appropriations cycle. The CDBG Section 108 Loan Guarantee program allows states and entitlement communities to borrow up to five times their annual allocation for a term of 20 years. The Administration's budget proposed a loan commitment ceiling of $500 million in FY2015. FY2015 marked the first year the program charged a fee to access the program rather than provide a credit subsidy. The fee-based requirement to use the program, which was created by Congress, is expected to be lifted in the coming months. The program is designed to help communities affected by the mortgage foreclosure crisis acquire, rehabilitate, demolish and resell abandoned and foreclosed residential properties.  HUD published two notices regarding the Section 108 fees in the Federal Register. The first of the two established a fee of 2.42% of the principal obligation of the loan, which will be applied to Section 108 loan disbursements during FY2015. The second notice included proposed rules that would govern the levying of fees when appropriations for credit subsidies are not available or insufficient in future years. The department set March 9, 2015, as the due date for comments on the proposed regulation.was first floated by the Administration in its FY2010 budget request, was not approved by Congress until the FY2014 appropriations. On December 16, 2014, the President signed into law the Consolidated and Further Continuing Appropriations Act ( P.L. 113-235 ), which included appropriations for the Department of Housing and Urban Development ( HUD) The bill appropriated $45.4 billion in gross discretionary appropriations, including $3.66 billion for CDBG activities. Of the amount appropriated $3 billion is to be allocated to CDBG. The House approved an amendment that would have prohibited HUD from terminating the CDBG entitlement status of any community. The $3 billion CDBG formula grants appropriation represents a 7% increase above the Administration's request and a 1% decline below the $3.030 billion appropriated for FY2014. The act also set aside $66 million for the Indian CDBG (ICDBG) program. Of the amount set aside for ICDBG projects, $6 million was to be made available to undertake mold remediation and prevention in Indian housing. P.L. 113-235 also supported a fee-based loan commitment ceiling of $500. The act continued funding of capacity building activities, but under a separate account. P.L. 113-235 did not support the Administration's request to transfer the Section 4 program from its current account to a new stand-alone account. The act also included CDBG-related provisions included in House or Senate bills, including a provision prohibiting a community from exchanging or transferring its CDBG allocation to another community in exchange for non-CDBG funds. It did not appropriate funding for the administration's Neighborhood Stabilization Initiative proposal. use of CDF funds for Economic Development Initiative and Neighborhood Initiative projects. Last funded in FY2010, these are two programs that had been used exclusively for congressional earmarks. In addition, FY2015 CDF appropriations were not to be used to fund projects under the Rural Innovation Fund, or discretionary activities authorized under 42 U.S.C. ยง5307. The Obama Administration's budget request for FY2014 included $3.143 billion for activities funded under HUD's CDF account. The requested amount represented 6.6% of the $47.6 billion in budget authority requested by the agency. 112 th Congress) noted that the SCI was unauthorized and did not have the support of the committee of jurisdiction, the House Financial Services Committee. Instead, the bill recommended just over $2 million in HUD's Management and Administration account for activities related to the closeout and evaluation of previously awarded SCI awards. In response to the mortgage foreclosure crisis that began to unfold in 2007, Congress passed a series of measures intended to assist states and local governments address the growing inventory of abandoned and foreclosed residential properties. The proposal would have allowed funds to be used for activities such as acquisition, demolition, clearance, and land banking. The CDBG Section 108 Loan Guarantee program (Section 108) allows states and entitlement communities to collateralize their annual CDBG allocation. Communities may borrow up to five times their annual allocation for a term of 20 years through the public issuance of bonds. The proceeds from the bonds must be used to finance activities that support job creation and that meet one of the national goals of the CDBG program. yields on U.S. Treasury obligations of similar maturity to the principal amount. The Administration proposed revamping the program by charging a fee-based assessment to borrowers accessing the program. This proposal was first made by the Administration in its FY2010 budget request, but it has been rejected by Congress. The HUD proposal would have allowed loan guarantee borrowers to fold the proposed fee into the loan guarantee amount or to use CDBG funds to pay the fee. The proposal was made in the Administration's FY2013 budget request. On January 17, 2014, President Obama signed the Consolidated Appropriations Act for FY2014, P.L. 113-76. The bill recommended $3.295 billion for activities funded under the CDF account. The House Appropriations Committee reported the THUD Appropriations Act on July 2, 2013. H.R. 2610 would have appropriated $10 million less than the $70 million recommended by the Senate or requested by the Administration for Indian tribes. It did not include language supporting an Administration proposal that would have established a minimum CDBG allocation. The act does continue funding of Section 4 (Capacity Building for Community Development and Affordable Housing) activities at $35 million. The act does not support transferring the program from its current account, the Self-Help and Homeownership Opportunity account, to a new stand-alone account, as requested by the Administration. Nor did the act include language supporting the Administration's proposal that would have established a minimum CDBG allocation. HUD is directed to develop rules governing the imposition of a fee-based assessment to borrowers accessing the program, which would eliminate the need for an appropriated credit subsidy. million be set aside to provide technical support for the development of a residential energy modeling system. The Administration's budget proposed doubling the program's loan commitment ceiling from $240 million in FY2012 to $500 million inFY2013. The proposed increase in funding will help local governments finance large-scale job creation activities. In addition to an increase in the loan. commitment ceiling, the Administration proposed revamping the program by charging a fee-based. assessment to borrowers accessing the program, which. would be charged a fee. would have eliminated the need for an appropriated credit subsidy. The House bill did not support the Administration's budget request calling for the conversion of Section 108 loan guarantees to a fee-based structure. H.R. 5972 did not include a set-aside of CDBG funds to support a new round of funding for SCI activities. The bill recommended just over $2 million in the Management and Administration account for activities related to the closeout and evaluation of previously awarded SCI awards. The 113 th Congress took up the task of completing the FY2013 appropriations process. On March 6, 2013, the House approved H.R. 933 , a bill providing full-year, government-wide appropriations for FY2013. The bill proposed continuing funding for the CDF account, including CDBG formula grants, at the FY2012 levels, reduced by an across-the-board rescission of .098% and proposed maintaining the funding reductions imposed by the sequester. The President signed into law P.L. 113-6 , the Consolidated and Further Continuing Appropriations Act, 2013. a Joint Select Committee on Deficit Reduction to develop a federal deficit reduction plan for enactment by January 15, 2012. On January 2, 2013, the President signed the American Taxpayer Relief Act, P.L. 112-240 , (ATRA), which averted scheduled income tax rate increases and postponed spending reductions required by the sequestration process. According to the Office of Management and Budget, sequestration has resulted in an $85 billion reduction in FY2013 discretionary spending, including a 5% reduction in funding for CDF activities.