Recent Congresses have considered legislation to establish a national water commission. Questions arise about the scope and effect of the 1973 National Water Commission report. The responsibility for development, management, and allocation of the nation's water resources is spread among federal, state, local, tribal, and private interests. Congress has generally deferred to the states' primacy in intrastate water allocation.. The report provides an overview of key issues and recommendations identified by the NWC; it neither covers the entire NWC report nor provides an exhaustive assessment of progress. concept of state primacy in water allocation or controlling water management decisions. Congress has not enacted any comprehensive—or overarching—change in federal water resources management or national water policy since 1965. Congress, which represents local interests, often has reacted to proposals to change or reorganize water organizations and institutions as attempts to exert federal control over state and local matters. Any attempt to untangle the complexities of current water policy involves many constituencies with differing interests, and becomes politically difficult to sustain, authors say. The National Water Commission was created by Congress in 1968 to "provide for a comprehensive review of national water resource problems and programs" Congress specifically tasked the Commission to (1) review present and anticipated national waterResource problems, including making projections of water "requirements" and alternative ways of meeting such requirements. (2) consider economic and social consequences of water resource development; and (3) advise on such specific water resource matters as might be referred to it by the President and the then-existing Water Resources Council. Members of Congress from the Pacific Northwest objected to proposals to transfer water from the Columbia River Basin to supply the needs of states in the Southwest. A political compromise was reached to create a commission to study water resource problems. The National Water Commission was made up of seven members appointed by the President. None was allowed to be a federal employee, but some, including chairman Charles F. Luce, had formerly held senior positions in the federal government. Members were chosen largely for their expertise in a variety of areas. fields related to water resource management. No special interests were required to be represented. Progress has been made on addressing many of the problems identified by the Commission. But few actions can be directly traced to the Commission's 1973 recommendations. In 1978, the report's executive director, Theodore Schad, noted that the report had remained in "limbo," awaiting mandated action from the WRC and final transmission from the President to the Congress. It appears these actions [WRC] have not yet been taken. comments and recommendations from the President to Congress] will never be taken. President Nixon became preoccupied with his defense against the Watergate scandals which ultimately led to his resignation. The Ford administration occupied itself with the Section 80 study of water policy. And the Carter administration appears to have accepted Santayana's comment as its precept [that "those who cannot remember the past are condemned to repeat it" The change from federal grants to loans for local water quality activities is consistent with the Commission's recommendation for an end to such grants. In 1973, the National Water Commission published its final report, Water Policies for the Future. The Commission found that many of the country's water policies were based on outdated goals and objectives. The report was based on hundreds of documents, special studies contracted by the Commission, eight public hearings, and other meetings. Despite the evolution in water policy, many problems identified by the commission remain today, authors say.. The influence of a commission may lie in how its recommendations combine with other drivers to create support for an evolution in policy, they say. Many of the water and natural environment concerns raised by the NWC have been addressed via implementation of environmental laws at their infancy in 1973. Many of the largest current federal water actions are attempting to address environmental or species concerns through ecosystem restoration and stream rehabilitation. Whether these recent efforts will perform as planned and whether the federal-nonfederal collaboration central to many of them will function effectively and efficiently remains a question. The Commission's recommendations ranged across numerous fields, including reservoir development, flood policy, estuaries and the coastal zone. The Commission supported greater application of "users pay" and "beneficiary pays" approaches. Cost recovery remains part of the ongoing discussions of the proper federal role in water policy. The elements of the final report that addressed water pollution control were some of the most controversial, chiefly because the Commission rejected some key concepts that Congress had recently adopted in the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972 (P.L. 92-500; 33 U.S.C. §1251 et seq.) the Clean Water Act (CWA). The draft final report was released one month after enactment of that major law. The Commission rejected the zero discharge goal and the core regulatory approach central to the CWA. The CWA is viewed today as one of the most successful environmental laws in terms of achieving its statutory goals. The need to adequately fund pollution control activities, highlighted in several recommendations, also remains a challenge for policymakers, the Commission also said. It said the Commission made observations that remain valid about the extent of water pollution problems, despite water quality improvements since then. focused on the scarcity of water as a resource and adapting to more efficient use and allocation. It suggested that procedural mechanisms and legal regulations, including adjustments to water rights, be implemented to ensure that water was used efficiently and effectively. Congress has enacted legislation protecting social and noneconomic values while respecting the state-based water rights frameworks. Many states also have modified their water rights systems to protect social values. The Commission described water supply in the West as limited and near full appropriation, and it framed the Indian water rights issue as a conflict in theWest between Indian rights to water and water development. The Commission found that future water requirements could not be fully assessed without taking into account how water resources are governed and what institutional structures guide their management, use, and allocation. The Commission predicted a less significant role for large-scale federal project development than in the past. It concluded that federal investment in water resources projects was inefficient for achieving regional economic development. It noted that important non-quantitative issues and judgments were buried in the analysis of some plans, and that federal planning requirements for states were costly while producing unclear state benefits. The discount rate for federal water projects is the one-year average yield of long-term government securities. Some economists argue that the rate should reflect displacement of private investment. The benefits of moving to a different rate, which may affect the evaluation and selection of a project, and federal participation in it, continue to be debated. In the late 1990s, the Western Water Policy Review Advisory Commission (WWPRAC) recommended a pilot program using a tiered or "nested" approach to water resources governance. Since 1992, Congress has authorized and funded the Corps to provide technical assistance for municipal water and wastewater projects in selected locations. Congress created a Reclamation program to investigate opportunities for water reuse in the West. Federal agency participation in state and local planning efforts has been constrained by the focus of the budget and appropriations process on specific projects, rather than broader planning efforts. Some states, such as California, Texas, and Florida, have undertaken their own planning efforts, often geared toward water supply augmentation and drought management. Commission found that project development needs tended to dominate over concerns about the potential environmental impacts of a project. The Commission recognized NEPA as a potential tool to include environmental concerns in the decision-making process. Since 1973, NEPA's procedural requirements may have become clearer, but the overall process is more complicated for reasons that have little to do with NEPA itself. To integrate compliance with any environmental requirements, agencies must prepare the EIS with any federal permits, licenses, or certification required to implement the project. The Commission found the then-active WRC an important and useful mechanism. It recommended changes to help the WRC better fulfill its roles of coordinating and appraising water policies and programs. The Commission recommended combining NOAA and USGS into a new DOI agency responsible for water resources data. The WRC has not been funded or active since 1983; however, the authorization for the W RC still exists.. Since 1973, significant shifts have occurred in the federal water resources institutional arrangements and organizations; but the federalist division of responsibilities has remained largely intact. Review of federal water projects also has experienced many shifts since 1973. There is no entity that independently reviews water projects by all federal agencies. The Corps has maintained its construction program, although not at its 1960s level. Reclamation too has moved more toward management and has a less substantial construction function than it did in the 1950s and 1960s..within watersheds and between states has been constrained by the focus on specific projects. What remains of the federal planning assistance generally is a few programs scattered among several agencies. Reclamation has adopted a new mission statement recognizing its increased role in water resources management vis-à-vis construction. Recent Reclamation efforts have included working with other DOI, federal agencies, and nonfederal parties, including Tribes. The challenge of accomplishing organizational changes like the Commission's NOAA recommendations was seen when the Secretary of the Interior in the mid-1990s attempted to consolidate the biological research being conducted by DOI's various agencies into a single agency. The effort was met with much resistance and skepticism, eventually being scaled back. Dam repair and safety remain areas of growing engineering and construction. Congress has authorized and appropriated funds for Corps participation in municipal drinking water and wastewater projects. In an effort to define the scope of the Corps' involvement in the growing area of ecosystem restoration, the G.O.P. Commission has recommended limiting Corps design and construction activities to those that cannot be efficiently performed by nonfederal entities. The Commission's recommendation has not been a criterion used during authorization and appropriations. The Corps has worked with states and local agencies to carry out engineering works to improve flood control. The Bush Administration in recent budgets used as one of its criteria for restoration projects that the Corps be uniquely well suited to perform the work. The Commission's recommendation to increase the Corps' nonfederal assistance actions has not been implemented. The Corps has retained its Planning Assistance to States program and its Flood Plain Management Service, which in recent years have averaged roughly $6 million each in annual appropriations. In the mid-1970s, the Corps received roughly $30 million for regional planning and planning assistance to states. Since 1973, the amount of the federal budget dedicated to all types of water research has been halved. Aspects of water resources have remained scattered across congressional committees. Without the WRC, CEQ at times and other ad hoc mechanisms have been used to arbitrate and coordinate among federal agencies on water issues. The Commission found that the steps by which separate branches of government conceived and executed water resources projects needed to be closely linked, or coordinated, to efficiently use the nation's water and fiscal resources. initiated by congressional appropriations. There has been no requirement that new construction starts that were authorized many years prior be re-evaluated. The backlog of construction authorizations created tension between the G. W. Bush Administration, whose Corps budget concentrated funding on a smaller set of projects, and Congress. An argument for concentrated appropriations is that the lower funding levels that individual projects receive under the distributed approach delay construction progress. Those supporting a more distributed appropriations process argue that a geographical and jurisdictional dispersal of projects maintains the currency and relevance of the Corps' mission. Annual federal appropriations for water resources projects followed a declining trend after the mid-1960s. The Commission found that the federal government insufficiently addressed ecological processes and environmental values in its water project and permitting decisions. Many of the concerns raised by the NWC have been addressed via implementation of environmental laws. Few new large-scale U.S. reservoirs are currently under construction, although some are being considered. There is no requirement to protect the overall function of ecosystems and some argue that no such requirement is needed. The Commission called for collecting and organizing a broad range of data on the condition of the nation's water. The Commission report suggested including not only water quantity and quality factors but also geological attributes, soil properties, riparian vegetation, fisheries and climate factors, aesthetics, related land uses, and recreation use. Although a national concern, the Commission report also called for the creation of a federal agency to manage the water resources of the U.S. and to provide information to the public about the state of water resources. Some basic water flow data are being collected on a national level. The streamflow program is based on partnerships with local sponsors and is not comprehensive. Data are also collected on wetland losses due to human activities such as agriculture, urban development, and water resources projects. The USGS also works with states to estimate water withdrawals and assess water quality in various water bodies. But overall levels of federal funding and the number of stream gages have declined in recent years.. Attempts have been made to better coordinate data collection and improve the quality of NWC recommended analyzing the environmental impacts of water resources proposals. NEPA implementation has resulted in a more comprehensive environmental analysis of project plans. Non-federal interests play a much larger role than previously, and in some cases have become active "partners" in the decision-making process. Water resource planning continues to be criticized for a narrow focus on national economic development benefits or specific development objectives and insufficient evaluation and weighing of environmental and social concerns (such as public safety and social equity) The 110 th Congress called for the Secretary of the Army to update water resources planning principles and guidelines to better account for the environment. adaptive management is the process of incorporating new scientific and programmatic information into the implementation of a plan. It is a management approach that allows flexibility to adjust strategies during implementation if goals are not being met or if new circumstances arise. The use of adaptive management in water resources to date has largely been limited to select restoration efforts and has yet to be used across all types of projects and their operations. Concerns with using adaptive management include the potential for cost growth of restoration efforts, the delegation of decisions to agency staff or even nonfederal parties. WRDA 2007 also added monitoring as an authorized activity for many specific Corps projects. The impact of these provisions remains unknown, due to the early stage of their implementation. The Corps and the Federal Emergency Management Agency are the principal federal agencies involved in programs to reduce riverine and coastal flood damages and risk. The Commission found that despite significant investments to reduce flood damages, annual flood losses grew and people continued living in harm's way. It recommended federal efforts that: encourage floodplain management that maximizes national economic, social, and environmental welfare. WRDA 2007 may be an early step in a reorientation of flood policy if its provisions are implemented. Since 1973, numerous legislative provisions and administrative actions have addressed flood risk. Many of these have seen only marginal implementation, enforcement, and funding. Current arrangements of aid, insurance, and water resources projects are criticized for providing disincentives to "wise use" of flood-prone areas. The 110 th Congress, in WRDA 2007, called for the Secretary of the Army to update water resources planning guidance. Concerns continue to be raised about the degree of subsidization under the NFIP and the financial foundation of the program. Reorganization of emergency response, in particular the placement of FEMA within the Department of Homeland Security, remains a topic of much debate. Hurricane Katrina, levee breaks in California and Nevada, and the 2008 Midwest floods have increased the recent debate about the program and its funding. In 2006, an independent review working group released its evaluation of the NFip. The recommendations are among other changes that have been considered, but not enacted, as part of recent NFIP legislation. how to manage flood, coastal, and aging infrastructure risks. What is an acceptable level of risk, especially for low-probability, high-consequence events? Who should bear the costs to reduce these risks? The policy issue is how to use limited fiscal resources to address a wide range of concerns, they say. The challenge is to structure actions and programs so they provide incentives to limit flood-prone lands to their best use, the authors say, without infringing on private property rights or usurping local decision making. Levee overtopping and failure contribute to approximately one-third of all flood disasters. A large percentage of locally built levees are poorly designed and maintained. How to address levee reliability and various levels of protection is a current issue that did not receive much attention in the Commission's report.WRDA 2007 builds on some post-Katrina actions that supported developing a levee inventory. It requires the Corps to establish and maintain a database with an inventory of the nation's levees by 2009. Drought in many parts of the country also is drawing attention to options for capturing and treating urban stormwater as a potential water supply. Stormwater is increasingly being seen as a resource (e.g., for reuse), rather than only for its negative effects on water quality and urban flooding. Estuaries are considered some of the most biologically rich areas on earth. Many animal species rely on estuaries for habitat, especially for places to spawn or nest and for nurseries to support early life stages and juveniles. Over half of the U.S. population now lives in coastal watershed counties. Commission found that the nation's estuaries and shorelands had been "subjected to massive physical modification" Several pieces of legislation have been enacted and programs implemented to protect the coasts and Estuaries since 1973. The type of integration envisioned by the Commission was constrained by the contraction of large-scale water resource planning efforts in the 1980s. The National Estuary Program (NEP) arguably have caused the most significant movement toward the Commission's recommendation. especially to urban and rural development have been substantially slowed and even slightly reversed nationally in recent years. The same trends are not occurring in coastal areas, where data indicate that coastal watersheds have been losing a substantial amount of wetlands. The Commission identified the negative environmental effects of channelization as an issue. Since the Commission's report, most federal channelization efforts, such as those at USDA and the Corps, have been abolished or gone unfunded. Some plans using channelization are still developed as components of flood damage reduction, navigation, and other federal projects. The Commission found that water projects often had been planned and developed with little regard for fish and wildlife impacts. The Commission expressed concern that state and federal legislation at the time might not fully address these impacts. Today, there are many more threats to fish and. wildlife resources than impacts from federal water project development. These threats include destruction of habitat due to. other development, invasive non-native species, climate variability and change, and. pollution, the FWS notes. The NWC may have contributed to improvements, but indirectly. 1983. The NWC recommendation supporting more fish and wildlife research at a national level has not been implemented. There is, however, greater understanding than existed in 1973 of how certain types of water projects such as reservoirs can affect fisheries and other species. For example, in the Columbia River Basin, considerable research has been done on the effects of water infrastructure on fisheries and habitat. Similarly, much research has done on fisheries affected by Reclamation projects in California and elsewhere. Insufficient scientific understanding of when, how much, and the quality of the water needed to sustain fisheries continues to plague some conflicts. for fish and wildlife resources on non-federally managed waters, similar to the FWCA on federal projects. State efforts are aided by federal programs, some of which have been strengthened since 1973. Chapter 15 identified a host of negative effects associated with what the Commission termed "deficiencies" in federal cost-share policies. Taken together, effects of the identified deficiencies can best be described as "negative effects" of federal cost share policies on sport fishery resources, conservation, and restoration. as inefficiencies in federal water resources management. The negative effects of these issues were found to be numerous. The Commission recommended many changes in federal cost-share policies. Specific recommendations include recovery of federal costs and ensuring that project beneficiaries pay proportional development and operating costs for water programs or activities. The recommendations are too numerous and context-specific to address in this analysis; but a few major topics (inland navigation, irrigation water supply, and municipal water and wastewater treatment) are discussed in separate sections below. of projects unless there is some social benefit to a federal "subsidy" Concerns over appropriate levels of nonfederal and federal cost share, their consistency across agencies and water resource purposes, remain today. While it may be an efficient way to allocate scarce federal resources, instituting "beneficiary pays" or "users pay" fee policies remains difficult politically. The determination of appropriate cost shares for federal water resource projects, and to some degree for water quality infrastructure, continues to be an issue in federal water policy and management. The Commission recommended that inland waterway users, both freight and pleasure craft, be charged a user fee set to recover all operation and maintenance costs. The Commission recommended a uniform fuel tax plus a lockage fee to be phased in over ten years. Congress enacted the Inland Waterways Revenue Act ( P.L. 95 - 502 , §202; 26 U.S.C. 4042) which imposed a 4 cents per gallon fuel tax on freight barges beginning in 1980. Congress has resisted attempts to raise inland waterways user charges. Congress has debated the level of user fees for waterways. Equity and economic arguments can be made for imposing a full cost-recovery user fee. Rail and pipeline industries, which compete with the barge industry, finance their infrastructure without public funds. If barge rates are subsidized, the nation incurs a higher overall cost for freight, authors say. fees, congestion tolls, lockage fees, per ton-mile fees, and combinations are among the options, they say. Reclamation Act of 1902 authorized the construction of projects to provide water for irrigation in western states. Originally, Reclamation projects were to be financed through the sale of public lands. In 1982, Congress enacted Reclamation Reform Act of 1982 (RRA; 97 - 293), which addresses some acreage limitation issues. In 1992, RRA increases the acreage limit for water users who comply with the new law, while allowing others to remain under "priororor" law. For those electing to comply, the new water limit was raised from the original 160 acres under the original law. included in CVPIA, as well as new fees to support fish and wildlife restoration and mitigation; however, these provisions apply only to the CVP. Tiered water pricing provisions of the C VPIA—intended to encourage water conservation—remain particularly controversial. In sum, while Congress addressed some aspects of both acreage limitation and the interest subsidy in 1982, these issues remain "third-rail" policy issues when it comes to Reclamation oversight. For example, 25 years after the 1973 NWC report, the Western Water Policy Review Advisory Commission made similar recommendations. The National Water Commission issued a report on water quality in the U.S. The report noted that proper pricing would conserve scarce water supplies. Water utilities and systems vary widely in adoption of conservation- or efficiency-oriented rate and pricing policies. The issue remains a concern for federal policymakers, the report says. toxic pollutants can harm human health and the environment even when present in very small amounts, says the NWC.. The Commission made a number of recommendations related to water pollution control. It noted that existing monitoring and surveillance programs were inadequate. The 1972 Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments (FWPCA; P.L. 92-500) were controversial. The goal of zero discharge of pollutants into the nation's waters by 1985 was not attained by 1985. The fundamental policy and programmatic approach to water pollution control adopted in the 1972 act remains central to the CWA. The need to adequately fund pollution control activities, highlighted in several recommendations, also remains a challenge for policymakers, authors say.. The CWA is viewed today as one of the most successful environmental laws in terms of achieving its statutory goals, they say. P.L. 92-500 greatly expanded what previously had been a fairly small program of grants to aid construction of municipal sewage treatment plants. The issue of how large the federal assistance role should be and how long it should continue remains contentious. The grants program continued through 1989, and it has now been replaced by a revolving loan fund program. To be effective, planning must be done on a regional or areawide basis, ideally incorporating water quality, water supply, other resource planning, and other planning. The National Water Commission called for waste management planning to be done on a larger scale than purely local bases. States today are at the forefront in establishing long-term water management plans. The Commission advocated shared federal and state responsibility for designing and implementing water pollution control policy. The federal government establishing national policy, and states (and localities) carrying out day-to-day implementation.. Monitoring and data collection to aid understanding of water quality trends and to help inform better decisions in the future. The Commission recommended a major role for the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) through a comprehensive water quality monitoring surveillance network. Monitoring activities today are carried out by all levels of government and nongovernmental entities. Information gleaned from these data are used to inform policymakers and the public about the status and trends of water quality. The Commission also identified needs for research in several areas, such as technology development, alternative waste treatment and disposal methods, and methods of controlling nonpoint sources of pollution. Shortages of adequate resources are a chronic problem for implementation of public policies. Congress and the President should be prepared to fully fund all activities. States and localities should fully fund their activities, the Commission said. The Commission made a number of other observations and related recommendations in areas that were fully addressed in the 1972 FWPCA and have been integral to CWA programs since then. It is unclear why these observations and recommendations were not addressed in 1972 and remain relevant to the CWA today.  issues drew the Commission's attention, unless the Commission anticipated that the new statutory provisions would not be implemented. Water rights traditionally are regulated by states, rather than the federal government. Depending on individual state resources and historic development, it may use one of three water rights doctrines: riparian, prior appropriation, or a hybrid of the two. Under the riparian doctrine, a person who owns land that borders a watercourse has the right to make reasonable use of the water on that land. Under a prior appropriation system of water rights, users apply for a permit from a state administrative agency. The Commission on Water Resources looked at water rights in the U.S. It said water supply is limited and should yield the highest return to social well-being. The Commission's recommendations fell into three categories: transfer of water rights, recognition of social values in water. The recommendations were directed toward state governments, as well as states, as states regulate water rights. system allows water users to acquire well-defined rights to water as a limited resource that requires planning to avoid scarcity, authors say. The Wild and Scenic Rivers Act of 1968 allowed the federal government to ensure protection of certain waters from development. The legislation has been both of general application and specifically targeted to certain federal water projects. In 1992, Congress enacted the CVPIA, which amended the original authorization for the Central Valley Project to include consideration of fish and wildlife preservation. The act allows the government to recognize aesthetic and recreational values of the rivers and prevent uses that would diminish those values, principles reflected in the Commission's recommendations. The CVPIA specifically allocated 800,000 acre-feet of project water for fish and wildlife purposes. While there has been limited action to encourage water transfers, no blanket national policy has been declared in accord with the Commission's recommendations. Because the law of water rights, including the specific system that a state uses, is a matter of state discretion, the federal government's action is limited by principles of federalism. A number of traditionally riparian states have modified their systems to account for permitting concerns. State-federal tensions over proper and respective roles and responsibilities in water resource development, management, and allocation, continue to cloud resolution to the most difficult water resource issues. Expectations for a commission to directly achieve changes in a system resistant to transformation may be unreasonable. Instead the influence of a commission may be how its recommendations combine with other drivers to create sufficient support for an evolution in policy.of overall benefits to the nation. Signed into law on January 1, 1970, the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA; P.L. 91-190) declared a national policy to protect the environment. NEPA establishes the basic framework for integrating environmental considerations into federal decision making. With an initial absence of regulations specifying implementation procedures, federal agencies reacted in different ways to NEPA's requirements. In the 1970s, many agencies had difficulty complying with the law. In an effort to standardize an increasingly complicated NEPA process, President Carter directed CEQ to issue regulations that would be legally binding on federal agencies; final regulations became effective on July 30, 1979. The CEQ regulations were intended to be generic in nature. with the intent of NEPA. NEPA is a federal law that aims to make it easier for states to legalize marijuana. The law was passed in 2010 and has been in effect since 2012. It was designed to allow for the production of marijuana in states with high levels of marijuana use. For more information on NEPA, visit www.nepa.gov. For confidential support, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org.