The major federal securities laws that form the basis for the regulation of securities in the United States were enacted in the wake of the stock market crash of 1929. These acts include the Securities Act of 1933, the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, and the Investment Company Act of 1940. Other important securities acts were passed late in the 20 th century and early in the 21 st century. The Insider Trading Sanctions Act of 1984, the Insider Trading and Securities Fraud Enforcement Act of 1988, the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2010 (Dodd-Frank), the Stop Trading on Congressional Knowledge Act of 2012. The Securities Act of 1933 makes it illegal to offer or sell securities to the public. A registration statement becomes effective twenty days after it is filed with the commission. The registration statement consists of two parts: the prospectus and the exhibits. Certain transactions and securities are exempted from the registration process under the 1933 Act. The Securities Exchange Act of 1934 is concerned with the ongoing process of disclosure to the investing public through the filing of periodic and updated reports with the SEC. The Investment Company Act of 1940 was enacted to protect investors who use others to manage and diversify their investments. "Insider trading" is the term used to refer to trading in the securities markets while in possession of "material" information. Insider Trading and Securities Fraud Enforcement Act of 1988 expanded the scope of civil penalties to control persons who fail to take adequate steps to prevent insider trading. Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 was enacted to address the perceived problem of an increase in frivolous shareholder lawsuits.investment adviser. An investment adviser may be registered by filing specified information with the SEC. The SEC may bring an action in U.S. district court to seek a civil penalty. The penalty may be up to three times the profit gained or loss avoided. stated reasons for bringing these lawsuits were varied. Some of the lawsuits had merit because some corporate managers had misled or defrauded investors. Some lawsuits were deemed frivolous and were brought when, for example, the share value of a corporation went down for reasons having nothing to do with the culpability of corporate managers. The act limits shareholder lawsuits in federal courts by such actions as having the court appoint a lead plaintiff determined to be the most capable of adequately representing the interests of class members. It also guarantees that plaintiffs receive full disclosure of settlement terms. The Securities Litigation Uniform Standards Act of 1998 (SLUSA) was enacted in response to the perceived failure of the Private securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 (PSLRA) PSLRA had set out a framework for bringing securities fraud cases in federal courts. SLUSA attempted to make certain that plaintiffs could not avoid the PSLra requirements by allowing a securities fraud case to be brought only in a federal court and only under a uniform standard if five criteria are satisfied. The lawsuit is a covered class action. The claim is based on state statutory or common law. The Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 had its genesis early in 2002 after the declared bankruptcy of the Enron Corporation. The act establishes a Public Company Accounting Oversight Board, which is supervised by the SEC. It also requires additional disclosures for public companies and the officers and directors of those companies. Among the other issues affected by the act are securities fraud, internal assessment of the companies, and internal audit of the public companies that are audited by accounting firms. It became law after the WorldCom scandal became known in late June 2002. Dodd-Frank effected the most significant changes to financial regulation since laws enacted in response to the Great Depression of 1929. Title VII of Dodd-Frank concerns the regulation of the over-the-counter swaps markets. Title IX, "Investor Protections and Improvements in the Regulation of Securities," sets out new powers of the SEC. Title XV requires the SEC to issue rules involving the disclosure by publicly traded companies of various minerals originating near the Democratic Republic of the Congo that are benefiting armed groups in the area. amends various titles of the U.S. Code, such as titles 5, 7, and 15, to prohibit Members of Congress and employees of Congress from trading stocks based on inside information. The JOBS Act is intended to encourage the funding of small businesses and startups by easing various securities reporting requirements. Among its seven titles, Title I, concerning emerging growth companies, and Title III, concerning crowdfunding, may be of special note. An emerging growth company, defined to apply to a company with a market capitalization of more than $1 million, is considered a growth company. Title III exempts certain companies from the 1933 Securities Act's registration requirements if various requirements are met. The companies are allowed to phase in various SEC regulations over a period of time and may confidentially submit to the SEC a draft registration statement for nonpublic review prior to public filing. The company must have.total annual gross revenues of less than $1 billion, is allowed to.phase in certain SEC regulations, and is allowed. to submit a draft. registration statement to theSEC fornonpublic review. must be sold through a funding portal, such as a website. must be sold to the public through a website or other form of public funding. Must be sold via a public website or another form of funding.must be sell through a fund-raising portal, like a website, or through a public fund-funding portal,such as a site. Must have a minimum selling price of $1,000. must have a waiting list of at least three months. Must not be more than one year old. must not be sold in public.