NextGen and SESAR envision an airspace system in which network-based information and automation optimize an aircraft’s operation in all phases of flight. Prescripted e-mail-like messages would replace routine voice communications between air traffic controllers and pilots. Navigation procedures used will be based on the performance capabilities of the aircraft. Each airplane will transmit and receive precise information about its position and the position of other nearby aircraft, as well as the time at which it and others will cross key points along their paths. ADS-B uses satellite signals along with aircraft avionics to transmit the aircraft’s location to ground receivers. ADS-B incorporates an aircraft-mounted transmitter and receiving units on the ground, about the size of a minirefrigerator. It can be placed nearly anywhere, such as on cell phone towers or on oil rigs in the Gulf of Mexico, where radar coverage does not reach.to retire, over time, up to 50 percent of secondary radar and reduce associated maintenance costs. FAA has the primary responsibility for developing, and managing the transition to, and implementing NextGen. The EU has divided SESAR into three phases, but in contrast to FAA’s government-centric approach to NextGen, it has provided a participatory role for the private sector. The differences in characteristics between the United States and the EU contribute to differences in how they manage their respective modernization programs, the authors say. They say FAA is focusing on making the most of technologies and procedures that are already available. FAA and SJU officials highlighted the Atlantic Interoperability Initiative to Reduce Emissions as an example of international collaboration. In 2007, the European Commission and FAA began collaborating to demonstrate how using NextGen/SESAR air traffic management techniques can lead to emissions and fuel savings. Tests at Honolulu and Anchorage International Airports showed that use of Optimal Profile Descent could save a total exceeding 8 million gallons of fuel and 167 million pounds of COplan, FAA and EUROCONTROL said. FAA and the European Commission signed a new MOC in March 2011. The MOC provides more specific direction on collaboration and governance as NextGen and SESAR move forward. The 2011 MOC establishes the main principles of cooperation and governance for NextGen. It also establishes a Joint Committee that is responsible for the MOC’s effective functioning and for evaluating its implementation. The list of research topics was developed during meetings among FAA, EUROCONTROL, SJU and the EU. FAA and SJU are working with ICAO to facilitate interoperability with other countries beyond the United States and the EU. These standards will allow equipment manufacturers to offer solutions that meet both NextGen and SESAR requirements, increasing the size of their markets and driving down costs. FAA officials in the ATO’s International Office, as well as those responsible for NextGen planning and integration, told us that many other countries do not have the resources to develop their own systems or procedures. between NextGen and SESAR, as the United States and EU have worked together to feed the block upgrade process. The tight deadlines imposed by this initiative provided the impetus for continued U.S.-EU interaction in the working groups, on an informal basis, before the formal collaborative procedures were established by the 2011 MOC. Effective collaboration increases the likelihood that organizations can communicate substantive information, reach joint agreements, and implement those agreements. Organizations can use their strategic and annual performance plans as tools to drive collaboration. establishing mutually reinforcing or joint strategies to achieve the outcome. establishing compatible policies, procedures, and other means to operate across agency boundaries. agreeing upon respective roles and responsibilities. identifying and addressing needs by leveraging resources. developing mechanisms to monitor, evaluate, and report the results of collaborative efforts. reinforcing individual accountability for collaborative efforts through agency performance management systems. and reinforcing agency accountability through agency plans and reports. The 2011 MOC defines the terms and conditions for mutual cooperation and sets forth the procedures by which FAA and SJU can establish cooperative research and development activities. FAA and SJU have assigned priorities such as “immediate” or “on hold,’ to these coordination plans. Those areas that do not have an immediate need for harmonization are deferred in favor of those with a more urgent need, such as data communications. SJU would like to see Data Comm implemented by 2018, while a senior FAA official believes it will take until 2023 at the earliest. FAA’s plans called for implementing an interim communications system as a step toward this future system. FAA and SJU have defined their roles and responsibilities for NextGen and SESAR collaboration, including how the collaborative effort will be led. FAA officials noted that U.S. and EU experts have prior experience leveraging each other’s research. FAA hopes to reduce the resources that each organization would otherwise require if it were to develop a solution in isolation. The 2011 MOC lays out a structure of jointly led and staffed coordination plans through which each side can leverage the resources of the other. The joint RTCA/EUROCAE special committees leverage the knowledge of officials representing NextGen, SESAR, and industry interests. For instance, representatives from FAA and EUROCONTROL, avionics manufacturers, U.S. Department of Transportation, and organized labor participate in the joint committee on Data Comm. Companies that traditionally compete for sales, such as Boeing and Airbus, or Raytheon and Thales (avionics manufacturers), work together in these joint committees. develop standards for air traffic management systems. These U.S. and EU companies want to operate in each other’s markets. They believe that they can save resources if the standards are harmonized. FAA and EUROCONTROL have a Coordination Committee under the MOC to oversee the FAA/EUROCON TROL action plans. The 2006 MOU called for FAA and the European Commission to try to meet at least every 12 months to review the functioning of the MOU. FAA has a long history of collaboration with the EU, but it has not detailed these efforts or outcomes in these publications. FAA’s strategic plan for 2009 through 2013, known as the Flight Plan, lacks any detailed information on these efforts. Stakeholders representing U.S. airlines, the aviation industry, and European avionics manufacturers told us that they were aware that work was progressing to ensure the interoperability of systems. But they were not aware of specific details of the MOC. Some stakeholders expressed skepticism about whether or when the future benefits of NextGen and SESAR will be realized. FAA and SJU have been wrestling with airlines’ hesitancy to equip with NextGen/SESAR technologies. Some of the key benefits, such as increased efficiency, are not realized when landings are delayed at congested airports. Airline confidence that there will be Next Gen/SesAR benefits over the long term is an important element in NextGen-SESar implementation. capacity and more direct, fuel-saving routing will not be realized until a critical mass of equipped aircraft exists. Because the first airlines to equip with the new technologies will not realize immediate benefits, it is difficult for an airline to make a business case showing that the near-term benefits of equipping will outweigh the cost. Efforts to reduce the federal debt could decrease the funding available to FAA for both collaboration and NextGen system development, potentially slowing the schedule for harmonization and adding to stakeholders’ skepticism. Cuts in system development budgets could also delay the schedule for harmonization and the realization of interoperability benefits. FAA officials told us that they normally absorb funding cuts by eliminating or delaying programs. A delay in implementing GBAS would require FAA to continue using the legacy Instrument Landing System, which does not provide the benefits of GBAS. The FAA may have to stop its work on GBAS while SESAR continues its GBAS development, with the result that SESar may have an operational GBAS, while FAA does not. that GBAS would provide, according to these officials. Such a situation could further fuel stakeholder skepticism about whether FAA will follow through with its commitment to implementing NextGen. FAA did not report on the impact of cuts on air traffic control modernization, including both the delayed benefits and the increased costs of maintaining legacy systems longer than originally planned. We recommended that FAA provide information about the ramifications of budget proposals to help congressional decision makers anticipate the effects of their decisions and to manage stakeholders’ expectations. annually report this information to Congress, as well as the potential effects of any budget or schedule slippages on the overall transition to NextGen. FAA established a new appendix to its Capital Investment Plan, which FAA provides annually to Congress and to the public over the Internet. The appendix includes each acquisition’s original and current budget and schedule, as we recommended. While the 2011 MOC follows several of the key practices that we have found can help to enhance and sustain collaborative efforts, it is still in the early stages of implementation. GAO: FAA and Europe jointly developed systems that were either not implemented or were implemented differently by each side. GAO: The absence of effective collaborative practices does not guarantee failure, nor does their presence ensure success. The real test of the MOC’s effectiveness will come when NextGen and SESAR move toward final decisions about implementing solutions and system components, the report says. The report will be available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. We also obtained perspectives from high-level U.S. and European stakeholder associations representing airlines, airports, as well as airframe and equipment manufacturers. In Washington, D.C., we visited the Aerospace Industries Association (AIA), to meet with officials from AIA’s Civil Aviation Infrastructure, International Affairs, and Standardization Offices. At Honeywell, we met with an official with Aerospace Regulatory Affairs. At the Air Transport Association, we meeting with officials within Legislative and Regulatory Policy, Airspace Management, and Operations. We conducted this performance audit from January to November 2011 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. We conducted a search utilizing multiple databases, such as ProQuest, Academic OneFile, and EconLit, using search terms such as collaboration, cooperation, coordination combined with the terms interagency, successful, and effective. After reviewing citations for relevance and eliminating duplicates, we were left with 37 citations. Based on the review of these articles, we identified effective practices for collaboration and compared these practices with those from our prior work. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. Director; Nabajyoti Barkakati; Lauren Calhoun; Elizabeth Curda; Pamela Davidson; Leia Dickerson; Colin Fallon; Jeffrey Heit; Edmond Menoche; Joshua Ormond; Taylor Reeves; and Maria Stattel made key contributions to this report. For more information on CNN iReport, visit www.cnn.com/cnnireport or follow us on Twitter @CNNireport and @CnnirePortraits. for more CNN iReporter photos.