NORAD has not done routine risk assessments as part of a risk-based management approach to determine ASA operational requirements. NORAD could better evaluate the extent to which previous threats have been mitigated by DOD or other government agencies. Routine risk assessments could also help NORAD determine the appropriate level and type of resources for ASA operations, especially in a resource-restricted environment. Air Force did not implement ASA operations as a steady-state mission because it has focused on other priorities, such as overseas military operations. Of the 18 ASA sites, 13 sites are currently equipped with F-16s, which, according to ANG estimates, will reach the end of their useful service lives between fiscal years 2015 and 2020. Five sites have F-15s which were grounded for 3 months in late 2007 and early 2008. Depending on when the F- 16s reach theend of their service lives and on the availability of next-generation F-22 and F-35 fighter aircraft, a gap in the number of available aircraft may affect units performing ASA operations. summary, we recommended that the Secretary of Defense direct The Commander of the U.S. command element of NORAD to routinely conduct risk assessments to determine ASA requirements. The Secretary of the Air Force to establish a timetable and implement ASA operations as a steady-state mission. DOD partially concurred with our recommendation to employ a risk-based management approach, which would include routine risk assessments. DOD stated that sufficient guidance and a long-standing risk- based process currently guide its decisions on ASA operations and, therefore, it does not plan on taking any further action. testimony, please contact Davi M. D’Agostino at (202) 512-5431 or dagostinod@gao.gov. In addition, contact points for our Offices of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of this statement. Individuals who made key contributions to this testimony are Lorelei St. James and Marc Schwartz (Assistant Directors), Tommy Baril, Grace Coleman, Greg Marchand, Terry Richardson, Bethann Ritter, Kenneth Cooper, and Jane Ervin. Massachusetts ANG assumes responsibility for the New England ASA operations in fiscal year 2010. ASA operations at Homestead Air Force Base, Florida are conducted by a detachment from the Jacksonville, Florida ANG unit. ASA Operations at Ellington Field, Texas are conducted from the Tulsa, Oklahoma Ang unit. This is a work of the U.S. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States. The published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from GAO.