In the United States, although drugs are classified as prescription or nonprescription, the practice of pharmacy is typically regulated by states. The 1951 Durham-Humphrey Amendments to the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act provided the statutory basis for the two-tier drug classification system. Drugs in the BTC class would be those determined by FDA to be nonprescribed but would require the intervention of a pharmacist. The BTC idea that FDA sought comment on would require that these drugs be sold only in pharmacies, and that a pharmacists’ intervention with a consumer occur before the drug could be dispensed. FDA has not indicated which drugs might be classified as BTC in the United States. Among the drugs suggested by some proponents are certain drugs that treat chronic conditions such as high cholesterol, asthma, high blood pressure, diabetes, urinary incontinence, and osteoporosis. Vaccines; the epinephrine auto-injector used in emergency situations following insect bites, stings, or exposure to other allergens; and oseltamivir—which is used to treat influenza and might be effective in the event of an influenza pandemic. Nonprescription drugs in the United States generally have these characteristics: (1) their benefits outweigh their risks; (2) consumers can use them for self-diagnosed conditions; and (3) they can be adequately labeled. Proponents of a BTC drug class argue that such a class would increase access because drugs that might not otherwise be suitable for general OTC use could be available without a prescription. Many of the drugs that could be switched to OTC under the current two-tier drug classification system have already been reclassified. To implement a BTC drug class, it would be important to evaluate whether a sufficient pharmacist workforce would be available. It would also be necessary to determine whether all pharmacists and pharmacy staff would be required to be trained in BTC-related skills. Having an inadequate number of pharmacists willing to carry out BTC functions could reduce the value of such a class. Consumers would need to understand protocols for obtaining BTC drugs, such as the necessity of consulting with a pharmacist before obtaining a drug. If a BTC class is established in the United States, consumers might need time to adjust to the new role. Cost-related issues would be important for the establishment of a BTC drug class. Third-party coverage of BTC drugs could affect consumers’ out-of-pocket drug expenses. Cost of nonreimbursable BTC drugs may also affect the extent to which consumers use BTC drugs. Compensation for BTC services might be necessary to offset increased costs incurred by pharmacists as a result of their BTC counseling, experts say.. The American Pharmacists Association has raised concerns about whether it would be financially feasible for pharmacies to carry BTC drugs unless pharmacists were able to bill. Concerns about liability might deter pharmacists from dispensing BTC drugs. Costs might be affected by new incentives to encourage drug manufacturers to invest funds in a two-stage switch process. Drug manufacturers may receive 3 additional years of exclusive marketing rights for drugs switched from prescription to OTC status if the switch requires additional clinical trials. HHS agreed that cost-related issues would have to be addressed before implementing a BTC drug class.. HHS suggested that GAO add a discussion regarding the statutory authority to provide reimbursement under Medicare Part D for drugs that would be included in a BTC. In light of the November 2007 Food and Drug Administration (FDA) public meeting to explore the public health implications of behind-the-counter (BTC) availability of certain drugs, we are updating information we first presented in our 1995 report. To describe the arguments that have been made supporting and opposing a BTC drug class in the United States, we reviewed published literature, reports, and meeting minutes of FDA hearings. To determine the impact of restricted nonprescription drug classes on drug availability, we interviewed experts. Drug classification system in the Netherlands includes four categories: pharmacy only, pharmacy and drugstore, and general sale. Drugs can be switched from prescription to more restrictive classification on rare occasions for safety reasons. The pharmacy class is reserved for drugs requiring interaction with pharmacy staff although not necessarily a pharmacist. The drugstore class is the default class for all nonprescription drugs that do not meet the criteria for pharmacy or OTC sale. The distinction between drugstore and OTC classification is often based on the dosage or pack size. The United Kingdom continues to use the three-tier drug classification system that was in place in 1995. Prescription drugs can be dispensed only with written or oral orders (i.e., a prescription) Nonprescription drugs are often referred to in the United States as OTC drugs. About 60 percent of EU countries do not have an OTC drug class, according to pharmacy experts. The European Medicines Agency makes a recommendation on whether the new drug should receive prescription or nonprescription status. neurodegenerative diseases, diabetes, and autoimmune diseases; and orphan drugs. Most drugs currently on the market in the EU were originally approved through national authorization procedures prior to the development of a centralized approval process. About 95 percent of new drugs brought to market are now approved through the centralized procedures. The first-ever application for the centralized switch of a drug (orlistat) from prescription to nonprescription status was recently approved. Orlistat was granted centralized approval as a prescription drug in 1998.