The price of natural gas paid by consumers is layered,in the sense that the wellhead price paid to producers forms a baseline. Pipeline transportation costsare then added, which yields the city gate price. Finally, local distribution companies add additionalcharges to yield the prices actually paid by Consumers. Residential consumers pay the highest prices, followed by commercial, industrial, and electricityusers. The residential prices presented in Table 1 represent an increase of 7% over residential pricesfor a comparable period in 2003. The most recent EIA natural gas price data available at the timeof this report was August 2004. York Mercantile Exchange (NYMEX), natural gas fordelivery in December 2004 was trading at $6.80 per mcf and January and February 2005 natural gaswas trading at over $7.50 per mCF. The process of natural gas pricederegulation began in 1978 when the Natural Gas Policy Act ( P.L. 95-621 ) became law. Under theNatural gas Policy Act, nearly all price controls were phased out by the end of 1984. The NYMEX future price is determined by the interaction of traderswho have business interests in the real, physical natural gas market. Interstate pipeline rates are not directly regulated and their pricing structure largely reflects open access for shippers and market pricing. The city gate price includes the addition of these pipeline transportation charges. Residential and small commercial natural gas prices are generally higher than the wellhead price because of processing and transportation costs. The Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) monitors pipeline tariffs to assure "just and reasonable" pricing. consumers buy gas from a local distribution company. Local distribution companies areregulated by state public service commissions, who set distribution charges. The price premium paid by residential and commercial consumers reflects the high fixed cost associated with distribution of their supply. The EIA defines effective productive capacity as the maximum production available fromnatural gas wells. The effective capacity utilization rate (ECUR) is the ratio of actual production to effective productivecapacity. Surplus capacity is the difference between effectiveproductive capacity and actualproduction. Figure 2 shows the history of the ECUR, capacity and production since 1985. Productive capacity has declined since the late 1980s, but appears to haveremained stable since 1993. Actual production has trended up from 1985 to 1995 and has beenrelatively stable since then. An ECUR in excess of 90% indicates that available natural gas output is nearly fully allocated to meeting demand. If thesesources are unavailable for expansion the price could rise dramatically, and supply disruption mightoccur. quickly brought to the market by increasing production from existing wells. Figure 3 shows the history of the wellhead price of natural gas from 1973 through 2003. The first run up in prices, from 1973 to the mid 1980s was theresult of price deregulation in a market where supply was not abundant, demand-after years ofregulated prices-was strong, and oil prices were high. Prices declined after1985-as did demand-and the United States entered a decade long period of relatively low, stableprices. remaining at, or above, 90% since 1995. These conditions set the stage for the gas priceincreases and price volatility experienced since 2000. The EIA reported that the average monthly drill rig count for 2003 was 872, with the count running over 900 per month from June toDecember. (7) Whether the recent increase in drilling activity resultsin large enough supply increases to allow the price of natural gas to fall depends on the explorationsuccess rate, the size of the fields found, and the degree to which existing producing wells showoutput declines. When the ECUR is below 90% extra pressure on the market is likely to result in higher production. Once theECUR rises to 90% or above, timely increases in production are less available and pressure on themarket manifests itself as higher prices. Higher prices for natural gas justify investment in exploratory drilling by increasing the value of the expected cash flow derived from the new production. The nature of this relationship in the natural gas industry can, under some circumstances, lead to a cycle of unstable boom and bust feared by those investing in gas production. completed. The volume of gas held in storage is a critical element in evaluating the possibility of price volatility. If storage volumes are below normal as the winter heating season begins, and the ECURis above 90%, the potential for elevated prices must be considered to be high. As a result, dependence on LNG maysafeguard the nation from physical shortage by building a new, higher, baseline price into the market. The cost of a complete LNG facility has fallen substantially due to economies of scale and enhanced technology. Figure 5 shows the variability of storage volumes of working gas. Stored volumes totaled 2.7tcf at the end of the 2000 refill season. The severe temperatures during the heating season of2000-01 drew this down to a low of 742 billion cubic feet (bcf) in March of 2001. In November 2004 working gas storage levels were above their previous levels. The storage levels are expected to remain above their current levels until at least 2015. For more information, visit the EIA's Natural Gas Storage Report. five yearaverage, suggesting that adequate supplies were available. The EIA reported that by November 26,2004 stocks in the lower 48 states totaled about 3.3 tcf, about 0.2 tcf more than at the same time in 2003. High, sustained levels of natural gas prices can act asa drag on economic growth. High natural gas price shocks canconstitute a classic supply side shock which reduces output and productivity growth. If severeenough, a shock of this type can increase unemployment and cause inflation in the short term. specific industrial users who make heavy use of natural gas in their production process, which makes themuncompetitive. Residential users might have difficulty paying their winter heating bills, forcing them to choose between adequate home heating and other necessities. To help mitigate the effects of possible price spikes this winter, aid to lowincome gas consumers through the Low Income Home Energy Assistance Program (LIHEAP) could be increased. Much can be done to alter the demand and supply characteristics of the natural gas market in the long term. Conservation, expansion of LNG use, access to areas not currently available forexploration, and new pipeline construction, among others can be debated. Any of these options willtake significant time to implement and must be considered in a long term context. None of themare likely to have significant influence on prices over the next six months to one year. The price of gold is expected to remain around $1,400 per ounce for the next 12 months, according to analysts at Citi. The value of the euro is also expected to stay above $1.30 per ounce. The euro has been under pressure since the start of the year due to fears of a global economic slowdown.