Department of Defense is the world's largest owner of aircraft and aircraft engines. Of 51 types of military engines used today, 28 are generally repaired in military depots and 23 almost exclusively by contractors. In recent years, private sector firms have sought more of the military engine workload. DOD estimates that its depot repair facilities and equipment are valued at over $50 billion. The engines maintained by the private sector generally have commercial as well as military applications and support fewer aircraft and require less inventory than those maintained in the military. most of the repair of 23 other engines, which power such aircraft as the KC-10, T-38, and C-9. Most of the 28 engines maintained in DOD’s public depots are military-unique and not used in the commercial market place. Military-unique engines include the F100 engine, which powers the F-15 and F-16 aircraft. The Air Force is considering developing repair capability for the F117 engine. It is similar to the commercial engine that powers the Boeing 757 aircraft. Changes in military strategy, reductions-in-force structure, and improved engine reliability have all contributed to decreased demand for engine repair requirements. The change in war-planning scenarios from a massive, protracted war in response to a Soviet invasion to shorter duration contingency scenarios also reduced the anticipated surge requirement for depot maintenance. Between fiscal years 1985 and 1994, the services reduced their aircraft inventories from about 24,500 to 17,400. For example, the Air Force reduced its F-4 aircraft inventory from 1,597 to 61. depots in 1990. With only one exception, DOD now has only one organic depot-level repair site for each military engine. Some engines are repaired both by a military depot and one or more private sector contractors. Efforts to achieve savings included consolidation, interservicing, and competitions between government depots and the private sector. Some of these efforts were superseded by the 1993 BRAC decision to close Alameda Naval Aviation Depot.. Despite these initiatives, DOD’s engine depot repair facilities continue to have significant excess capacity. the military and industry, specifically, commercially developed aircraft turbine (jet) engines. On March 14, 1995, DOD provided the House and Senate Committees on Appropriations with its report. In its engine report, DOD reviewed 17 military engines with commercial counterparts. The report concluded that, for two reasons, no changes in workload allocation between the public and private sector were warranted. We addressed the rationale supporting the continued need for DOD to maintain capability to repair engines at its own depots, and whether there are opportunities to privatize additional engine workloads. We drew from information gathered as part of our overall review of DOD’s depot-level maintenance program. for each depot that performs engine overhauls and repairs engine components. (2) the services’ fiscal year 1997 engine workload projections for each depot in our study. (3) capacity, core workload, and workload projections used by the services to develop recommendations for the BRAC Commission. We interviewed service officials, examined documents and visited the facilities at the San Antonio Air Logistics Center, Kelly Air Force Base, and Corpus Christi Army Depot, Texas. We also visited the Oklahoma City Air Logistic Center, Tinker Air Force base, and Cherry Point Naval Aviation Depot, North Carolina. We surveyed 24 private repair activities identified as potential sources of repair. The amount of excess capacity in DOD’s depot system influences cost. Statutes require DOD to maintain a minimum level of capability as well as limit the amount of work that can be contracted out to the private sector. Public and private depot repair capabilities, capacity, and competition are key factors that impact readiness and cost, and, therefore, influence source-of-repair decisions. We used the military services’ workload projection for engine and component repair. Public-private competition is one procedure the services have used to consider the cost-effectiveness of privatizing depot maintenance work. Although the competition program is credited with significant savings, private contractors generally do not believe the program is fair. Despite the services’ claimed savings, we and DOD audit agencies found that DOD could not verify the results because of weaknesses in its accounting system and internal controls. The future of competition between public and private entities is questionable and remains uncertain, the authors say. They recommend that the Secretary of Defense reinstitute public- private competition for depot maintenance. depot maintenance workloads as quickly as possible. The degree of similarity between military and commercial engines can range from 30 percent to 100 percent. Ten military engines with commercial counterparts are now fully or predominantly maintained in the private sector. The more similarity there is between military systems and equipment and commercially available items, the greater the likelihood that private repair sources may be cost-effective as depot maintenance sources of repair, the authors say. They say the time to make such decisions is before the military invests in establishing its own depot maintenance capability. repair for military-unique engines would likely be more costly than organic repair. Key reason is that this workload is awarded on a sole-source basis to the original equipment manufacturer. We have found that most of DOD’s contract depot maintenance is awards on a noncompetitive basis and that it is difficult to control costs under these conditions. We found the greatest percent of excess engine capacity at the Corpus Christi Army Depot and Cherry Point Naval Aviation Depot and the smallest percent at the Jacksonville Naval aviation Depot. by making better use of available building space, adding some additional shifts, transferring some engine workloads to the Jacksonville Naval Aviation Depot, which repairs engines for the Navy. Public-private competitions would be required before privatizing each engine workload, since the value of each engine’s workload exceeds the $3 million threshold provision of 10 U.S.C. 2469. DOD actions show that in practice it has not reinstituted public-private competition. Our report includes a recommendation that DOD reinstitute the program and issue guidance regarding the conditions, framework, policies and procedures. Since the end of the Cold War, commercial contractors have aggressively sought more of DOD’s maintenance work. Excess capacity in the public depots may reduce the cost-effectiveness of privatizing commercial counterpart engine workloads. The opportunity appears to be most promising when two factors are present: the military engine has a high degree of similarity with its civilian counterpart and multiple repair (both public and private) sources are able to compete. For more information, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/27/military-maintenance-and-recovery/index.html. Seven engines are good candidates for evaluating the cost-effectiveness of privatization by conducting public-private competitions. The degree of similarity between military and commercial engines can range from 30 percent to 100 percent. The competitive environment that exists for these engines allows DOD to benefit from “sharing” fixed-overhead costs with the private sector customers who have substantially larger numbers of engines being serviced. For reasons previously mentioned, the TF33 and TF34 engines do not appear to be good candidate for competition. workload at the San Antonio Air Logistics Center would result in savings. We found that the Navy’s decision to equip the North Island Naval Aviation Depot to repair the LM2500 reflected the services’ reluctance to share depot maintenance. The repair costs of theLM2500 have steadily increased from $443,678 in 1990 to $925,200 in 1995. We believe the costs have increased because the LM 2500 is a relatively small workload and is the only turbine engine North Island currently repairs. not recommend closing any maintenance depots. However, the Commission found that the significant excess capacity and infrastructure in the Air Force depot system required the closure of the San Antonio center. DOD officials are developing plans to privatize workloads—including engines—in San Antonio, as part of a plan to retain over 16,000 jobs in that city. Since the remaining depots will continue to be burdened with excess capacity, moving additional engine workloads from these facilities to the private sector would only increase the fixed costs. The current policy is to maintain core capabilities in the military depot maintenance system. We believe cost-effectiveness should be a key part of this decision-making process. Privatizing additional engine work would further exacerbate the severe engine excess capacity problem and the cost of maintaining engines at the remaining military depots. The LM2500 workload can probably be performed more cost-effectively by the private sector or through consolidation with the TF39. A public-private competition would be a good choice for determining the most cost- effective source of repair for this engine.