"Evergreening" involves obtaining multiple patents that cover different aspects of the same product. Critics of evergreening assert that the ability to obtain multiple patents on a product, over a period of many years, effectively extends the term of exclusivity that the patent holder obtains. Other observers believe that the term "ever greening" is perjorative and misdescribes long-standing intellectual property policy that allows innovators to obtain patents on improvement inventions. The U.S. Constitution confers upon Congress the power "To promote the Progress of ... useful Arts" An invention that constitutes a "process, machine, manufacture, or composition of matter" may be patented. It must also be novel, or different, from subject matter disclosed by an earlier patent, publication, or other state-of-the-art knowledge. An invention is not patentable if "the subject matter as a whole would have been obvious at the time the invention was made to a person having ordinary skill in the art to which said subject matter pertains" If the USPTO allows the patent to issue, its owner obtains the right to exclude others from making, using, selling, offering to sell or importing into the United States. use made of the invention by the infringer." The maximum term of patent protection is ordinarily set at 20 years from the date the application is filed. Patent owners who wish to compel others to respect their rights must commence enforcement proceedings in the federal courts. The Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit (Federal Circuit) possesses nationwide jurisdiction over most patent appeals from the district courts.. The Supreme Court enjoys discretionary authority to review cases decided by the Federal. Circuit. According to Janice Mueller, a member of the faculty of the University of Pittsburgh School of Law, and Donald Chisum, a retired member of the Santa Clara University Law School faculty, "evergreening refers to attempts by owners of pharmaceutical product patents to effectively extend the term of those patents on modified forms of the same drug" Various properties of a drug that are eligible for patenting include methods of manufacture, methods of medical treatment, chemical intermediates, formulations, mechanisms of action, packaging, delivery profiles, screening methods, and biological targets. A simple example illustrates how different patents may cover the same product. a brand-name drug company, Alpha Pharmaceutical Co., discovers that a new chemical compound is useful for treating a particular disease. Alpha files a patent application on that active ingredient on January 1, 2005. The USPTO approves the application, resulting in a patent that will expire 20 years later. Under this example, a generic drug company may begin selling products that employ the active ingredient starting in 2025. However, the generic firm may not use the improved manufacturing method at that time. It must instead use another manufacturing technology until 2030, when the second patent expires. evergreeening typically refers to the construction of a patent portfolio that covers a single product. It has also been used in connection with marketing strategies allegedly employed by brand-name pharmaceutical firms. Some observers believe that the practice of patent evergreening is promoted by the availability of "continuation applications" Continuation applications allow inventors to extend the period of examination at the USPTO in order to amend existing claims or submit new ones, authors say.. The patent statute allows inventors of any sort of technology to obtain patents upon improvements. Hatch-Waxman Act governs the procedures through which a potential generic drug manufacturer may obtain FDA marketing approval on a drug that has been patented by another. Some observers believe that the Act provided additional incentives to evergreen. Critics argue that evergreening conflicts with congressional judgment concerning the duration of patent rights. However, obtaining multiple patents that cover the same product may effectively extend the aggregate period of patent protection that applies to that product, the authors say. They say Congress has established a term that ordinarily extends for 20 years from the date of filing. Under the Patent Act, each invention must fulfill a number of requirements in order to be subject to patent protection. Among these criteria are that the invention must be novel, nonobvious, and fully disclosed in an application submitted to the USPTO. These statutory standards are applied neutrally to each kind of invention, whether it may be characterized as an "original" (such as a medication that has never been previously approved by the FDA) or an "improvement" ( such as a new formulation of a known medication) Some observers believe that, on an individual or collective basis, patents on more marginal improvements may provide the public with valuable sources of technological information. Some commentators also believe the critique that many "evergreen" patents represent trivial variations of earlier technologies is misplaced. They assert that many patented improvements provide significant practical benefits. For example, a new formulation may make a known medication easier to use, leading to greater patient compliance, or cause fewer side effects. While there are a rising number of patents for incremental technical advances, the collectivity of incremental advances provides essential information for further innovation. Patents on improvement inventions may not block competitors from marketing competing products that were covered by patents that have expired. The scope of protection provided by a particular patent varies in accordance with the degree of technological advance provided by the patented invention. In particular, a patent that claims a new active ingredient for use in a pharmaceutical typically provides more robust proprietary rights than improvement patents. The ability of any innovator to obtain a patent is said to encourage competition among different firms, both in innovation and in the marketplace. Some experts believe that recent changes to patent law rules may have limited evergreening strategies. From 1870 to 1995, the maximum term of a U.S. patent was 17 years from the date it issued. For patents based upon applications filed on or after June 8, 1995, maximum term is 20 years. Any patent that issues from a continuation application now expires at the same time as the original application—namely, 20 years after the filing date of the original patent. The incentives to "evergreen patents" illegitimately have been significantly curtailed by these developments as to the patent term. A 2007 U.S. Supreme Court opinion addresses one of the fundamental requirements for obtaining a patent. Many observers believe that the KSR opinion raised the standard of nonobviousness. If this view is accurate, evergreening may become a less viable tactic because patents to improvement inventions may be more difficult to procure from the USPTO. If Congress changes the patent term, this tactic may no longer be as viable, as some observers say. The patent term is set to expire at the end of 2015. Some observers believe that the broad ability to file continuation applications encourages evergreening practices. The USPTO recently promulgated controversial rules that would have limited the availability of continuation applications. No provision of the U.S. Patent Act is specifically directed towards ever greening issues. Recent amendments to the Patent Law of India were introduced arguably arguably to encourage ever green patenting in that country as well as in other nations such as Australia and New Zealand. In this respect, legislative developments in other countries might also be of interest. Section 3(d) of that statute provides: The following are not inventions within the meaning of this Act: [T]he mere discovery of a new form of a known substance which does not result in the enhancement of the known efficacy of that substance. For the purposes of this clause, salts, esters, ethers, polymorphs, metabolites, pure form, particle size, isomers, mixtures of isomers,. complexes, combinations and other derivatives of known substance shall be considered to be same substance. University of Pittsburgh, "[t]his express and detailed statutory presumption against patentability of derivatives ... reflects a strong resentment towards ever-greening of pharmaceutical patents" Some commentators have expressed concern that the Indian patent statute may violate obligations established by the World Trade Organization (WTO) Current bills before the 111 th Congress would potentially introduce a more generalized reform of the patent system. Persistent concerns have been voiced that certain patents upon improvement technologies are of poor quality and doubtful validity. Effective rules that would allow the USPTO to issue high-quality patents, may allay some of these concerns. broad range of reforms in an effort to improve the patent system. Janice Mueller and Donald Chisum assert that "[d]rawing the line between improper attempts at evergreening and legitimate incremental innovation is a broad and difficult problem in patent law" The difficulty of this discussion is suggested by the fact that numerous knowledgeable observers have reached strongly contrasting views concerning the propriety of improvement patenting, the extent of any possible negative social impact of this practice, and even the term "evergreening" itself.