In fiscal year 2006, DOD committed over $1.5 billion to its recruiting effort. Each service has at least two levels of command between the senior headquarters and the recruiting station. A typical frontline military recruiter is between the ages of 25 and 30 years old and has between 5 and 10 years of military service. The Army is using almost 370 contract civilian recruiters, representing approximately 3 percent of the Army’s total recruiting force. In general, training for recruiters is similar in all services and has focused on ethics and sales. The military pays for the applicant to travel to 1 of 65 military entrance processing stations (MEPS) After the recruiter’s prescreening, the applicant signs an enlistment contract and is sworn into the service and enters the delayed entry program. The applicant returns to the processing station just before reporting for basic training, undergoes a brief physical examination, and is swearing into the military. The Office of the Under Secretary of Defense has the responsibility for overseeing the recruiting program. However, OUSD has not established a framework to conduct oversight of recruiter irregularities. Recruiter wrongdoing. Although not required by OUSD to do so, the services require their recruiting commands to maintain data for 2 years. The Army Recruiting Command maintains data for 3 years and can retrieve case files back to fiscal year 1998. OUSD has not established criteria for the services to characterize recruiter irregularities or developed common terminology for irregularities. Each of the services uses multiple systems for maintaining data that are not integrated and decentralized processes for identifying and tracking allegations and service-identified incidents. Youth and their parents believe that deployment to a hostile environment is very likely for servicemembers with some types of military specialties. Adults who influence a prospective applicant’s decision about whether to join the military are increasingly fearful of the possibility of death or serious injury to the applicant. Other factors that affect the recruiting environment include a recruiter's location and access to eligible applicants. Over half of U.S. youth aged 16 to 21 are ineligible to join military because they cannot meet DOD or service entry standards. pressure to meet monthly goals contributes to recruiter dissatisfaction. Over 50 percent of active duty military recruiters said they were dissatisfied with their jobs. Army, Navy, and Air Force generally evaluate recruiters on their ability to write contracts to bring applicants into the delayed entry program. Marine Corps recruiters are held accountable when an applicant does not complete basic training and remain responsible for recruiting an additional applicant to replace the former basic trainee, the authors say. The Army spends approximately $17.17 per month to satisfy recruiting goals, they say. E.E. Moser, Assistant Director, Grace A. Coleman, Tanya Cruz, Nicole Gore, Gregg J. Justice III, Mitchell B. Karpman, Warren Lowman, Julia C. Matta, Charles W. Purdue, and Shana Wallace made key contributions to this report. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255.