DOD depends overwhelmingly on the U.S. commercial electrical power grid for electricity to support its operations and missions. Concerns have been raised about the increasing vulnerability of the grid to more frequent or longer electrical power disturbances. Factors that contribute to the grid’s vulnerability include an aging electrical power infrastructure and increased reliance on automated control systems. The National Science and Technology Council has established a task force to identify research and development needs for electric grid vulnerabilities and to coordinate with other federal agencies to address those needs. Vulnerabilities may involve co-location of both primary and secondary electrical power equipment, single points of failure in an electrical power network, lack of security access controls, and insufficient backup sources of electrical power generation. To address such vulnerabilities, owners or operators of DOD assets may consider diversifying the locations of primary and secondaries. DOD identifies the vulnerabilities and manages the risks of its most critical assets to electrical power disruptions primarily through DCIP. DOD has established several complementary programs that help protect critical assets, including those listed in table 1. DOD’s most critical assets and the missions they support are vulnerable to disruptions in electrical power supplies. The U.S. commercial electrical power grids have become increasingly fragile and vulnerable to prolonged outages. DOD is identifying key vulnerabilities through DCIP vulnerability assessments, but as of June 2009, the department had conducted such assessments on only 14 of its 34 most critical Assets. DOD Instruction 3020.45 requires DOD to conduct vulnerability assessments on all of its most critical. assets at least once every 3 years. supply of electricity to its critical assets. DOD has also partnered with various federal agencies and industry organizations to further increase the assurance of electrical power. DOD serves as co-chair of the federal Task Force on Electric Grid Vulnerability of the National Science and Technology Council’s Committee on Homeland and National Security. The survey results confirm that some steps are being taken at various levels within DOD to improve the assuranceof electrical power supplies to its most critical assets, the authors say. But they say DOD has not yet established a mechanism for systematically tracking the implementation of future DCIP risk management decisions. DCIP guidance recognizes the importance of collaboration between DOD facilities with critical assets and their respective public utilities. DOD relies on commercial electrical power grids for secure, uninterrupted electrical power supplies to support its most critical assets. The Defense Science Board Task Force on DOD Energy Strategy says commercial power grids have become increasingly fragile and vulnerable to extended power disruptions. The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers is requesting funds for a pilot program that would involve extensive collaboration with the local electricity providers at selected U.s. Army installations. on DOD-owned most critical assets. DOD concurred with our recommendation that the department establish a time frame for the military services to provide the infrastructure data. DOD acknowledged that such information is necessary for the proper characterization of its critical assets from a public works perspective. We believe that the establishment of specific time frames for theMilitary is a good first step to getting the data required to complete the analysis on infrastructure located within the installations. We modified this recommendation to indicate that these data are required for completing—rather than conducting—the preliminary technical analysis. services to provide this important information is necessary because, as of July 2009, only one of the military services had begun to gather the requested information. DOD concurred with our recommendation that the department develop explicit DCIP guidelines for assessing the most critical assets’ risks and vulnerabilities to long-term electrical power disruptions. According to DOD, the ASD(HD&ASA)/DCIP Office will review current vulnerability assessment criteria and standards. We encourage DOD to finalize this draft manual and ensure that it provides explicit guidance on tracking the implementation of DCIP risk management decisions. local electricity providers in an effort to coordinate and help remediate or mitigate risks and vulnerabilities to electrical power disruptions. DOD’s comments cited existing guidance that, among other things, encourages government and private-sector decision makers to work with electricity providers. According to DOD, this guidance will be reinforced at DCIP forums for collaboration, such as meetings of the Defense Critical Infrastructure Integration Staff, Operational Advisory Board, and Defense Infrastructure Sector Council. We encourage DOD to reinforce such guidance concerning collaboration with local electricity providers directly with asset owners. GAO is sending copies of this report to other interested congressional parties. The report also is available at no charge on GAO’s Web site at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staff have any questions concerning this report, please contact me at (202) 512-5431 or dagostinod@gao,gov. GAO: Use of disparate sets of guidance resulted in the selection and submission of assets to the Tier 1 Task Critical Asset list based on inconsistent criteria. To become more familiar with efforts currently taking place to assure the nation’s electrical power grid, we met with various officials from federal agencies, electrical power industry associations, and private-sector entities. We obtained relevant documentation and interviewed officials from the following organizations: Department of Homeland Security (DHS) Office of Electricity Delivery & Energy Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, Office of Electric Reliability. CACI International, Inc. Edison Electric Institute Pareto Energy, Inc., Talisman International, LLC. Regulatory Commission on the full draft report, which at the time was classified as SECRET because of DOD’s concerns about the classification and dissemination of the report. We did seek technical comments from these entities on sections of the initial draft report that pertained to their roles and responsibilities, which we incorporated in the report where appropriate. We conducted our surveys from May 2009 through August 2009, using self- administered electronic surveys. We sent a questionnaire on DOD critical assets to the owners and operators of DOD-owned critical assets. return electronically via SIPRNet after marking check boxes or entering responses up to the SECRET classification level into open answer boxes. Because this was not a sample survey, but rather a survey of the universe of respondents, it has no sampling errors. We sent the original three electronic questionnaires in May and June 2009. All questionnaires were returned by August 2009. In the end, we achieved a 100 percent response rate. However, the practical difficulties with the survey were difficult to overcome. GAO conducted this performance audit from October 2008 through October 2009. We conducted six follow-up site visits to a nonprobability sample of surveyed assets. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. The findings from our site visits are not generalizable to all 34 most critical assets, but we obtained follow- up survey information from installation personnel for critical assets and visited those assets to validate the survey responses, as applicable. We clarified responders’ interpretation of the survey questions, discussed their responses in detail. Both the primary and backup power supply systems exist in the same room for convenience of maintenance. Single transformer provides both commercial and Backup power to a critical asset. Bury electric power lines or protect poles with anti-ram barriers. Power lines share right-of-way with other key utilities. Generators and uninterruptible power supplies are not large enough to support the critical asset in case of primary power loss or in case the location does not stockpile sufficient fuel during an electrical power loss. minimum operational requirements for consumables (i.e., fuel) Distribute critical asset operations to other backup power supplied locations. You can answer most of the questions easily by checking boxes or filling in blanks. A few questions request narrative answers. You may write additional comments at the end of the survey. We request that you provide the most recent information from no earlier than January 1, 2006. Please use your information to help the Government Accountability Office (GAO) evaluate how the federal government spends taxpayer dollars. Mouse to navigate throughout the survey by clicking on the field or check box you wish to fill in. Do not use the “Tab” or “Enter” keys as doing so may cause formatting problems. To select or deselect a check box, simply click or double click on the box. Please limit your responses to Task Critical Asset information classified no higher than “SECRET” in accordance with the Defense Critical Infrastructure Program (DCIP) Security Classification Guide, May 2007. We ask that you coordinate the completion of this survey with other officials as necessary and return one consolidated survey for this asset. follow-up telephone interview if we need to clarify some answers in the survey. To assist us, we ask that you complete and return this survey by June 5, 2009, via SIPRNet to ArtadiD@gao.sgov.gov. Please return the completed survey by e-mail. Simply save this file to your classified computer desktop, hard drive, or disk and attach it to your e-mails. Lt Col Norman Worthen Phone: (703) 693-7542 SIPrNet:: Norman.Worthen@js.pentagon.smil.mil require electrical power in order to function and support its military mission(s)? (Mark only one response) Yes No SKIP TO QUESTION #62 Please explain if necessary: 4. Does this critical asset require supporting infrastructure, such as water; natural gas; heating, ventilating, and air conditioning (HVAC); or any other supporting utility to function? (MarkOnly one response). 5. From what source does this asset generally receive its primary electrical power supply? Non-DOD electricity provider(s) or utility(ies) (e.g., the commercial) power grid) Name of provider(s) or utility(ies): DOD-generated electricity supply based on fossil fuels (e.g., diesel-powered generators) DOD- generated electricity supply. based on solar energy DOD-produced electricity based on geothermal energy, wind energy, biomass energy, nuclear energy. Do you have another back-up generator that could be utilized while performing preventive or corrective maintenance on the primary generator? How often are the generators identified in question 10 above subject to inspection and preventive maintenance to ensure they function as intended? Do you know the cause(s) for each disruption? Yes No SKIP TO QUESTION #31 29. What trends, if any, did you identify regarding causes of the disruptions? 30. How, if at all, did the disruption affect the asset’s mission(s)? 32. What actions did you take to mitigate the impact of the disruption on the asset's mission? 34. Have any cyber or computer-based attacks or probes occurred that have negatively affected the delivery of electrical power to the asset or its supporting infrastructure? 45. What measures were proposed or recommended to address or manage these vulnerabilities or risks? 46. At what level within DOD was the decision made to implement the recommended measure(s) or not implement the measure( s) and accept the risks? 47. What criteria, if any, were used in determining which measure(S) would be taken to address, manage, or accept vulnerabilities and risks? 48. Were measures selected for implementation? Yes No SKIP TO QUESTION #54. What were the estimated costs for implementing these measures? response) Not at all SKIP TO QUESTION #62 Some extent Moderate extent Great extent 56. What was the nature of the coordination with U.S. electricity providers? 57. Is this asset located outside the United States? Yes No SKIP To QUESTion #62 58. Have there been any efforts to coordinate with host-nation governments and/or foreign-owned electricity providers to identify or address potential vulnerabilities or risks identified in question #40 above? 59. Did you or the host installation of this asset coordinate with any other organizations or entities (other than U.s. electricity. providers or host- nation governments)? Yes No- the host installation of this asset coordinate? 62. Please provide any additional information about efforts to identify, assess, or address the vulnerabilities and risks associated with electrical power disruptions to this asset. The U.S. Government Accountability Office (GAO) is an independent, non-partisan legislative branch agency that assists Congress in evaluating how the federal government spends taxpayer dollars. GAO provides Congress with timely information that is objective, fact-based, nonpartisan, nonideological, fair, and balanced. GAO is conducting a review of the Assurance of Electrical Power Supplies to DOD Critical Assets (GAO code 351266) The following critical asset was selected for this survey: survey by clicking on the field or check box you wish to fill in. Do not use the “Tab” or “Enter” keys as doing so may cause formatting problems. To select or deselect a check box, simply click or double click on the box. Since the Joint Staff (J-34) has agreed to respond to the mission-related questions for this asset, we ask that the Joint. Staff respond. Staff (J-34) coordinate the completion of this survey with other officials as necessary and return one consolidated survey for this asset. Please try to limit your responses to Task Critical Asset information classified no higher than “SECRET” in accordance with the Defense Critical Infrastructure Program (DCIP) Security Classification Guide, May 2007. After we receive your reply, we may call you to schedule a follow-up telephone interview if we need to clarify some answers in the survey. To assist us, we ask that you complete and return this survey by June 26, 2009, to David Artadi. DOD Directive 3020.40: Defense Critical Infrastructure Program (DCIP) Defense Industrial Base (DIB) Financial Services Global Information Grid (GIG) Health Affairs Intelligence, Surveillance, and Reconnaissance (ISR) Logistics Personnel Public Works Space Transportation Unknown 2. Where is this asset physically located? (Mark only one response) At a military installation please specify name of installation: At a commercial facility please specifyName of facility: At an industrial site At a stand-alone facility please specifying name of facility. facility: please specify name of industrial site: 3. What is the nearest city (and U.S. state or country) to this installation, facility, or site? 4. Who owns the asset? (Mark only one response) 5. Who primarily operates the asset during normal operational status? 6. Who is the owner or operator of the asset at the time of this question? 7. Is the asset owned by a government organization or a private company? 8. Is it owned or operated by a military service or a non-DOD organization? Company Other Section B. Mission(s), Combatant Command(s, and Military Service(s) Supported by Asset 6. Which military mission does this asset support within DOD during normal operational status? 7. For the military missions identified in question #6, which DOD Unified Combatant. Command does it support? 8. Which other DOD agencies or organizations, if any, does this. asset support? 11. Please provide any additional information regarding the missions, combatant commands, and non-DOD organizations supported by the asset. GAO is an independent, non-partisan legislative branch agency that assists Congress in evaluating how the federal government spends taxpayer dollars. You can answer most of the questions easily by checking boxes or filling in blanks. A few questions request narrative answers. You may write additional comments at the end of the survey. We request that you provide the most recent information from no earlier than January 1, 2006. Please use your information to help the GAO with its work. The U.S. Government Accountability Office provides Congress with timely information that is objective, fact-based, nonpartisan and fair. Mouse to navigate throughout the survey by clicking on the field or check box you wish to fill in. Do not use the “Tab” or “Enter” keys as doing so may cause formatting problems. To select or deselect a check box, simply click or double click on the box. Please try to limit your responses to Task Critical Asset information classified no higher than “SECRET” in accordance with the Defense Critical Infrastructure Program (DCIP) Security Classification Guide, May 2007. Submit your answers to this survey by June 26, 2009, to David Artadi via SIPRNet at ArtadiD@gao.sgov.gov or to Mark Pross via JWICS at igproma@dodigic.ic.gov. We may call you to schedule a follow-up telephone interview if we need to clarify some answers in the survey. Simply save this file to your classified computer desktop, hard drive, or disk and attach it to your e-mail.