Biofuels, such as ethanol and biodiesel, are an alternative to petroleum-based transportation fuels. Ethanol is mainly used as a gasoline additive in blends of about 10 percent ethanol and 90 percent gasoline. Biodiesel is a renewable alternative fuel produced from a range of plant oils, animal fats, and recycled cooking oils. Production of ethanol from corn starch reached 9 billion gallons in 2008, according to the U.S. Energy Policy Act of 2005. The federal government has promoted biofuels since the 1970s. There are a number of steps in the biofuels life cycle, from cultivation of the feedstock through distribution to the end user at the fuel pump. Water plays a critical role in many aspects of this life cycle. Unlike corn starch, most of the energy in plant and tree biomass is locked away in complex cellulose and hemicellulose molecules. Some cellulosic biorefineries are piloting the use of biochemical processes, in which microbes and enzymes break down these complex plant molecules to produce ethanol. The extent to which increased biofuel production will affect the nation’s water resources will depend on which feedstocks are selected for production and which areas of the country they are produced in. Increases in corn cultivation in areas that are highly dependent on irrigated water could have greater impacts on water availability. In contrast, many experts expect next generation feedstocks to require less water and provide some water quality benefits, but even with these feedstocks the effects on water resources are largely dependent on where and how these feedstock is grown. Fertilizer runoff containing nitrogen and phosphorus can lead to overenrichment and excessive growth of algae in surface waters. In some waters, such enrichment has resulted in harmful algal blooms, decreased water clarity, and reduced oxygen in the water. In marine waters, this excessive algal growth has created “dead zones,” which cannot support fish or any other organism that needs oxygen to survive. The number of reported dead zones around the world has increased since the 1960s to more than 400. A 2007 USGS model estimated that 52 percent of nitrogen and 25 percent of the phosphorus entering the Gulf system are from corn and soybean cultivation in the Mississippi River basin. Increased corn production will also increase the use of pesticides, which also have the potential to affect surface water and groundwater quality. Once groundwater is contaminated, it is difficult to clean up, according to the experts we contacted. According to some of the experts and officials we spoke with, increased demand for biofuel feedstocks may also create incentives for farmers to place marginal lands back into production. Millions of acres of land currently enrolled in the Conservation Reserve Program (CRP) CRP provides annual rental payments and cost share assistance to landowners who contractually agree to retire environmentally-sensitive cropland from agricultural purposes. As part of the contract, farmers are generally required to plant or maintain vegetative covers (such as native grasses) on the land. These covers provide a range of environmental benefits, including improved water quality, reduced erosion, enhanced wildlife habitat, and preserved soil productivity. Officials are concerned that higher corn prices and increased demand for biofuel feedstocks may encourage farmers to return CRP land to crop production. If such conversion does occur, these officials noted that water quality may further decline in the future. Next generation feedstocks for biofuels have the potential for fewer negative effects on water resources, but the magnitude of these effects remains largely unknown because these feedstocks have not yet been grown on a commercial scale. Experts suggested that certain water resource impacts were likely for the following potential feedstocks: Agricultural residues, such as corn stover, can provide feedstock for cellulosic ethanol production. Perennial grasses may require additional water or nutrient inputs. Perennial grasses such as mixed prairie and switchgrass can grow with less water than corn. Some experts cautioned that any water supply benefits from these grasses will only occur if they are rainfed. Woody biomass, such as biomass from the thinning of forests and cultivation of certain fast-growing tree varieties, could serve as feedstock for cellulosic ethanol production, according to some experts. Use of thinnings is not expected to impact water supply, as they are residuals from forest management. Algae cultivation is expected to consume a great deal of water. Some communities have become concerned about the potential impacts of withdrawals for biofuel production on their drinking water and municipal supplies. Algae are also being explored as a possible feedstock for advanced biofuels. Current estimates of the water needed to convert cellulosic feedstocks to ethanol range from 1.9 to 6.0 gallons of water per gallon of ethanol, depending on the technology used. In contrast, biodiesel conversion requires less water than ethanol conversion. variety of plant and animal-based feedstocks, providing more options when choosing a location. This flexibility in type of feedstock that can be converted allows such facilities to be built in locations with plentiful water supplies, lessening their potential impact. In addition to the water supply effects, biorefineries can have water quality effects because of the contaminants they discharge. The type of contaminant discharged varies by the type of biofuel produced. In contrast, biodiesel refineries discharge other pollutants such as other pollutants. Glycerin from small biodiesel refineries can be a problem if it is released into municipal wastewater facilities. It may disrupt the microbial processes used in wastewater treatment. Glycerin is less of a concern with larger biodieselRefineries because it is often extracted from the waste stream prior to discharge and refined for use in other products. Several state officials we spoke with told us these discharges are generally well-regulated under the Clean Water Act, which requires a permit to discharge pollutants. regulated waters under specific limits and conditions. Ethanol is highly corrosive and there is potential for releases into the environment that could contaminate groundwater and surface water, among other issues. When ethanol-blended fuels leak from underground storage tanks (UST) and aboveground tank systems, the contamination may pose greater risks than petroleum. The ethanol in these blended fuels causes benzene, a soluble and carcinogenic chemical in gasoline, to travel longer distances and persist in soil and groundwater than it would in the absence of ethanol. As biofuel production increases, farmers and the biofuel industry will need to consider regional differences in water supply and quality. Certain states may be better suited to cultivate particular feedstocks because of the amount and type of water available. Certain cellulosic feedstocks, such as switchgrass, would be well-suited for areas with limited rainfall. In Georgia, some experts said pine was likely to be cultivated as a next generation biofuel feedstock because the state has relatively limited land available for cultivation. have on the quality of individual water bodies and regional watersheds. Farmers need to consider local water quality effects when making decisions regarding the suitability of a particular feedstock. In addition, state officials should consider these effects when deciding where programs such as the CRP may be the most effective. For example, experts and officials told us it will be important to identify watersheds in the Midwest that are delivering the largest nutrient loads into the Mississippi River basin and, consequently, contributing to the Gulf of Mexico dead zone. Currently, many biorefineries are located in areas with limited water resources. Experts noted that states with enough rainfall to replenish underlying aquifers may be more appropriate locations. Water laws in certain states may influence the location of future bioreFineries. Agricultural conservation practices can reduce the effects of increased biofuel feedstock cultivation on water supplies in many parts of the U.S. and reduce the need for biofuel conversion facilities in the future. In Nebraska, where water supplies are already fully allocated, natural resource districts can require bio fuel conversion facilities to offset the water they will consume by reducing water use. Many experts and officials highlighted the importance of using agricultural conservation practices to reduce the potential effects of increased biofuel feedstock cultivation on water resources. These practices can reduce nutrient and pesticide runoff as well as soil erosion by retaining additional moisture and nutrients in the soil and disturbing the land less. Experts also identified conservation tillage practices as an important way to reduce soil erosion. The process of converting feedstocks to biofuels, technological innovations, and the use of alternative water sources can help reduce water supply and water quality impacts, but these options can be cost prohibitive. information to tailor water, fertilizer, and pesticide application to specific plots within a field. Other precision agriculture tools, like low-energy precision-application irrigation and subsurface drip irrigation systems, operate at lower pressures and have higher irrigation water application and distribution efficiencies. Genetic engineering has the potential to decrease the water, nutrient and pesticide requirements of biofuel feedstocks. Several experts and officials said that in order to promote such practices, it is important to continue funding and enrollment in federal programs, such as USDA’s Environmental Quality Incentives Program. Technological improvements have already increased water use efficiency in the ethanol conversion process. Water loss from cooling towers for biorefineries is responsible for approximately 50 to 70 percent of water consumption in modern dry-milling ethanol plants. Some ethanol plants are beginning to replace freshwater with alternative sources of water, such as effluent from sewage treatment plants or excess water from adjacent rock quarries. Many experts and officials stated that technological innovations for next generation biofuel conversion also have the potential to reduce the water supply and water quality impacts of increased biofuel production. of the experts and officials we spoke with identified areas where additional research is needed to evaluate and understand the effects of increased biofuel production on water resources. These needs fall into two broad areas: (1) research on the water effects of feedstock cultivation and conversion and (2) better data on local and regional waterresources. Experts and officials identified the following research needs: Genetically engineered biofuel feedstocks. Effects of cellulosic crops on hydrology. More research into the development of drought-tolerant and water- and nutrient-efficient crops. Research is needed on how to more efficiently cultivate algae to minimize the freshwater consumption and water quality impacts. Data on land use is needed to better understand how farmers decide whether to adopt agricultural conservation practices. Research is also needed to determine optimal placement of feedstocks and use of agricultural conservation Practices to get the best yields and minimize adverse environmental impacts, experts and officials told us. For example, 50 percent of agricultural land is rented, and renters may be making cultivation decisions that maximize short-term gains rather than focusing on the long-term health of the land. Existing and emerging technology innovations may be able to address some effects of conversion on water resources. Congress is considering legislation that would require DOE’s research, development, and demonstration programs to seek to advance energy and energy efficiency technologies. It would also require the Secretary of Energy to create a council to promote and enable, in part, improved energy and water use. The bill would require efforts to minimize freshwater use, increase water use efficiency, and utilize nontraditional water sources with efforts to improve the quality of that water. More research is needed to ensure that the next generation of biorefineries is as water efficient as possible. EPA officials noted that additional research related to storage and distribution of biofuels is also needed. More is needed into the compatibility of fuel blends containing more than 10 percent ethanol with the existing fueling infrastructure, they say. Better information is necessary to better define the spatial distribution, depth, quantity, physical and chemical characteristics for these lower-quality water sources, the authors say. It is unclear how much water has been or will be consumed with increases in cultivation and conversion of biofuel feedstocks. increased production may lead to significant water shortages in certain regions. Additional withdrawals in states relying heavily on irrigation for agriculture may place new demands on already stressed aquifers in the Midwest. Even in water-rich states, such as Iowa, concerns have arisen over the effects of increased biofuel production. We are sending copies of this report to interested congressional committees; the Secretaries of Agriculture, Energy, and the Interior; the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency; and other interested parties. The report will be available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. We conducted a systematic analysis of relevant articles of relevant scientific articles. We interviewed recognized experts affiliated with U.S.-based institutions, including academic institutions, the federal government, and research- oriented entities. We examined key assumptions, methods, and relevant findings of major scientific articles, primarily on water supply and water quality. We believe we have included the key scientific studies and have qualified our findings where appropriate. But it is important to note that, given our methodology, we may not have identified all of the studies with findings relevant to our objectives. the interview content analysis, we reviewed interviews, selected relevant statements from the interviews, and identified and labeled trends using a coding system. The methodology for each objective varied slightly, because the first objective focused on regional differences and therefore relied on case study interviews. Once relevant data were extracted and coded, we used the coded data to identify and analyze trends. We used the following categories to quantify responses of experts and officials: “some” refers to responses from 2 to 3 individuals, “several’ refers to. responses from 4 to 6 individuals, and “many” means responses from 7 or more individuals. our work from January 2009 to November 2009 in accordance with all sections of GAO’s Quality Assurance Framework that are relevant to our objectives. The framework requires that we plan and perform the engagement to obtain sufficient and appropriate evidence to meet our stated objectives and to discuss any limitations in our work. We believe that the information and data obtained, and the analysis conducted, provide a reasonable basis for any findings and conclusions in this product. Reduces soil erosion caused by tillage and exposure of bare soil to wind and water. A close-growing crop that temporarily protects the soil during the interim period before the next crop is established. Integrates crops that store nitrogen from the atmosphere (such as soy), replaces the nitrogen that corn and other grains remove from the soil. Reduces pesticide use by naturally breaking the cycle of weeds, insects, and diseases.improves soil quality by improving soil organic matter. Use of nutrients to match the rate, timing, form, of crops grown in a field, usually in a planned sequence. Precision agriculture may be able to maximize farm production efficiency while minimizing environmental effects. Key technological tools used in this approach include global positioning systems, geographic information systems, real-time soil testing,real-time weather information. A system of management of site-specific inputs (e.g., fertilizer, pesticides) on a site- specific basis such as land preparation for planting, seed, fertilizers and nutrients, and pest control. The U.S. Department of Agriculture has released a list of tips on how to reduce the environmental impact of agriculture. erosion. Reduces pesticide use. In addition to the contact named above, Elizabeth Erdmann, Assistant Director; JoAnna Berry; Mark Braza; Dave Brown; Muriel Brown; Colleen Candrl; Miriam Hill; Carol Kolarik; Micah McMillan; Chuck Orthman; Tim Persons; Nicole Rishel; Ellery Scott; Ben Shouse; Jeanette Soares; Swati Thomas; Lisa Vojta; and Rebecca Wilson made significant contributions to this report.