The Civil Rights Act of 1964 prohibited discrimination in schools, employment, and places of public accommodation. The Department of Education’s Office for Civil Rights has some responsibility for enforcing the Act. Title IV of the Act also authorizes Justice to file suit in federal court to enforce the civil rights of students in public education. The Equal Educational Opportunities Act of 1974 prohibits states from denying equal educational opportunity to individuals, including deliberate segregation of students on the basis of race, color, or national origin. In school year 2011-12, for the first time in about a decade, Education collected these data from all K-12 public schools in the United States. It makes its Civil Rights Data available to the public so that researchers, states, and districts can conduct their own analyses. Through its Magnet Schools Assistance Program, Education provides grants to local educational agencies to establish and operate magnet schools. These grants are intended to assist in the desegregation of public schools by supporting the elimination, reduction, and prevention of minority group isolation in elementary and secondary schools. Justice monitors and enforces the implementation of any open school desegregation court order to which Justice is a party. Education launched a 50-state strategy to enforce a statutory provision that required states to take steps to ensure poor and minority students are not taught by inexperienced, unqualified, or out-of- field teachers. Some of the cases that originally ordered districts to desegregate their schools back in the 1960s and 1970s are still open today. The onus is on the school district, not Justice, to seek unitary status. U.S. Supreme Court struck down several school districts’ student assignment plans that relied on racial classification. In 1975, approximately a decade after enactment of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, Black students were the largest minority group in public schools. In 2007, in Parents Involved in Community Schools v. Seattle School District No. 1, the Court held that the districts failed to show that the use of race in their student assignment plan was necessary to achieve their goal of racial diversity. The composition of the student population has changed significantly over time. In school year 2013-14, Hispanic students were the largest minority group in schools. Both groups continue to have poverty rates two to three times higher than the rates of White students. According to several studies, there is concern about this segment of the population that falls at the intersection of poverty and minority status in schools and how this affects their access to quality education. Of the approximately 93,400 K-12 public schools in the United States, 90 percent of them were traditional schools, 7 percent were charter schools. An extensive body of research over the past 10 years shows a clear link between schools’ socioeconomic (or income) composition and student academic outcomes. The studies, however, paint a more nuanced picture of the effects of schools' racial composition on student Academic outcomes. Over time, there has been a large increase in schools that are the most isolated by poverty and race. The U.S. Census Bureau projects that by 2044, minorities will be the largest minority group in K-12 public schools. Black or Hispanic, across most areas analyzed. In addition, comparing just the H/PBH traditional, charter, and magnet schools, we also found differences. These analyses, taken alone, should not be used to make conclusions about the presence or absence of unlawful discrimination. The Importance of Middle School Algebra, STEM courses, and AP and GATE Programs are especially beneficial in preparing students for college and successful careers. Among these are middle school algebra; courses in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) fields; Advanced Placement (AP) courses; and Gifted and Talented Education (GATE) programs. violated the state constitution, requiring the state to take action to diversify the urban district and its surrounding suburban schools. In response, the state and district took a variety of actions. In particular the state provided funding to build several new or completely renovated state-of-the-art magnet schools within the region to attract suburban students. To attract students from the city and suburbs, the magnet schools used highly specialized curriculum. For example, one newly renovated environmental sciences magnet school offered theme-based instruction. The state required the district’s magnet schools to maintain a student enrollment of no more than 75 percent minority students. Officials said maintaining a certain ratio of non- minority students posed challenges. The state also enabled students from the urban district to enroll in traditional schools (non-magnet) in the suburbs. Some families chose not to enroll their children in the suburban schools and instead opted to stay in close-by neighborhood schools, officials said. They also said the neighborhood schools were not required to maintaining a specified percentage of minority students like the magnets. The district in the South had previously been under a federal desegregation order. Students in the district represented about 120 different nationalities and languages. Under the new plan, parents were allowed to choose among schools within their attendance zones. The plan also supported students who chose to attend schools outside of these zones by providing public transit passes, while school bus transportation was provided to students who attended schools within the attendance zones, the authors say. But even after implementing the new diversity plan, officials told us that some families in their district sent their children to private schools, rather than attend the district's public schools. The district we visited in the West is located in a state with an “open-enrollment” law. White students often choose not to attend certain schools in the district. District officials told us that this left a largely Hispanic and low-income student population in those schools. Education has taken a range of actions to address racial discrimination in schools, the authors say.. English Learners, or foster care youth. The state provided additional funds for high-needs students, such as those eligible for free or reduced- price lunch. Education’s Office for Civil Rights launched 32 compliance reviews in fiscal years 2013 and 2014 across a range of issues related to racial discrimination. Education may withhold federal funds if a recipient is in violation of the civil rights laws and Education is unable to reach agreement with the parties. Education has also conducted more narrowly-focused investigations in response to complaints of discrimination, which can be filed by anyone who believes an educational institution that receives federal funds has discriminated against someone on the basis of race, color, or national origin. Education, it received about 2,400 such complaints in fiscal year 2014. Education found that the football coach directed racial slurs at Black players, and players who complained were harassed by their fellow students and staff. Education negotiated a resolution agreement with the district that required the district to review and revise its harassment and discrimination policies and take appropriate steps to remedy the harassment by the coach. The district also appointed a new coach and offered counseling to the players. The coach did not assist Black players with obtaining athletic scholarships, even stating that athletic scholarships are for White players. Education has issued guidance to schools on their obligations under the federal civil rights laws. Education could further enhance its current efforts by also more routinely analyzing data by school types and groupings, authors say. For example, through its analysis of its Civil Rights Data, Education identified an issue nationwide with disproportionately high suspension and expulsion rates of certain groups of students by race, among other characteristics. The disparities were most acute among H/PBH schools, with disparities most evident among traditional charter and magnet schools. The Department of Justice’s Educational Opportunities Section of the Civil Rights Division has taken several actions to address racial discrimination against students. Justice conducts investigations in response to complaints or reports of possible violations. By analyzing its data by groupings and types of schools, Education has an opportunity to enhance its efforts and better inform guidance and technical assistance to the groups and type of schools that need it most. Depending on the outcome of its investigation and the circumstances of the case, Justice could provide guidance and assistance. Justice monitors and enforces open federal school desegregation cases where Justice is a party. As of November 2015 there were 178 of these cases. Justice has issued guidance jointly with Education to ensure states and school districts understand their responsibilities to prevent and address racial discrimination in schools. For example, in 2000 Justice intervened in a civil rights lawsuit against a district, alleging the district failed to appropriately address harassment of a pair of students by other students. The parties negotiated an agreement, which was adopted by the court as an order, that required the district to maintain written records of each harassment allegation. it does not systematically track important summary information on these orders. As a consequence, the potential exists that some cases could unintentionally languish for long periods of time. For example, in a long-standing desegregation case, the court described a long period of dormancy in the case and stated that lack of activity had taken its toll. The court noted that had Justice “been keeping an eye” on relevant information, such as disparities in test scores, it could have brought it to the court’s attention. attention more quickly, allowing the court and district to address the issue in a timely fashion. Officials were unable to provide more detailed summary information across all of the open cases. Justice officials said that to obtain such information they would have to review each individual case file, some of which are voluminous and not stored electronically. The last action taken on the open orders within broad time frames of 5 years, 10 years, or 15 years was not available. The case name, the court docket number, the identification number generated by Justice, and the jurisdiction where the case originated are included in the system. According to Justice’s Strategic Plan, the agency has a goal to protect the rights of the American people and enforce federal law. According to this Plan, Justice seeks to address and prevent discrimination and segregation in elementary and secondary schools. The Plan states that the extent to which societal attitudes and practices reflect a continuing commitment to tolerance, diversity, and equality affect the scope and nature of Justice's work. Federal internal control standards state that routine monitoring should be a part of normal operations to allow an agency to assess how the entity being monitored is performing over time. monitoring of activities. Without a systematic way to track key information about all of the open desegregation cases, Justice may lack the summary information needed to monitor the status of its orders. This may affect the agency’s ability to effectively manage its caseload and to promote and protect civil rights. More than 60 years after the Brown decision, our work shows that disparities in the justice system are still wide and deep. We need to do more to close the gap between the rich and the poor. Black and Hispanic students are increasingly attending high-poverty schools where they face multiple disparities, including less access to academic offerings. Education has ongoing efforts to collect data that it uses to identify potential discrimination and disparities across key groups of students. Justice is a party to 178 federal desegregation orders that remain open, but Justice does not track key summary information about the orders that would allow them to effectively monitor their status. Without systematically tracking such information, the agency may lack information that could help in its enforcement efforts. Justice said it is currently developing an electronic document management system that may allow more case-related information to be stored in electronic format. Justice also stated that our report fails to appreciate the extensive amount of data the agency maintains on its desegregation cases. We understand Justice’s need to maintain voluminous case-specific evidentiary files, some of which are maintained in hard copies. But Justice does not track such data across cases, because the data it collects are used to litigate each individual case. Justice said it is concerned that the report could be read to suggest that racial disparities within a public school district constitute per se evidence of racial discrimination. Justice said various terms in our recommendation, such as “systematically’ or “key” were not clear or well defined. It was out of recognition for the extensive nature of these files that we recommended Justice also have a way to track key, summary information across its cases. Such summary information would allow for timely and effective monitoring and for prompt reaction. Justice said in this case and in many others, it is engaged in a range of related activities, such as site visits and settlement agreements, which are not recorded on the courts’ docket sheets. Justice said it was concerned the report could be read to suggest that some cases have remained dormant or languished for long periods of time as a result of Justice’s tracking system. We have clarified in the report that data on disparities taken alone are insufficient to establish unlawful discrimination, Justice said. by achieving unitary status). In the draft report on which Justice commented, we stated that the onus is on the district, not Justice, to seek unitarystatus. We have amended the final report to state this more prominently. We acknowledge the key roles of the districts and the courts in resolving and advancing a desegregation case, but the focus of our report is on federal role. Justice, too, plays an important role in litigating these cases. We believe this role would be enhanced by improving its tracking of information about the cases. The report will be available at no charge on GAO’s website at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staff have any questions about this report, please contact me at (617) 788-0580. Contact points for our Offices of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of this report. The objectives of this study were to examine: (1) how the percentage of schools with high percentages of poor and Black or Hispanic students has changed over time. We focused on Black and Hispanic students because they are the two largest minority groups in U.S. K-12 public schools. We measured poverty level at the school level using the percentage of students eligible for free or reduced-price lunch. We analyzed schools with both the highest and lowest percentages of poverty and Blacks or Hispanics. We used Education’s Common Core of Data (CCD) from school years 2000-01, 2005-06, 2010- 11, and 2013-14. The data in the CCD represent the full universe of all U.S. K-12 public schools. The data are supplied by state education agency officials describing their schools and school districts. To further understand the trends underlying the growth or decline of these categories of schools, we examined the trends in state education agencies, as well as the state and local levels of education funding for each school. We reviewed technical documentation and interviewed relevant officials from Education. Based on these efforts, we determined that these data were sufficiently reliable for our purposes. whether any variation in growth existed by region (Northeastern, Midwestern, Southern, and Western areas of the United States) and school type (traditional neighborhood schools, charter schools, and magnet schools) For our analysis of the CCD, we excluded schools that did not report information on (1) free or reduced-price lunch, which we used as a proxy to categorize the poverty level of the school. For school year 2000-01, we included 78,194 schools and excluded 16,520 schools. Non-sampling errors can be introduced in many ways. CCD’s coverage of traditional public schools and school districts is very complete. Coverage of publicly funded education outside of traditional school districts has varying levels of coverage within different states and jurisdictions. Some states do not report schools that are administered by state organizations other than state educational agencies. Examples include charter schools authorized by an organization that is not a school district, schools sponsored by health and human services agencies within a state, and juvenile justice facilities. The Civil Rights Data is part of Education’s overall strategy for administering and enforcing the federal civil rights statutes for which it is responsible. The data was collected from the full universe of all U.S. K-12 public schools in 2011-12. These data are also subject to non-sampling error, and because these data are self-reported, there is also the potential for misreporting of information. For these data, Education put in place quality control and editing procedures to reduce errors. suppression. To mitigate the potential for suppressions that distort aggregate totals, suppressed data were replaced with imputed data where possible. We selected a school district in each of three states (one in the Northeast, South, and West) and interviewed officials to describe why and how selected school districts have taken actions to address the diversity of their schools. Within these districts, the schools we visited were selected to include a mix of grade level (elementary, middle, and high school) and school type (traditional public and magnet) and a review of available information. We interviewed different stakeholders, such as school district superintendents, school board members, state education officials, community leaders, and school officials. We did not assess the extent to which the selected districts have achieved any diversity goals or complied with any applicable court orders. Because we selected the school districts judgmentally, we cannot generalize the findings about the actions officials took to address diversity to all school districts and schools nationwide. We assessed agencies’ actions using guidance on internal controls in the federal government related to oversight and monitoring. we used studies published between 2004 and 2014 on U.S. students, as these studies are more reflective of current students and their outcomes. We excluded from consideration some studies based on factors including outdated data, limited scope, or research methods that failed to control for multiple factors when assessing outcomes. The findings of the studies we identified are not representative of the findings of all studies looking at whether a school’s racial or socioeconomic composition affects student outcomes. This appendix contains the results of our additional analyses to examine trends and disparities among schools with different levels of poverty among students and Black or Hispanic students. The Tier Working Paper Series (2010) was compiled by Sherri Doughty, Linda Siegel, Rachel Beers, Lisa Brown, Grace Cho, Sarah Cornetto, Camille Henley, John Mingus, Anna Maria Ortiz, and David Reed. Also contributing to this report were Deborah Bland, Holly Dye, Farrah Graham, Kirsten Lauber, Mimi Nguyen, and Cady Panetta. In addition to the contact named above, Sherri. Doughty (Assistant Director), Linda. Siegel (Analyst-in-Charge), and David. Reed made key contributions.