Most rail traffic in the U.S. is not subject to the Surface Transportation Board’s (the Board) rate regulation. The Board is responsible for the economic and rate regulation of freight railroads and certain pipelines, as well as some aspects of motor and water carrier transportation. The board was established pursuant to the ICC Termination Act of 1995, and is organizationally housed within the Department of Transportation (DOT) The board is a bipartisan, independent, adjudicatory body. greater flexibility to negotiate freight rates and respond to market conditions. The Staggers Act in particular made it federal policy that freight railroads would rely, where possible, on competition and the demand for services. The number of large railroads in the United States has declined substantially from the 63 class I railroads operating in 1976 to nine by 1997. In 1997, class I freightRailroads originated almost 1.6 billion tons of freight, of which coal, farm products, and chemicals accounted for about 61 percent. The nine class I freight railroads in 1997 were the Burlington Northern and Santa Fe Railway Co., CSX Transportation and Grand Trunk Western Railroad, Inc. Since 1997, additional railroad consolidations have occurred. Officials from the Federal Railroad Administration (FRA) believe that within the next 5 years, the number of class I railroads will fall to eight. The FRA estimates that the number will drop from 9 to 8 within five years. The number of railroads that will be class I in 1999 is expected to be less than 1.5percent. The ICC Termination Act of 1995 eliminated the ICC and transferred its core rail adjudicative functions and certain non-rail functions to the Board. The 1976 and 1980 acts provided railroads with significant flexibility to negotiate freight rates and respond to market conditions. The Staggers Rail Act built on the reforms of the 1976 act by establishing a threshold under which railroads would not be considered market dominant. Shipments exempted from rate regulation accounted for an additional 12 percent of all rail tonnage moved in 1997. Board is required to exempt any person or class of persons, or a transaction or service, from regulation. In April 1998, the Board exempted 29 nonferrous recyclable commodity groups from the Board’s regulation. Board found that railroads do not possess sufficient market power to abuse shippers. Other exemptions issued for the same reason include those for boxcar traffic, certain agricultural products, and intermodal transportation. The remaining traffic, potentially subject to rate regulation, accounted for 18 percent of rail tonnage in 1997. The railroad industry was in weak financial condition with a rate of return on net investment of 1.2 percent in 1975. By contrast, manufacturing companies and utilities earned rates of return in 1975 of about 15 and 12 percent. The 1976 act required the ICC to develop standards for determining whether railroads’ were earning adequate revenues to cover their operating costs and provide a reasonable return on capital. Despite the reforms of the 1976 act, in 1980, the Congress found that railroads' earnings were still insufficient to generate the funds they needed to make improvements. Transactions requiring the Board’s approval are not subject to the antitrust laws or other federal, state, and municipal laws. During a merger proceeding involving two or more class I railroads, the Board is required to consider, among other things, how the merger will affect competition among railroads. The Board oversees other rail matters, such as line constructions and abandonments. Railroads that want to either construct a new rail line or abandon an existing one must generally obtain the Board's approval. R. Burns, John D. Rockefeller IV, and Pat Roberts asked us to describe the Board’s rate relief complaint process and how it has changed since the ICC Termination Act of 1995. GAO will issue a companion report that will address how freight railroad rates and service have changed since 1990. We met with Board officials, shippers’ organizations, and the AAR to gain a thorough understanding of the process. We then summarized the rate relief process and obtained comments on our summary from the Board. outcome. The Board’s requirement that railroads demonstrate product and geographic competition for traffic subject to a challenged rate was in effect during the course of our review. We did not independently verify the information provided by the Board regarding the number of complaints filed or pending since January 1, 1990. To determine shippers’ views on the rate relief process and suggestions for improvement, we mailed a questionnaire to members of 11 commodity associations that ship using rail in the United States. To identify the individual shippers of each commodity, we obtained a list of their names. To identify these shippers, we selected three commodity classifications representing four commodities that constitute the largest volume of rail shipments. The selection of 2,149 shippers was reduced by 92 to account for shippers who were members of more than one association, leaving 2,057. Of the 1,657 grain, coal, chemicals and plastics shippers we surveyed, 996 (or 60.1 percent) returned our survey. The response rates were 61 percent, 62 percent, and 55 percent, respectively. AAR mailed a questionnaire to each of the nine class I railroads with operations in the U.S. The questionnaires asked the railroads to indicate the significance of barriers caused by the standard rate complaint process. AAR officials answered questions pertaining to the rate relief process and competition issues on behalf of therailroads. In commenting on a draft of this report, the Board disagreed with our statistic that 88 percent of rail shippers are satisfied with the current rate relief system, AAR says. class I railroads operated in 1976. The Board noted that of these 30 rail systems, 9 were subsequently reclassified as smaller (class II or III) railroad systems. 2 systems ceased operations as a result of bankruptcy. The actual reduction in the number of class I railroad systems from 1976 to 1998 that resulted from mergers and consolidations was from 19 to 9. Our count of 88 class IRailroads was based on information from FRA’s annual safety bulletins. To be consistent with the Board, we changed the number to 63 and provided additional information on the 30 systems these class I railroad represented. The rate complaint process in larger cases is a complex administrative proceeding involving difficult issues. In February 1999, the Board raised the filing fee for a case brought under the standard guidelines to $54,500—20 percent of the 1999 cost to the agency of adjudicating a rate complaint. The Board’s goal is to complete the entire process in 16 months. The parties use a variety of tools to obtain information from each other and present evidence supporting their positions under a schedule established by regulation. The Board’s regulations require the parties to discuss discovery matters within 7 days after a complaint is filed. According to shipper representatives, a complaint can cost a shipper from about $500,000 to $3 million. Shipping groups told us that obtaining information during the discovery process can be difficult and that railroads make it burdensome and time-consuming for them. Shippers are reluctant to challenge railroads during discovery, fearing that an extended schedule will lead to added costs and the continued disruption of daily operations. The Board may assess whether a challenged rate is reasonable only if the railroad dominates the shipper’s transportation market. The Staggers Rail Act retained this requirement and tied the definition of market dominance to rail rates exceeding a certain revenue-to-variable cost percentage. Until January 1999, the railroad had to show that theShipper had access to alternative origin or destination points for the same commodity. The shipper must prove that it does not have access to more than one competing railroad or combination of railroads. 1976 act, the ICC regulated almost all rates and judged their reasonableness by various cost formulas. Constrained Market Pricing (CMP) guidelines for coal shipped in markets where there was only one railroad. ICC believed that CMP allowed it both to assist railroads in attaining adequate revenues and protect shippers from monopolistic pricing practices. AAR challenged the simplified guidelines in federal court, contending that they did not fulfill Congress’s directive to establish a simple and expedited method to determine whether rates were reasonable. The Board has encouraged further private-sector discussions to address access and competition issues. In September 1998, the American Short Line and Regional Railroad Association (ASLRRA) and AAR announced an agreement to improve service. The agreement provides for confidential, nonbinding mediation of certain rate disputes and mandatory binding arbitration of service disputes. Other mechanisms to encourage discussions between the railroad and shipper communities include the National Grain Car Council and the Joint Grain Logistics Task Force. The Task Force will address shippers’ and railroads’ information needs concerning recurring seasonal problems. The Board must balance two competing goals: considering the needs of the railroad industry for adequate revenues and ensuring that the industry does not exert an unfair advantage over captive shippers. Board officials noted that the agency has streamlined the standard process for handling large cases (such as modifying the market-dominance rule) But they stated that the complexity of the standard procedures for larger rate cases is largely unavoidable. Officials expressed confidence that the courts would affirm the Board’s simplified procedures, when they are applied. The time required for resolving a complaint varied by commodity. Three complaints filed by grain shippers, which were combined into a single proceeding, took about 16 years to resolve. Coal and chemical complaints have generally been resolved more quickly; average reviews have taken about 5 and 2 years respectively. Some cases were lengthy because the standards were not in place when the cases were filed and/or because of extensive litigation. The Department of Energy and the Department of Defense filed complaints against various railroads in 1978 and 1981 regarding railroads. The ICC found that the railroads’ practice of requiring special trains to handle this material was unreasonable. On appeal, the court held that the agency must rule on the rate levels. The Board told the parties that it will not resolve these cases until it receives information on their progress in settling the dispute. If the information provided shows that there is little or no prospect that the parties will resolve these complaints, the Board will move the case forward. Of the complaints we reviewed, those filed after January 1, 1990, were generally completed more quickly. The Board is currently reviewing nine rate complaints, including three filed by the Department of Energy. The Board is also considering three complaints filed by electric utility companies for the transport of coal, one complaint regarding the Transport of grain, and two chemicals complaints. Many of the complaints did not go through the entire rate complaint process. These complaints usually ended after reaching the discovery stage of the process. The complaints involve the same traffic, but the Board has not officially consolidated these three complaints into a single proceeding. phase (where the railroad and shipper disclose information) or the evidentiary phase. Of these complaints, the ICC/Board dismissed seven after it had examined market dominance and eight during or after a review of the reasonableness of the rates. In two cases, the Board found rates to be unreasonable and awarded reparations to Arizona Public Service and PacifiCorp (jointly, Arizona) and West Texas Utilities. The ICC/ board found that the rates in six of these eight cases were reasonable; the other two complaints were ultimately dismissed at the shippers' requests. The Board concluded that our approach of counting consolidated rate complaints separately overstated the average time required to resolve rate complaints. In response to our survey of shippers and discussions with commodity shipping associations, shippers cited several reasons for not using the standard rate complaint process. Shippers suggested methods to simplify the filing process and thereby reduce the time and costs involved. Increasing competition in the railroad industry would lower freight rates and diminish the need to file rate complaints, railroads said in a response to the Board's survey. From 52 to 58 percent of the rail shippers we surveyed support certain types of arbitration. Grain shippers generally favored arbitration more than coal, chemicals, and plastics shippers. It is too early to tell whether the use of mediation to resolve rate disputes between shippers and their railroads will have a positive impact, says AAR. Some shippers suggested that the Board’s current statutory jurisdictional threshold for rate reasonableness complaints is too high and that a rate that is below 180 percent of a railroad's variable cost of transporting the traffic can still be unreasonable. Railroads, shippers disagree on need to increase competition. Shippers want ability to choose between railroads when there is an option. Railroads say deregulation has increased revenue, decreased rates, improved industry's financial viability. Board has not initiated a proceeding to consider whether it should be reduced to a level below 180 percent, says AAR official. AAR sees additional efforts to impose reciprocal switching agreements and trackage rights as a kind of “forced access and greater regulation” that would return the shipping industry to the poor condition it was in before deregulation. McCarty Farms alleged that Burlington Northern Railroad was charging unreasonable rates for transporting wheat from Montana to ports in Oregon and Washington State. The district court referred the matter to the Interstate Commerce Commission (ICC) to determine the reasonableness of the rates. In a December 1981 decision, an administrative law judge found Burlington Northern had market dominance over wheat and barley traffic. In 1991, the ICC affirmed its earlier decisions, concluding that Burlington. Northern dominated the movement of Wheat and barley and that. Burlington Northern’s rates were unreasonable. the court held that it did not have jurisdiction over claims that were initially raised by the McCarty Farms Group’s complaint in federal district court. The district court has since dismissed its portion of the case at the request of the parties. The ICC designated the post-1982 part of this case as 38239S (Sub-No.1) For the purposes of this analysis, we considered this as one complaint. In a decision served on June 7, 1989, the ICC divided the proceeding that originated with one complaint into two proceedings. dismissed the complaint on Dec. 31, 1996, because the regulatory relief sought was not available. Shipper’s appeal pending. Vinyl acetate (chemical) The Board dismissed the complaint for lack of jurisdiction on Aug. 22, 1997. The parties have asked the Board to hold the proceedings in abeyance, pending possible settlement. Polyethylene terephthalate ( chemical) Apr. 5, 1996 Not determined (continued) Market-dominance present? Soda ash, phosphorus, phosphate rock, coke, sodium bicarobonate.  appendix presents the results of our shipper survey in summary form. It discusses the methodology used in controlling for sampling error, nonsampling error, and presentation. In administering this survey, we agreed to hold the responses of individual shippers confidential. We asked survey respondents to indicate the average number of loaded out-bound rail shipments. they had made since 1990. The results of this survey have not been presented in this appendix because of the confidentiality of the responses. We are happy to clarify this. Table III.6 shows the percentage of respondents whose answers fit each category. Table III.7 through III.9 present the sampling error associated with the estimates we present in Chapter 4. Our estimates for coal, chemical and plastics shippers do not include sampling error because we sent our survey to 100 percent of these shippers in our universe. Four of the nine class I railroads we surveyed responded to this set of questions. The information provided by the railroads augmented the information we developed from reviewing the Board’s case files. The first copy of each GAO report and testimony is free. Additional copies are $2 each. Orders should be sent to the following address, accompanied by a check or money order made out to the Superintendent of Documents, when necessary. VISA and MasterCard credit cards are accepted, also. Orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent. The U.S. General Accounting Office P.O. Box 37050 Washington, DC 20013 Room 1100 700 4th St NW (corner of 4th and G Sts. NW) from the past 30 days, please call (202) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone. A recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. For support in the Middle East, call the Salvation Army on 866-856-7273.