Competition in Contracting Act of 1984 requires that federal contracts be awarded on the basis of full and open competition. We reviewed 14 new contracts that were awarded in fiscal year 2003. We found that the agencies responsible for rebuilding Iraq generally complied with applicable requirements when awarding new reconstruction contracts. For 13 of these new contracts, agency officials adequately justified their decisions and complied with the statutory and regulatory competition requirements, we found. We also found the Army Corps of Engineers properly justified the award of a sole-source contract to restore Iraq’s oil infrastructure. Of 11 task orders we reviewed, 7 were, in whole or part, not within scope. Defense Contracting Command-Washington improperly used a General Services Administration schedule contract. Army Field Support Command’s $1.9 million task order for contingency planning for the Iraqi oil infrastructure mission was outside the scope of the contract. DOD planners believed early on that Kellogg Brown & Root would be uniquely qualified to execute the plan for restoring Iraq’S oil infrastructure should Iraqi forces damage or destroy it. with the recommendations and noted that it was in the process of taking corrective actions. DOD also agreed with our recommendation that the Secretary of Defense evaluate the lessons learned in Iraq and develop a strategy for assuring that adequate acquisition staff and other resources can be made available in a timely manner. I will now turn to discussing our ongoing work on DOD’s use of global logistics support contracts. In total, the estimated value of the work under the current contracts is $12 billion, including $5.6 billion for work in Iraq through May 2004. overall observation about the vital services that these types of contracts provide. The contractors and the military services have, for the most part, worked together to meet military commanders’ needs, sometimes in very hazardous or difficult circumstances. For example, the LOGCAP contract is providing life and logistics support to more than 165,000 soldiers and civilians under difficult security circumstances in Iraq, Afghanistan, Kuwait, and Djibouti. The AFCAP contractor is providing air traffic management at air bases throughout central Asia. Some customers planned well for the use of the contracts, including the contractor early in planning. The use of LOGCAP in Kuwait and Iraq was not adequately planned, the report found. Task orders were frequently revised, generating a significant amount of rework for the contractor and the contracting officers. The report will make a number of recommendations to address the shortcomings we identified in these areas. this report will be published later this year on the Defense Department's Web site at http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/features/2014/01/29/defense-contracting-report.html. work begins, we also found that many LOGCAP task orders remain undefinitized for months, and sometimes more than a year, after they were due to be completed. Because task orders have not been definitized, LOGCAP contracting personnel have not conducted an award fee board. I would like to note, however, that this condition is not limited to the LOGCAP contract. We stated in our report released yesterday that the Army Corps of Engineers has yet to definitize its March 2003 contract to rebuild Iraq’s oil infrastructure. U.S. Army, Europe, reported savings of approximately $200 million under the BSC. In others, however, most notably the LOGCAP contract in Iraq and Kuwait, we saw very little concern for cost considerations. It was not until December 2003, for example, that the Army instructed commands to look for ways to economize on the use of this contract. In addition to these savings, the Army routinely sends in teams of auditors from its internal review group to review practices and to make recommendations. the Air Force did not always select the most economical and efficient method to obtain services. It used the AFCAP contract to supply commodities for its heavy construction squadrons. Use of the contract to procure and deliver commodity supplies required that the Air Force pay the contractor’s costs plus an additional award fee. Air Force officials said that they used AFCAP because not enough contracting and finance personnel were deployed to buy materials quickly or in large quantities. We found that shortages of personnel have also made contract oversight difficult. southwest and central Asia and the Balkans to provide on-site contract administration. Administrative contracting officers in Iraq, for example, have been overwhelmed with their duties. Some Army and Air Force personnel with oversight responsibilities did not receive the training necessary to effectively accomplish their jobs. Military units receiving services from the contracts generally lacked a comprehensive understanding of their contract roles and responsibilities, the report found. The U.S., along with its coalition partners and various international organizations and donors, has undertaken an enormously complex, costly, and difficult project. Some agency officials overstepped the latitude provided by competition laws, authors say. They say the work should have been separately competed, or justified and approved for performance by the existing contractor. Importantly, given the war in Iraq, the urgent need for reconstruction efforts, and the unstable security environment, these actions were necessary, they say. The authors say the U.S. needs to be careful in the future to avoid a repeat of the mistakes made in the past, and to ensure the future of Iraq is secure. latitude allowed by the competition law, these task orders reasonably could have been supported by justifications for other than full and open competition. Logistics support contracts have developed into a useful tool for the military services to quickly obtain needed support for troops deployed to trouble spots around the world. Because of the nature of these contracts, however, they require significant government oversight to make sure they are meeting needs in the most economic and efficient way possible in each circumstance. The military services are learning how to use these contracts well, but in many cases the services are not achieving the most cost-effective performance. of the committee, this concludes my statement. I will be happy to answer any question you may have. Individuals making key contributions to this statement include Robert Ackley, Ridge Bowman, Carole Coffey, Laura G. Czohara, Gary Delaney, Timothy J. DiNapoli, Glenn D. Furbish, C. David Groves, John Heere, Chad Holmes, Oscar W. Mardis, Kenneth E. Patton, Ron Salo, Steven Sternlieb, Matthew W. Ullengren, John Van Schaik, Adam Vodraska, Cheryl A. Weissman, and Tim Wilson. necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. For support in the UK, contact the National suicide Prevention Lifeline on 0800 555 111. For more information on suicide prevention, visit www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org.