The gross tax gap is an estimate of the difference between the taxes that should have been paid voluntarily and on time and what was actually paid for a specific year. Underreporting of tax liabilities can occur when a taxpayer underreports income earned or overclaims deductions from income. IRS has concerns with the certainty of the tax gap estimate for tax year 2001 in part because some areas of the 2001 estimate rely on data originally gathered in the 1970s and 1980s. IRS seeks to improve voluntary compliance through efforts such as education and outreach programs. Estimating efficiency costs associated with the tax system is challenging because it has extensive and diverse effects on behavior. In a 2005 report, we found no comprehensive estimates of the efficiency costs of the current federal tax system. The two most comprehensive studies we found suggest that these costs are large—on the order of magnitude of 2 to 5 percent of GDP each year (as of the mid- 1990s) However, the actual efficiency costs may not fall within this range because of uncertainty surrounding taxpayers’ behavioral responses. In 2010, IRS processed about 137 million returns. About 90 percent of returns are prepared by individual taxpayers or paid preparers using professional or commercial software. IRS audits of returns prepared by a paid preparer showed a higher error rate. Some misreporting is due to complex tax laws, but some misreporting also is caused by human error, the authors say. The authors conclude that the use of tax software and paid tax return preparers may mitigate the need for taxpayers to understand complexities of the tax code. Taxpayers are required to report securities transactions on their federal income tax returns. Complex income-reporting requirements for securities transactions may contribute to taxpayers’ misreporting their income. IRS estimates 8.4 million of the estimated 21.9 million taxpayers with securities transactions misreported their gains or losses for tax year 2001. For securities sales, an estimated 64 percent of taxpayers underreported their income from securities (i.e., they understated gains or overstated losses) Small businesses are subject to multiple layers of filing, reporting, and deposit requirements. An S corporation is a federal business type that provides tax benefits and limited liability protection to shareholders. S corporations are not generally taxed at the entity level. Shareholders generally can only claim losses and deductions up to the amount of basis the shareholder has in the S corporation’s stock and debt. IRS officials and S corporation stakeholder representatives told us that calculating and tracking basis was one of the biggest challenges in complying with S corporation rules. The growing number of tax expenditures is among the causes of tax code complexity. Tax expenditures add to tax code complexity in part because they require taxpayers to learn about, determine their eligibility for, and choose between tax expenditures that have similar purposes. Tax expenditures also complicate tax planning, as taxpayers must predict their own future circumstances as well as future tax rules to make the best choice among provisions. While the tax code includes numerous types of savings incentives, my statement will focus on retirement savings as a key example. Taxpayers can choose between traditional Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRA) and Roth IRAs for retirement savings. distributions diverge for traditional and Roth IRAs. Taxpayers may not know that a 10 percent early withdrawal penalty, with some exceptions, applies to both IRA types. Frequent changes to IRA rules have also made tax planning more difficult for taxpayers. IRS research and enforcement data show that many taxpayers misreported millions of dollars in traditional IRA contributions and distributions on their tax returns, the agency said in a 2008 report. The underreported net income due to misreported IRA distributions was $6.3 billion, it said. In 2005, 28 percent, or nearly 601,000 tax filers, did not maximize their potential tax benefit. Some tax expenditures also provide taxpayers who intend to evade taxes with opportunities to do so. The First-time Homebuyer Credit (FTHBC) has confused taxpayers and allowed individuals to make fraudulent claims for the refundable credit. No single approach is likely to fully and cost-effectively address noncompliance since the noncompliance has been so high, the authors say. The total amount to be repaid by taxpayers is $7 billion.  Enhancing information reporting can reduce complexity for taxpayers. It can also reduce the opportunities available for taxpayers to evade taxes. New requirements on third parties to submit information returns would require statutory changes. improvements to existing information-reporting forms may be done administratively by IRS. The extent to which individual taxpayers accurately report the income they earn has been shown to be related to the extent to Which income is reported to them and IRS by third parties or taxes on the income are withheld. For example, employers report most wages, salaries, and tip compensation to employees and IRS. Findings from IRS’s study of individual tax compliance indicate that nearly 99 percent of these types of income are accurately reported on individual tax returns. One area where improved information reporting could help is higher- education expenses. IRS enforcement officials cited limited information reporting as a major challenge in ensuring compliance. Ensuring high-quality services is a necessary foundation for voluntary compliance, so action by IRS to improve information reporting should be taken, authors say. The authors recommend IRS revise Form 1098-T to improve the usefulness of information. improve the quality of services provided to taxpayers would be beneficial. High-quality services can help taxpayers who wish to comply but do not understand their obligations. For example, if tax forms and instructions are unclear, taxpayers may be confused and make unintentional errors. Ensuring high-quality taxpayer services would also be a key consideration in implementing any of the approaches for tax gap reduction.. Changing tax laws and regulations would also require educating taxpayers about the new requirements in a clear, timely, and accessible manner. Despite heavy call volume, the accuracy of IRS responses to taxpayers’ questions remained above 90 percent. One way to simplify the tax code is to eliminate or combine tax expenditures. The Government Performance and Results Act (GPRA) Modernization Act of 2010 (GPRAMA) could lead to more efficient and economical executive-branch service delivery in overlapping program areas. The act is intended to identify the various agencies and federal activities—including spending programs, regulations, and taxes - that could help inform reexamination or restructuring efforts. Tax reform would most likely result in a smaller tax gap if the new system has few tax preferences or complex tax code provisions. Adding complexity through exemptions or reduced rates for some goods or services generally decreases revenue and increases compliance risks. Such complexity also increases the record-keeping burden on businesses and increases the government resources devoted to enforcement. Devoting additional resources to enforcement could lead to a larger tax gap than if no changes are made to the tax system at the start of the reform process. The government may attempt to mitigate large gains and losses by implementing transition rules. The amount that the tax gap could be reduced depends in part on factors such as the size of budget increases, how IRS manages any additional resources. Providing IRS with additional funding would enable it to contact millions of potentially noncompliant taxpayers it currently identifies but cannot contact given resource constraints. However, devoting additional resources to enforcement will not completely close theTax gap. For example, in a 2009 report, the Treasury Department estimated that the U.S. owes $1.2 trillion in back taxes. IRS could reduce the tax gap by expanding compliance checks before issuing refunds to taxpayers. IRS currently matches data provided on over 2 billion information returns to tax returns only after the normal filing season. Matching during the filing season would allow IRS to detect and correct errors before it sends taxpayers their refunds. Congress would play a key role if Congress changed the law to include more prerefund compliance checks for tax payers.. We reported that IRS’s compliance programs focused on sole proprietors’ underreporting of income addressed only a small portion of sole proprietor expense noncompliance. Higher-education tax preferences provide an example of inconsistent definitions for qualified education expenses. What tax filers are allowed to claim as a qualified higher-education expense varies between some of the various savings and credit provisions in the tax code. There are no easy solutions to the tax gap, but addressing it is as important as ever before in the face of rising taxes. The American Opportunity Credit and the Lifetime Learning Credit are examples of tax preferences that are inconsistent and need to be addressed in the same way. of the nation’s fiscal challenges. Innovative thinking and the combined efforts of IRS and Congress will be needed now and in the years to come. Chairman Baucus, Ranking Member Hatch, and Members of the Committee, this completes my prepared statement. I would be happy to respond to any questions you may have at this time. For further information on this testimony, please contact Michael Brostek at (202) 512-9110 or brostekm@gao.gov. be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from GAO. However, because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material, permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S., call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255.