The two federal material support statutes have been at the heart of the Justice Department's terrorist prosecution efforts. They largely share a common definition of the term "material support" Since their inception in the mid-1990s, Congress has periodically expanded and sought to clarify the scope of Sections 2339A and 2339B. Allowing an individual to supply funds, goods, or services to an organization, or to any of its subgroups, helps defray the costs to the terrorist organization of running the ostensibly legitimate activities. "Whoever" usually means any legal entity or individual. Section 2339A outlaws: (1) whoever (2) [knowingly] (3)(a) attempts to, (b) conspires to, or (c) actually (4) provides material support or resources. The Dictionary Act declares that "person" and "whoever" include corporations, companies, associations, firms, partnerships, societies, and joint stock companies, as well as individuals. "Whoever" knows or intends that they be used in preparation for, or in carrying out, an offense identified as a federal crime of terrorism. At common law, every crime consisted of two essentials, one mental ( mens rea ) and the other physical ( actus reus ). Thereafter, legislative bodies, Congress included, created criminal offenses which had no mental component. This occurred most often for regulatory, "public welfare" misconduct, misconduct that did not constitute a common law crime. Federal law now generally holds that corporations are criminally liable for crimes committed by their officers, employees, or agents within the scope of their employment and for the benefit of the corporation. Supreme Court has stopped short of equating felony status with the intent to require a mens rea component. The word "provide" ordinarily means "to supply something for sustenance or support" Section 2339A condemns both providing material support and concealing "the nature, location, source, or ownership" The concealing prong provision seems designed to reach the middle men or conduits between terrorists and their supporters.. The predicate offense consists of several offenses, such as bombing a federal building or murdering a federal official. 18 U.S.C. Section 2339A outlaws attempts as well as conspiracies to violate its proscriptions. If the attempt is successful, the offender cannot be prosecuted or punished for both the completed offense and the attempt to commit it. Attempt has two elements: (1) an intent to commit the underlying offense; and (2) some substantial step towards its completion. Mere preparation is not enough. "To constitute a substantial step, the attempt must be completed" a defendant's actions must cross the line between preparation and attempt. It is no defense that, unbeknownst to the defendant, commission of the underlying offense was impossible, as for example because he was dealing with government undercover agents. An attempt to provide material support in violation of Section 2339A and actually providing such assistance are punished the same: imprisonment for not more than 15 years (for any term of years or life, if death results from theCommission of the offense) The government must prove that the crime will take place unless interrupted by independent circumstances. a conspiracy; (2) that the objective thereof was to provide support or resources; and (3) that he then knew and intended that such support would be used in preparation for, or in carrying of [a predicate offense] No First Amendment violation occurs when the government introduces at trial evidence of the defendant's conspiratorial statements. "Forming an agreement to engage in criminal activities – in contrast with simply talking about religious or political beliefs – is not [First Amendment] protected speech," the ruling says.  conspirators may be punished for both conspiracy and for actually providing material support should their scheme succeed. Unlike conspiracy, liability under Section 2 only attaches if someone else commits the substantive offense. Convictions carry a sentence of imprisonment for not more than 15 years (for any period of years or for life if death results from commission of the offense) The Sentence Guidelines influence the sentence actually imposed below the statutory maximum. Either the defendant or the government or both, may seek appellate court review of the sentence imposed. The Sentencing Guidelines treat Section 2339A convictions as if they were convictions for aiding and abetting and for being an accessory after the fact. A federal crime of terrorism is one "calculated to influence or affect the conduct of [a] government by intimidation or coercion, or to retaliate against government conduct" The standard "does not focus on the defendant but on his 'offense,' asking whether it was calculated, i.e. planned – for whatever reason or motive – to achieve the stated object" Section 2339A of the U.S. Constitution applies to crimes with extraterritorial application. The Supreme Court in RJR Nabisco, Inc. v. European Community declared: "Absent clearly expressed congressional intent to the contrary, federal laws will be construed to have only domestic application" The law provides as a general rule that conspiracy to commit an offense may be tried wherever an act in furtherance of the conspiracy occurs. The law's application abroad extends at least as far as the extraterritional application of its predicate offenses. abroad may be tried where the accused is first brought into the United States. Venue is also proper when the accused aided and abetted the commission of a completed offense. The courts have concluded that the violations of Section 2339A or Section 2 339B may constitute "acts of international terrorism" for purposes ofSection 2333. Federal law now generally holds that corporations are criminally liable for crimes committed by their officers, employees, or agents within the scope of their employment and for the benefit of the corporation. Section 2339B has no explicit definition of the word "provide" Nothing in the context indicates Congress intended to attach any special meaning to the word. At least two lower federal courts concluded that the word should be accorded its ordinary dictionary meaning. With some additions, the section uses the definition found in Section 2339A(b) and thus covers "any property, tangible or intangible, or service" The material support excludes medicine and religious materials, but includes: currency or monetary instruments or financial securities. Congress adjusted some of the definitions in the wake of First Amendment overbreadth and due process vagueness challenges that the Supreme Court ultimately addressed. The Humanitarian Law Project and other groups had argued that Section 2339B's prohibitions against providing "personnel" or "training" were unconstitutionally vague and might extend to things like advocating the organizations' interests before the U.N. Commission on Human Rights. In H older v. H umanitarian Law project , the Supreme court concluded that Section2339B, as applied, was not unconst Constitutionally vague. Chief Justice Roberts: Due process bars enforcement of a vague criminal statute. A statute is impermissibly vague when "it fails to provide a person of ordinary intelligence fair notice of what is prohibited, or is so standardless that it authorizes or encourages seriously discriminatory enforcement" Section 2339B is clearly applicable to the conduct at issue, it is to no avail that its application may be unclear under other circumstances, Chief Justice Roberts said. The Supreme Court ruled 5-2 that the lower court had interwoven First Amendment overbreadth into its vagueness analysis. not unconstitutionally vague as applied to the type of support at issue – coordinated advocacy on behalf of a terrorist organization. As for free speech, the Chief Justice concluded that Congress may outlaw material support to aterrorist organization in the form of speech of the type at issue without offending the First Amendment. The government has a compelling interest in the suppression of terrorism. Training and coordinated support frees resources to service illicit activities; lends legitimacy to the organization; and may strain diplomatic relations with countries against whom the organization's terrorist activities may be directed. of any conveyance (including an aircraft, vessel, or vehicle) (II) The seizing or detaining, and threatening to kill, injure, or continue to detain, another individual in order to compel a third person to do or abstain from doing any act. (III) A violent attack upon an internationally protected person (as defined in Section 1116(b)(4) of Title 18) or upon the liberty of such a person. (IV) An assassination. (V) The use of any – (a) biological agent, chemical agent, or nuclear weapon or device, or (b) explosive, firearm, or other weapon or dangerous device. Section 2339B outlaws both attempts and conspiracies to violate its substantive provisions. An attempt is the unfulfilled commission of an underlying offense. If the attempt is successful, the offender cannot be prosecuted or punished for both the completed offense and the attempt to commit it. It is no defense that, unbeknownst to the defendant, commission of the underlying offense was impossible, as for example because he was dealing with government undercover agents rather than agents of a foreign terrorist organization. A defendant's actions must cross the line between preparation and attempt by unequivocally demonstrating that the crime will take place unless interrupted by independent circumstances.  conspirators may be punished for both conspiracy and for actually providing material support should their scheme succeed. Conviction for a violation of Section 2339B is punishable by imprisonment for not more than 20 years (for any period of years or for life if death results from commission of the offense) The Sentencing Guidelines assign a base offense level of 26 which translates, without more, to a sentencing range of 63 to 78 months imprisonment for offenders with a virtually pristine criminal record. Section 3A1.4 raises the offense level to 32, criminal history category VI that translates to a sentence of 210 to 262 months imprisonment. Section 2339B has both a descriptive and a general statement of extraterritorial jurisdiction. The general statement has been part of the section since its inception. At least one court seems to have reached a different conclusion from the general statement. The legislative history of the 2004 legislation provides no explanation of why the apparently overlapping statement was thought necessary. The inclusion of both suggests Congress may have intended extraterritory application in any situation that falls under either provision. The descriptive statement appeared in the Intelligence Reform and Terrorism Prevention Act of 2004. The courts have concluded that the violations of Section 2339A or Section 2 339B may constitute "acts of international terrorism" The courts have stated that "[f]or non-citizens acting entirely abroad, a [due-process-required] jurisdictional nexus exists when the aim of that activity is to cause harm inside the United States or to U.S. citizens or interests" Section 2333 authorizes the Attorney General or the Secretary of the Treasury to bring a civil suit in district court to enjoin violation of the section.