Department of Agriculture’s Forest Service manages about 192 million acres of land. In fiscal year 1996, revenue generated from the sale or use of resources and lands within the National Forest System totaled about $0.9 billion. The Forest Service is required to plan for six renewable surface uses—outdoor recreation, rangeland, timber, watersheds and water flows, wilderness, and wilderness. The motto is “caring for the land and serving people.” The Forest service manages about 30 percent of all federal lands. Under the Organic Administration Act of 1897, the national forests are to be established to improve and protect the forests within their boundaries. The Multiple-Use Sustained-Yield Act of 1960 added the uses of outdoor recreation, range, watershed, and fish and wildlife. The act also requires the agency to manage its lands to provide high levels of all of these uses to current users while sustaining undiminished the lands’ ability to produce these uses for future generations. In addition, the agency’s regulations require the Forest Service to consider the production of nonrenewable subsurface resources. of the forests and (2) maintain the diversity of plant and animal communities. The Forest Service is subject to more than 200 laws affecting its activities and programs. Many laws governing national forest management and planning, dating back to the Organic Administration Act of 1897, have implied or stated that economics should be included in managing the national forests. Forest and Rangeland Renewable Resources Planning Act of 1974 (known as RPA) requires the Forest Service to periodically analyze trends in supply and demand and to report on investment opportunities. amended, generally require federal agencies to obtain fair market value for the use of federal lands for rights-of-way for oil and gas pipelines, power lines, and communications lines. Title V of the Independent Offices Appropriation Act of 1952, as amended, authorizes agencies to issue regulations to assess a fair fee for a service or thing of value provided to an identifiable recipient beyond that provided to the general public. When providing special services, such as reviewing and processing permits or leases, federal agencies are to recover the costs of providing the services, resources, or goods. goods, resources, or services provided. Under the provisions of the Independent Offices Appropriation Act and OMB Circular A-25, federal agencies are to obtain fair market value in the absence of specific legislation to the contrary. The Forest Service is prohibited by law from obtaining a fair return for certain goods or recovering costs for certain services. The agency provides recreation through numerous recreation facilities that it manages directly, including about 3,000 campgrounds, over 120,000 miles of hiking trails and thousands of picnic areas and boating sites. on the Budget has an ongoing interest in the Forest Service’s management of the nation’S 155 forests. To assist the Committee in its deliberations and oversight, the Chairman asked us to identify the lessons that can be learned from efforts by nonfederal land managers to generate revenue and/or become financially self-sufficient from the sale or use of natural resources on their lands. To identify legal and other barriers that may preclude the Forest service from implementing similar efforts on its lands, we relied extensively on prior GAO reports. aside other lands, programs, or functions for non-revenue-generating activities, such as conservation, resource protection, and research. The department has also developed several programs to transfer, sell, or exchange trust lands that have a low capability of generating revenue. Between 1981 and 1994, the department transferred, sold, exchanged, purchased, or otherwise acquired 355,000 acres, or 11 percent of its land base. The state legislature provided funds to the department to fund these programs. International Paper manages Southlands Experiment Forest to generate revenue. Department of Natural Resources has converted more than 34,000 acres of drylands to higher revenue-producing lands. The company’s annual budget separates the forest’S research and policy functions from its revenue-generating timber operations. This separation reflects the company's recognition that the forest's research andpolicy functions sometimes require operational decisions that do not always make sense, the authors say. to compensate the trust for the fair market value of the lands transferred to conservation status. The White Mountain Apache tribe’s Fort Apache Indian Reservation, the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints’ Deseret Land and Livestock ranch, and the Southlands Experiment Forest were managing game species as a profitable resource. About 25 percent of Southlands’ revenue is generated by recreational hunting. Although grazing revenue varies with such factors as weather conditions and the price of beef cattle, the livestock grazing programs on Deseret and The Nature have been successful in the past. Conservancy’s Niobrara Valley Preserve contributed significantly to the land units’ financial self-sufficiency. On average, livestock grazing provides at least 80 percent of Niob ranches’ total revenue. On Deseret, this management practice involves developing an annual written plan to set the time of year and limit the length of time that cattle are allowed to graze in an area. The ranches practice what is often referred to as “time-control” or ‘time-managed’ grazing. Trust lands managed by Washington State’s Department of Natural Resources are funded from total revenue. Since 1990, this practice has generated about $41 million in additional revenue at a cost of about $2 million in staff salaries. In fiscal year 1996, tree sales resulting from commercial thinning generated some $17 million in revenue. In addition, the department is also performing both precommercial and commercial. thinning, and, to a lesser extent, pruning and fertilizing timber stands to spur tree growth. Washington State's Department of Natural Resources has changed its timber appraisal system. Officials say they've stopped reimbursing contractors for constructing logging roads. They've also replaced oral bidding of timber sales with sealed bids to avoid artificially suppressing the highest bid value. The department has also pilot-tested contracting with a company to harvest timber and then having the department, rather than the company, market the logs. According to department officials, this last effort has increased the department’s return by eliminating the middle man. Since fiscal year 1994, managers of Texas state parks have increased entrance and campground fees, sometimes by 100 percent. The White Mountain Apache tribe charges fees for amenity-based recreation on the Fort Apache Indian Reservation. As a result, recreational fees provide a relatively stable source of revenue to the tribe. The tribe requires outdoor recreation permits to travel on the reservation’s unpaved roads. A park-generated net income grew from $14.8 million in 1993 to $18.5 million in 1995. use that the Forest Service is legislatively mandated to sustain. Water plays an important role in generating revenue from other uses, such as irrigating rangelands. Washington State’s Department of Natural Resources and the White Mountain Apache tribe have entered into agreements with federal regulatory agencies to reduce costs and to provide more regulatory certainty and predictability to revenue-generating timber and other programs. The agreement includes a “no surprise policy” under which the federal government will not ask for more land or mitigation funding from the state. institutional capability to ensure that economic activity does not have an adverse impact on species listed under the Endangered Species Act. Other efforts to increase net income through savings included reducing the number of salaried employees by increasing the use of volunteers and prison inmates. In June 1997, the Secretary of the Interior signed an order that clarifies the responsibilities of the Department. The order contains a provision stating that the United States defers to tribal conservation management plans. Both federal regulatory and tribal officials agree that these agreements will greatly reduce the time and costs associated with accommodating environmental objectives. employees and increased the number of campground volunteers and hosts. They also increased their use of prison inmates to perform routine cleaning, renovation, and improvements at park facilities. In fiscal year 1995, volunteers donated about 490,000 hours of work valued at $2.6 million, equal to the work of about 238 full-time employees. The estimated value of the inmates’ labor was about $ 2.4 million over 2 fiscal years, according to Texas Parks Division officials. None of the approaches or techniques for increasing revenue or decreasing costs used by the nonfederal land managers were legislatively mandated or otherwise required. The primary goal of private businesses, such as the Deseret Land and Livestock ranch and International Paper, is to make a profit. Having a clear mission priority to generate long-term sustainable revenue has produced similar results for public agencies. For example, trust lands and programs managed by Washington State’s Department of Natural Resources are funded from total revenue and generate considerable net income for the designated trust beneficiaries. The need to generate revenue for other mission-related goals and objectives can also provide an incentive. entrepreneurial ideas or conduct research to increase profits and (2) choose where and when to apply the results. One result has been that they have tailored their approaches and techniques for generating revenue or reducing costs to their particular geographical areas or conditions. This freedom to make choices is often accompanied by oversight by the parent organization, the beneficiaries of the revenue generated, or others to ensure accountability for expenditures and results. For example, the managers of the Deseret Land and Livestock ranch and the Southlands Experiment Forest have the freedom to try innovative approaches to increase net income. designated trust beneficiaries, including state school districts, colleges, and universities, as well as other public agencies and charitable institutions within the state. When the department makes a decision that may reduce current income and return on investment over the short term, it must show these beneficiaries that it has exercised skill and care in protecting trust resources. Washington State’s Department of Natural Resources also has two initiatives under way that address accountability. One is the Asset Stewardship Program, which is to look at the current and possible future mix of assets. to determine which mix will best generate long-term revenue for the trust beneficiaries. The agency also hopes to develop a longer-term management framework that will give its managers flexibility to respond to future population and other changes that affect the management of state lands and programs. The second effort is the department’s March 1997 long- Term Strategic Plan. It sets out major goals, objectives, and specific strategies to achieve them. The plan (1) will be consistent with a statewide performance budgeting system now being developed. Generating revenue and reducing costs are not mission priorities for the agency, GAO says. Agency has reduced staffing from about 46,000 permanent positions in 1992 to 39,400 in 1996. Congressional expectations and revenue-sharing provisions serve as disincentives to either increasing revenue or decreasing costs, report says. Forest Service’s recent strategic plan contains no goals or performance measures for obtaining fair market value or for reducing or containing costs, it says. The agency is moving away from, rather than toward, financial self-sufficiency, it adds. Environmental and planning laws limit the Forest Service’s ability to generate revenue. Section 7 of the Endangered Species Act represents a congressional design to give greater priority to the protection of endangered species. The Forest Service bears the burden of demonstrating that its actions will not be likely to jeopardize listed species. Other laws enacted primarily during the 1960s and 1970s also establish minimum requirements for these components of natural systems. The act provides that maximizing returns or volume cannot be the only criterion for determining the harvesting system to be used. response to these requirements, the Forest Service has, during the last 10 years, increasingly shifted the emphasis under its broad multiple-use and sustained-yield mandate. In western Washington State, western Oregon, and northern California, 24.5 million acres of federal land were available for commercial timber harvesting. About 7.6 million acres, or 31 percent of the available acreage, have been set aside or withdrawn as habitat for species that live in old-growth forests. To protect the forests’ health, only limited timber harvesting and salvage timber are allowed. In recent years, legislative and administrative decisions have set aside or withdrawn an increasing percentage of Forest Service lands for conservation. Most of the federal acreage that has been set aside for conservation is located in 12 western states. In 1964, less than 9 percent (16 million acres) of the national forests’ acreage was managed as wilderness, wild and scenic rivers, and national monuments. By 1994, this figure had increased to 26 percent (almost 50 million acres). (See fig. 3.1.) of the importance of naturally functioning systems to the long-term sustainability of other forest uses, including timber production. An increasing recognition that past Forest Service management decisions have led to degraded aquatic habitats, declining populations of some wildlife species, and increased forest health problems. In addition, the thrust of the Forest Service’s timber sales program is changing from primarily supplying commercially valuable timber to the wood-using industry. The Forest Service is using timber sales as a “tool” for achieving land stewardship objectives that require manipulating the existing vegetation. Volume of timber sold from Forest Service lands in western Washington, western Oregon, and northern California has declined. Like the acreage available for timber harvesting, the acreages available for oil and gas leasing have declined. The Forest Service is prohibited by law from charging fees for the use of most recreational sites and areas. Compared with timber and minerals, recreation generates substantially less revenue, according to the Forest Service. The agency collected only about 7 cents per visit in receipts and special use fees in 1993. The Forest Service manages half of the nation’s big-game and coldwater fish habitat. Federal statutes and regulations have narrowly defined the instances in which the Forest Service can charge fees for noncommercial recreational activities. The agency generally defers to state laws regulating these activities, the authors say. For example, a hunter can pay over $24,000 on the Fort Apache Indian Reservation and up to $8,500 on the Deseret Land and Livestock ranch for a trophy bull elk. government receives no financial compensation for hardrock minerals extracted from Forest Service and other federal lands. 11 western states that lease state-owned lands for mining purposes impose a royalty on minerals extracted. In 1990, hard rock minerals worth at least $1.2 billion were extracted from federal lands, while known, economically recoverable reserves were valued at $64.9 billion. If the Congress were to adopt an 8-percent royalty on gross profits, the Congressional Budget Office estimates that the government would receive $184 million. Congressional expectations and revenue-sharing provisions have sometimes served as disincentives to either increasing revenue or decreasing costs. Establishing annual output targets and sharing revenue that has been generated before deducting the costs of providing goods or services furnish two examples. When the Forest Service is allowed to retain a portion of the revenue it generates, it does so without deducting its costs, which are funded from annual appropriations. In fiscal year 1996, 41 states received about $481 million in revenue from the development of federal onshore minerals. The Forest Service has not always acted to contain costs, even when requested to do so by the Congress. Inefficiencies within the Forest Service’s decision-making process cost up to $100 million a year at the individual project level alone. Approved forest plans sometimes do not satisfy the requirements of environmental and planning laws. The Forest Service had not developed new regulations and a new contract that would limit the government's liability on new timber sales contracts and redistribute the risk on canceled contracts. Writers: Among Forest Service's mission priorities, reducing costs rank below protecting resources. They say Congress has provided agency with authority to obtain fair market value for goods. Writers: But Forest Service often has not done so, nor has it always acted to contain costs. They recommend Forest Service revise strategic plan to include goals and performance measures for obtaining fair marketvalue for goods, recovering costs for services, and containing expenses, to hold agency accountable for its performance. The Forest Service agreed with the report’s conclusions and recommendations, they say. by the nonfederal land managers to increase revenue and has reduced staffing. The agency has also reduced the number of federal employees on the land. The land is owned by non-federal agencies, such as the National Park Service and the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. It is run by a non-profit organization called the National Trust for Historic Preservation, which has a contract with the federal government to run the land for the next 50 years. The federal government owns the land, which is managed by the non- federal agencies.