Electricity generation is vital to the commerce and daily functioning of the United States. The U.S. electric grid has historically operated with a high level of reliability. The various parts of the electric power system are all vulnerable to failure due to natural, operational, or manmade events. Adoption of digital technologies has improved the efficiency and speed of operations and processes, and allowed for the development of new systems for the grid to protect against cyberattacks and other threats to critical infrastructure. The grid also connects the many publicly and privately owned electric utility and other wholesale power companies in different states and regions. The electric grid relies on a number of electronic devices, switches, and circuit breakers to regulate and report on the flow of electricity. Often, these digital devices are also connected to the internet to increase the ability to share information with a multitude of users and devices. The grid's ICS networks essentially operate in a "control loop" in which sensors continually check key components, with variable responses against control variables to ensure that the system is functioning as designed. The benefits of internet-connected digital technologies are many, so too are the risks of a cybersecurity breach. In 2015, a cyber attack on distribution utility substations in Ukraine shut off power to over 225,000 utility customers for several hours. Cyber intrusions on the SCADA systems of the Bowman Dam in Rye, New York resulted in federal indictments against a group of hackers linked to Iran's Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps. In March 2018, the United States Computer Emergency Readiness Team issued an alert concerning cyber intrusions at critical energy and manufacturing infrastructure companies. The Department of Homeland Security and the Federal Bureau of Investigation concluded that Russian government hackers conducted a multi-stage intrusion campaign to access files on ICS networks. Congress gave the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) authority to oversee the reliability of the bulk-power system under the Energy Policy Act of 2005. FERC can approve or remand back reliability standards proposed by the Electric Reliability Organization (ERO) The standards are both mandatory and enforceable in that violators of reliability rules may be subject to a civil fine of up to $1 million per violation for each day that it continues. While a cyber attack aimed at U.S. critical energy infrastructure has led to heightened attention from the federal government. Attack on the U.S. grid similar to the cyber attacks in Ukraine was not expected to result in the same type of consequences. President Trump issued Executive Order (E.O.) 13800 on "Strengthening the Cybersecurity of Federal Networks and Critical Infrastructure" E.O. 13800 called for an assessment of a prolonged electric power outage resulting from a cyber attack. The cyber supply chain and public-private cybersecurity information sharing were listed among a number of major cybersecurity potential vulnerabilities. Department of Energy has established a new Office of Cybersecurity, Energy Security, and Emergency Response (CESER) CESER is to focus on more coordinated preparedness and response to natural and man-made threats to energy infrastructure security. The energy sector is one of 16 infrastructure sectors designated as critical infrastructure by Presidential Policy Directive-21 (PPD-21) A report released by the National Research Council (NRC) in 2012 recognized the vulnerability of the electric power delivery system to either cyber and/or physical attacks. The NRC report concluded that well-informed terrorists could black out a large region of the country for weeks or even months. The largest power system disruptions experienced to date in the United States have caused high economic impacts. Cyber attacks are unlikely to cause extended outages, but if well coordinated they could magnify the damage of a physical attack, the report said. The event of this magnitude and duration could lead to turmoil, widespread public fear and an image of helplessness that would play directly into the hands of the terrorists. The 2013 attack on the Metcalf substation in California further cast light on the physical vulnerabilities of the grid. The scenario estimated the total impact to the U.S. economy at between $243 billion and $1 trillion. It took the local utility 27 days to restore the substation. The Federal Energy Regulatory Commission's chairman at the time reportedly said that "if [the attack] were widely replicated across the country, it would have a significant impact" on the economy. It was averted by rerouting power around the substations. country, it could take down the U.S. electric grid and black out much of the country. Recovery from a well-planned cyber and physical attack on the grid could be complicated by the cost and vulnerability of critical components. A large-scale attack may use up the limited inventory of spare units, and it may take months or years to build new units. The availability of other large components, such as high-voltage circuit breakers, could also hamper recovery efforts. The security of the supply chain for grid devices and components is discussed later in this report. Every two years, the North American Electric Reliability Corporation (NERC) organizes a two-day grid security exercise. The goals of GridEx include the determination of ways to best secure the grid and improve future response. The 2017 GridEx drill was the fourth iteration of the exercise, and had over 6,500 participants from the United States, Canada, and Mexico. NERC released its public report of the results of the GridEx IV drill, listing lessons learned and recommendations to enhance grid security. The Cyber Mutual Assistance (CMA) program is intended to provide a pool of utility cybersecurity experts who can share their expertise. NERC recommended that more utilities should participate in the CMA program. The bulk power system faces new and evolving cybersecurity threats on a daily basis, according to NERC. A focus on recovery from a potential large-scale physical or cyber attack appears to be an increasing part of the exercises, NERC said in a report. It recommended that the ESCC and the Electricity Information Sharing and Analysis Center (E-ISAC) also increase their participation in the program. Cyber risks can come from direct attacks aimed at the electric grid or other critical infrastructure. Arguably, the greatest cyber threats to the grid have been attacks focused on manipulating industrial control systems. ICS-CERT issues an annual report on ICS network vulnerabilities based on reports of cyber intrusions. It found that 61% of these vulnerabilities would likely cause a "severe operational impact," if exploited in a cyber attack. The Mandiant consulting company reported that it responded to a cyber intrusion at a critical infrastructure organization where malware was deployed. The malware deployed to attack a transmission system control center in the 2016 cyber attack in Ukraine was named "Industroyer" or "Crash Override" The malware accesses the same protocols used by electric grid systems to communicate with each other. Cyber threats to the grid can also emerge from attacks directed via Internet of Things (IoT) devices connected to networks. If such attacks were able to access electric utility operational or industrial control systems, they could potentially impair these systems or cause false power networks. The electric utility industry increasingly depends on Operational Technology (OT) and Information Technology (IT) systems for the safe and efficient production and delivery of electricity. OT and IT systems rely on hardware devices and software systems, procured from a variety of manufacturers and vendors, often from international sources. Cyber supply chain risks may include insertion of counterfeits, unauthorized production, tampering, theft, insertion of malicious software and hardware, as well as poor manufacturing and development practices in the cyber supply chain. The components of smart grid devices present another potential vulnerability. its functioning in a reliable manner. Older, legacy systems may also be affected by potential supply chain vulnerabilities. Legacy systems are a challenging vulnerability because upgrades and repairs of equipment may not include the installation of up-to-date, security-focused patches. In 2016, FERC issued Order No. 829 directing NERC to develop a Critical Infrastructure Protection reliability standard that would require affected entities to develop and implement a plan that includes security controls for supply chain management for industrial control system hardware, software, and services. There are gaps in cybersecurity for electric power and energy systems. Some gaps are related to regulatory jurisdiction, while other gaps may relate to cost and complexity. OT systems are often used by electric utilities to monitor and control power production processes. modernization of ICS networks has led to OT and IT systems becoming increasingly interconnected. But considering the potential impact of a major grid cybersecurity event, the gaps may require further attention. The gaps may need further attention, according to the National Institute of Standards and Technology.  OT systems are often directly connected to the Internet, in some cases so that third-party vendors can remotely connect to the system to perform diagnostics and maintenance. Many cybersecurity breaches are caused by individuals falling prey to phishing or similar attacks which are used to gain credentials to access utility systems. The human factor is thus considered by many to be the weakest link in cybersecurity. This was the reason why many OT networks are not protected by a firewall and are outdated. Economic challenges, resource constraints, business requirements and the pace of technological change are reported as making it nearly impractical to completely segregate OT networks from IT networks. case in Ukraine, as hackers sent out malware-carrying emails. After links in the emails were opened by legitimate users, hackers acquired the credentials needed to access control and operations systems. Covellite has been targeting electric utilities in the U.S., Europe, and parts of East Asia with spear-phishing attacks that employ code and infrastructure eerily similar to that used by the so-called Lazarus Group. Multi-factor authentication is one security method focused on the human factor, as it requires two or more credentials. FERC acknowledged that the Energy Policy Act of 2005 excluded local distribution systems from its reliability mandate under Section 215 of the Federal Power Act. FERC's revised 2012 definition brought some of these larger distribution system components under BES regulation. Most distribution systems are not required to comply with NERC CIP cybersecurity standards. Electricity production depends in large part upon other electricity production. A combination of something you know, something you have, or something you are (i.e., a biometric) establishes you as a legitimate user. critical infrastructure sectors for fuel, fuel delivery, and support systems. PPD-21 also establishes Energy and Communications systems as "uniquely critical" infrastructure. NERC itself concluded in its report on GridEx III that, after a major grid disruption, restarting generation and energizing transmission and distribution systems would be first priority. Restoring service to communications systems, oil and gas, water supply/treatment, and hospital customers would be a secondary priority. It is unlikely that an adversary capable of causing extreme impairment to the electric power system would overlook other, less protected critical infrastructure. Digital Smart grid technologies to enhance and modernize grid operations. Speed and processing power of microprocessor-based ICS networks enhances the efficiency and control of power production and flows across electricity transmission and distribution systems. Many in Congress recognize that grid and pipeline cybersecurity are intertwined. AI is one of the technologies being deployed to mitigate cybersecurity risks. It allows computer systems to simulate human learning and problem solving. The speed of processing of AI systems are currently seen as providing protection for ICS and other networks that human operators may not be able to match. AI can potentially respond to a cyber attack scenario far more quickly than a human decision maker. Electric utilities are collecting massive amounts of data from ICS networks and customer-information systems. Big data refers to the growth in the volume of structured and unstructured data. High performance computing can take advantage of fast processing to examine data sets collected from Smart Grid systems into operational information, according to the report. Using Data Analytic techniques, Big data can be turned into useful information, the report says. Artificial intelligence can be used for offensive as well as defensive cybersecurity applications. The next generation of situation-aware malware will use AI to behave like a human attacker. Just as organizations can use artificial intelligence to enhance their security posture, cybercriminals may begin to use it to build smarter malware. The application of AI to surveillance or cybersecurity for national security opens a new attack vector based on this data diet vulnerability, says Andrew Barocas, co-author of "Big Data's Disparate Impact" The Aurora simulation in 2007 was the first known event which proved that power plants could be vulnerable to a cyber attack. An AURORA attack results when a circuit breaker or breakers are opened and closed, resulting in an out-of-phase condition. Three years later, the Stuxnet attack against the industrial control system of an Iranian nuclear fuel enrichment plant provided the next step in the development of cyber weapons. But it is conceivable that future developments in swarm or distributed AI may result in strategic botnets with small malware payloads but devastating effects. NERC aims to increase monitoring of the bulk electric system, and has proposed a plan for the E-ISAC to be staffed 24 hours daily. FERC also seeks increased reporting of cyber incidents. NERC would file an annual, public and anonymized summary of the reports with the Commission. DOE, for its part, has established its own mandatory reporting requirements for U.S. electric utilities experiencing emergency incidents. Form OE-417 alerts the Department of Energy to electrical emergency incidents and disruptions. Electric power incidents and outages have various criteria for reporting depending on the level of urgency of the situation. An Emergency Alert must be filed within one hour of an incident. The information collected by Form OE-417 is to be used for reporting on electric power emergency incidents and disturbances in monthly Energy Information Administration (EIA) reports. The data may use the data to develop legislative recommendations and reports to Congress, and as a basis for DOE investigations following severe, prolonged, or repeated electric power reliability problems. Some utilities are undertaking security improvements in modernization programs. Other improvements would potentially have to be undertaken as special projects. Intelligence on the existence and nature of the threat, as well as the capability of dealing with the threat often relies on the federal government's national security apparatus. The information communicated from the government is generally more useful when it is both timely and relevant as to the severity of a threat, and when the threat is related to the source of the information. The U.S. Department of Energy says it has no immediate comment on the report. Communicate whether a need exists for immediate action. The electricity industry then provides the expertise necessary for understanding the relative risk to the grid of the potential threat. As of the end of 2015, 75% of U.S electricity customers were covered by companies which had deployed CRISP. There has been speculation that a major cyber attack may be inevitable, given the many diverse actors in the cyber threat space with both political and commercial interests. The Electricity Subsector Coordinating Council (ESCC) has called for the E-ISAC to be the "central source of information sharing between the Electricity Sub sector and the government" New technologies are being considered for their potential to enhance electric power transmission and distribution system resiliency. Sensors and automated controls can use real-time data to reconfigure a utility network to isolate problems. Smart Grid solutions would utilize fast acting sensors and tools to gather and analyze information. However, distributed data centers powered by energy supplies independent of the grid may be needed to ensure that recovery from a cyber attack is not hampered by the loss of information and data needed to recover operations and business systems. Distributed resources and microgrids are also being considered both in terms of making the current grid more resilient and as an increased element of the future grid. The state of New York has been working with investor-owned electric utilities on a plan to deploy distributed resources at scale as part of its plan to modernize its energy systems. Distributed generation is growing and could potentially be a source for black start power in the event of a grid failure. These smaller power plants would have to be protected against cybersecurity attacks if they were to operate independently of the grid. Large, high voltage electric power transformers (LPTs) have received special attention as a critical component of the bulk electric system which could be targeted in physical and cyber attacks. LPTs are not commonly manufactured in the United States. The investor-owned electric utilities have had a transformer sharing program in place since 2006 with those utilities that wanted to participate. In March 2017, DOE submitted a plan to Congress evaluating the feasibility of establishing a Strategic Transformer Reserve for the storage, in strategically located facilities, of spare large powertransformers and emergency mobile substations. submitted a report to Congress on the strategic reserve, highlighting the issues of time to build, cost, and potential federal ownership. DOE found that given FERC's approval of CIP-014 reliability standards, supporting enhanced industry programs for spare transformer sharing might be a better way to achieve a strategic reserve. DOE also stated that it is encouraging manufacturers to design transformers to meet high resilience standards for electromagnetic pulse (EMP) and geomagnetic disturbances (GMD), as well as physical and cybersecurity. The electric power industry does not have the intelligence gathering capabilities to deal with the many cyber and physical threats to the grid. The energy sector is one of 16 critical infrastructure sectors identified by the Department of Homeland Security. The Grid Cybersecurity Research and Development Act ( H.R. 4120 ), introduced in October 2017, would require the DOE to develop an initiative to mitigate the consequences on the electric grid of cyber attacks by the U.S. government. The electric power system in the United States is evolving, but not consistently across sectors and regions of the country. increasing grid cybersecurity. The Pipeline and Liquefied Natural Gas Facility Cybersecurity Preparedness Act would require the Secretary of Energy to ensure security, resiliency, and survivability of natural gas pipelines. The Enhancing Grid Security through Public-Private Partnerships Act would promote and advance physical and cybersecurity of electric utilities. The Promoting Cybersecurity for Rural Electric Utilities Act would amend the Rural Electrification Act of 1936 to provide that cybersecurity and grid security improvements are eligible for electric loans and guarantees under that act.