Biofuels received significant federal support in the form of tax incentives, loan and grant programs, and regulatory programs. Many incentives for biofuels production and use expired at the end of 2011. The ongoing congressional debate over budget deficits and the national debt make the prospect of extending these incentives less likely. This report outlines 22 current, expired, or pending federal programs that provide direct or indirect incentives for Biofuels. The programs are grouped below by administering agency. The incentives are summarized in the Appendix. Several key biofuels incentives had expired or were set to expire. Gasoline suppliers who blend ethanol with gasoline are eligible for a tax credit of 45 cents per gallon of ethanol. Biodiesel producers (or producers of diesel/biodiesel blends) can claim a per-gallon tax credit through the end of 2011. The guaranteed market created by the renewable fuel standard is expected to stimulate growth of the biofuel industry and to raise prices above where they would have been in the absence of the mandate. A taxpayer may take a 30% credit for the installation of alternative fuel infrastructure, up to $30,000, including E85 (85% ethanol and 15% gasoline) infrastructure through the end of 2011. Residential installations qualify for a $1,000 credit (biofuels pumps are not generally installed in residential applications). Rural Business-Cooperative Service (RBS) Annual funding: $74 million in mandatory spending for FY2009, $245 million for FY2010, and $150 million annually for FY 2009-FY2012. A 2.5% ad valorem tariff and a most-favored-nation duty of $0.54 per gallon of ethanol (for fuel use) applies to imports into the United States from most countries through the end of 2011. Most ethanol from Caribbean Basin Initiative (CBI) countries may be imported duty-free. Covered Entities: Fuel ethanol importers. Administered by: National Highway Traffic Safety Administration Annual funding: N/A Established: 1975 by the Energy Policy. Automakers are required to meet Corporate Average Fuel Economy (CAFE) standards for their passenger cars and light trucks. Manufacturers may gain credits for the sale of alternative fuel vehicles, including ethanol/gasoline flexible fuel vehicles (FFVs) However, the credits are limited—the maximum fuel economy increase allowed through the use of these credits is 1.2 miles per gallon through model year (MY) 2014. The credits are phased out after MY2014 and are completely eliminated after MY2019.