The organization that became NOAA was established in 1807, and in 1836 it officially became known as the Coast Survey. The Survey dispatched technical and scientific teams to survey the uncharted U.S. coastline and relied on the Army and the Navy to supply personnel. After the Civil War, the Army withdrew from the Survey’s work; the Navy withdrew during the Spanish-American War, leaving the work to be done solely by the employees of the newly named Coast and Geodetic Survey. In 1917, Congress passed legislation authorizing the President to transfer the Survey’s ships and men to the Navy and War Departments for the duration of the war. In World War II, about half of the commissioned officers and ships of the Coast and Geodetic Survey were temporarily transferred to the armed services. Officers’ duties included training amphibious troops in seamanship and navigation, serving as battalion observation officers, and executing hydrographic surveys in advance of fleet operations in the Pacific. At the end of the war, all Survey ships and officers were returned to the Coast and Geodetic Survey and to civilian duties. However, the Corps continued to exist, and its officers retained their military ranks and compensation. Corps officers are assigned to work in all component offices of NOAA. Corps officials said officers can expect to serve one-third of their careers in each of the five line offices. In April 1995, the Office of the Administrator assigned Corps officers to the National Marine Fisheries Service, National Weather Service, and National Ocean Service. In October 1994, the Corps had approximately 400 commissioned officers. The Corps was reduced to 332 officers as of July 1, 1996. The ultimate downsizing goal was to reduce the number of officers to 285 by the year 2000. NOAA has since expressed an interest in eliminating the Corps and using civilian employees to carry out the Corps’ functions. In January 1996, NOAA’s Administrator announced that the NOAA Corps would begin a transition to civilian status on October 1,. 1996, and directed that the transition be completed within 6 months. He asked the Director of NOAA Corps operations to develop the following work categories. The NOAA Corps has not been incorporated into the armed forces since World War II. Corps officers continue to receive virtually the same pay and benefits (including retirement) as the military. NOAA cannot press criminal charges or pass sentence against an officer who disobeys orders, and Corps officers can quit the Corps without legal sanctions. NOAA contracted with Arthur Andersen LLP to determine the comparative costs of using civilian employees rather than Corps officers to carry out the Corps’ functions. We found that some Corps assignments are of this nature, but civilian employees are often assigned to duties similar to those of the Corps. Arthur Andersen LLP report concluded that civilianization of the Corps would increase government costs by $573,000 a year. This estimate was based on actual costs incurred during the year ending June 30, 1995, and used a Corps strength of 384 officers. If the Corps is downsized as intended, the estimated cost savings would be smaller in subsequent years, the report says. If civilian employees had been used, the cost to the government would have been about $661,000 lower, it says. NOAA Corps officers pay no federal income taxes on their housing and subsistence allowances. The tax advantage comes in the form of a loss to the U.S. Treasury, authors say. They estimate the annual tax advantage associated with the allowance amounts used in the Arthur Andersen LLP study would be $1,234,000 a year. If a decision were made to civilianize the NOAA Corps, whether there would be any actual cost reductions would depend, in large part, on the manner in which a transition to civilian employment would be carried out. Any decision to replace Corps officers with civilian employees could be implemented in a number of ways. The possibilities range from requiring all officers to immediately convert to civilian employment, to longer-range measures such as allowing all current officers to remain in place until retirement or other separation. The amount of transition costs would also depend on how considerations such as the following were resolved. (1) What retirement benefits or credits are given to officers for the time they spend in the Corps before converting. (2) What resources would be required to recruit, train, and retain civilian employees. be needed to replace Corps officers who opt to leave federal service. The amount of additional resources, if any, that would be required to administer the civilian workforce at NOAA after civilianizing the Corps and its administrative personnel. A plan of action that addresses each of the above factors and other possible considerations would be needed before estimates of the transition costs involved could be determined. The Department of Commerce provided written comments on a draft of this report. The comments are provided in their entirety in appendix II and are discussed below. criteria focused exclusively on the military services, rather than on uniformed services in general. In our opinion, the criteria we used were appropriate. The Department expressed an opinion that the report did not sufficiently address the ways in which service with the Corps is similar to military service. It should also be noted that the criteria for military compensation articulated in the DOD report are based on the need for inducements and incentives to maintain a force necessary “to insure successful accomplishment of the United States national security objectives” The objective of this report is to provide information on the operations of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Commissioned Corps. We were asked to address why the NOAA Corps exists; what the Corps officers’ duties are; how the Corps is similar to and different from the military. To compare the costs of using uniformed personnel or civilian employees to carry out Corps duties, we reviewed the findings in an August 1995 report prepared by Arthur Andersen LLP under a contract with NOAA. We examined the contractor’s approach and methodology and generally found them to be similar to those we would have used. The first copy of each GAO report and testimony is free. Additional copies are $2 each. Orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent. VISA and MasterCard credit cards are accepted, also. Orders should be sent to the following address, accompanied by a check or money order made out to the Superintendent of Documents, when necessary: U.S. General Accounting Office P.O. Box 6015 Gaithersburg, MD 20884-6015 Room 1100 700 4th St. NW. To receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days, please call (202) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone. A recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists. For more information, visit www.cnn.com/cnndailylist or call 1-800-273-8255. For the latest from CNN.com, visit the CNN iReport home page or click here for a list of recent news stories.