In Subtitle A, Congress established a two-pronged approach for protecting the privacy of nonpublic personal information obtained by financial institutions. A financial institution generally is prohibited from disclosing a consumer’s protected information to nonaffiliated third parties unless the institution provides the consumer with a privacy notice and an opportunity to opt out of such disclosures. The opt-out notice must, among other things, identify the categories of information that may be disclosed and the categories to whom disclosures may be made. As of March 1, 2002, 35 states and the District of Columbia have adopted statutes or regulations that are based on the 2000 Model Regulation. Of those 36 jurisdictions, 2—Vermont and New Mexico—substituted an opt-in requirement which can provide greater privacy protection. Four of the 14 Model Act states relaxed restrictions on disclosures for marketing purposes that are contained in the 1982 Model Act but are not imposed by Subtitle A or the 2000 models. The 2000 Model regulation treats health information differently from other nonpublic personal information. states generally is prohibited from disclosing nonpublic personal information to nonaffiliated third parties unless the provider first obtains the consumer’s affirmative authorization to do so. Vermont, however, limits the information that can be disclosed for joint marketing purposes. As of March 1, 2002, 14 states were relying on previously enacted laws that are based on the 1982 Model Act but had amended their laws or taken administrative measures to ensure compliance with Subtitle A's provisions. A number of the 14 Model Act states told us that they did not adopt the 2000. NAIC issued the Model Act in 1982 to address privacy concerns relating to the collection and disclosure of insurance information by insurance institutions, insurance agents, and organizations that assemble and provide information to insurers. The 1982 Model Act contains additional protections not provided by Subtitle A. A number of Model Act states modified some of the more protective provisions of their laws to obtain greater consistency with the less restrictive requirements of Sub Title A, the authors say. They say the states are in the process of adopting regulations, which would be based on the 2000 Model Regulation. Only one state, New York, has satisfied the Subtitle A mandate that state insurance authorities establish standards for safeguarding insurance customer records and information. The other states appear to have been waiting for NAIC to adopt the model regulation, “Standards for Safeguarding Customer Information” In early April, NAIC adopted the Model Safeguarded Regulation. FTC has received comments on proposed standards and is developing final rules. The Securities and Exchange Commission and Commodities Futures Trading Commission issued their rules to safeguard customer record information last year. NAIC wanted the report to reflect that since enactment of GLBA, the states have worked hard and accomplished a great deal to meet the congressionally mandated requirements of the law. NAIC emphasized that, nonetheless, to date, every state except Alaska has privacy protections in place that meet or exceed the standards established in GLBA. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. NAIC provided greater details on the factors that affected the process it followed in drafting and adopting the Model Safeguarding Regulation. To determine the specific legislative and regulatory actions taken by the states to carry out the provisions of Subtitle A relating to the insurance industry, we used publicly available data from NAIC. We did not attempt to independently verify NAIC data. To obtain information on insurance privacy laws that are based on the 1982 Model Act, we sent a list of questions to the 14 state insurance authorities that continue to rely on such laws. and California’s draft regulations relating to the standards for safeguarding customer information. In addition, we interviewed two representatives of the NAIC Privacy Working Group, which developed the model standards. We performed our work between July 2001 and March 2002 in Washington, D.C., in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. As agreed with your office, unless you publicly release its contents earlier, we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days from its date. We will also send copies of thisReport to the president of NAIC and to the chairman of the Federal Trade Commission and make copies available. to other interested parties upon request. As of March 1, 2002, privacy regulations are pending. If you or your staff have any questions on this report, please contact me at (202) 512-8678 or Harry Medina at (415) 904-2000. X X XX X X x X X Z X X 2000 Model Regulation X XxX X 2000 X X Y X X 2 X X 1 X X 3 X X 4 X X 5 X X 10 X X