In October 2004, Congress included a provision in the Ronald W. Reagan National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2005. The legislation required the Secretary of Defense to develop a comprehensive policy for DOD on the prevention of and response to sexual assaults involving members of the Armed Forces. DOD has taken positive steps to respond to congressional direction by establishing policies and a program to prevent, respond to, and resolve reported sexual assault incidents involving servicemembers, and the Coast Guard, on its own initiative, has taken similar steps. Military Justice (UCMJ) and the Manual for Courts-Martial and include trial by court-martial. In determining how to dispose of alleged sexual assault offenders, commanders take into account a number of factors. DOD’s directive and instruction may not adequately address how to implement the program when operating in deployed or joint environments. Training is not consistently effective, although DOD and the Coast Guard require that all servicemembers receive periodic training on their respective sexual assault prevention and response programs. programs. In reviewing DOD’s program, we found that the military services encountered challenges providing requested data because the request to do so was made after the start of the data collection period. We believe that this lack of a common means of presentation for reporting purposes has prevented users of the reports from making meaningful comparisons or drawing conclusions from the reported numbers. Without access to such information, DOD does not have the means to identify those factors, and thus to fully execute its oversight role, including assessing trends. The Ronald W. Reagan National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2005 required that the Defense Task Force on Sexual Assault in the Military Services conduct an examination of matters relating to sexual assault in cases in which members of the Armed Forces are either victims or offenders. As part of its examination, the law directs the task force to assess, among other things, DOD’s reporting procedures, collection, tracking, and use of data on sexual assault by senior military and civilian leaders. The law does not require an assessment of the Coast Guard's program. task force’s findings to evaluate the effectiveness of DOD’S sexual assault prevention and response programs. As of July 2008, this task force has yet to begin its review. Senior task force staff members attributed the delays to challenges in appointing the task force members and member turnover. They also told us that they project that by the end of fiscal year 2008 DOD will have expended about $15 million since 2005 to fund the task forces’ operations, such as salaries for the civilian staff members. the Secretary of Defense and the Secretaries of the Army, Navy, and Air Force no later than 1 year after beginning its examination. If such a goal were met, the task force’s evaluation could be complete by August 2009. We expect to make a number or recommendations in our final report to improve implementation and oversight of sexual assault prevention and response programs in both DOD and the Coast Guard. If you have any questions on matters discussed in this testimony, please contact Brenda S. Farrell at (202) 512-3604 or farrellb@gao.gov. This is a work of the U.S. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States. It may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from GAO. However, because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material, permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately. For confidential support, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org.