As of February 1, 2015, there was one preventive medicine unit available to conduct OEHS activities in Iraq and one in Afghanistan. Each of the military services has a public health surveillance center that provides support and technical guidance on reporting on potential environmental risks to combatant commands and their subordinate commands. Health surveillance during deployments includes identifying the deployed population at risk, recognizing and assessing potentially hazardous health exposures and conditions, employing specific preventive countermeasures, daily monitoring of real-time health outcomes, and reporting of disease and injury. DOD collects and stores three types of data during deployments: (1) daily individual servicemember location data, (2) medical data, and (3) OEHS data. Once collected, DOD currently uses two separate IT systems for the storage of OE HS data. MESL contains both classified and unclassified documents that have been scanned and uploaded into the system. DOEHRS is a database that incorporates additional functionalities including OEhs data collection, management, and assessment. DOD is transitioning from the use of MESL to DOEHRS, which has greater functionality. However, DOD’s current policy does not reflect the potential transition. Inconsistencies between DOD and military service-specific policies regarding OEHS data storage have led to fragmentation and duplication of OEhs data. VBA processes veterans’ claims for monthly compensation for service-connected disabilities. VHA also conducts or sponsors research on veterans' illnesses related to military occupational and environmental exposures. The military services lack specific and consistent guidance on performing quality assurance reviews. As a result, it is difficult to identify complete and comprehensive data sets for specific types of OEHS data. This may lead to problems when officials attempt to use these data in the future. A U.S. Army Public Health Command official who has technical expertise in both systems confirmed that there is duplication of O EHS data storage, but said it is not possible to determine the extent of the duplication because only DOEHRS has specific data level querying capabilities. The military services use site assessments to identify and address potential occupational and environmental health risks at deployment locations. DOD established the Occupational and Environmental Health Site Assessment (OEHSA) in 2007. In our review of 50 OEHSAs for sites in Iraq or Afghanistan, we found that almost all contained recommendations for mitigating potential health risks for servicemembers in these locations. For example, a 2011 OEHSA for a site in Afghanistan found that particulate matter concentrations exceeded military guidelines, and consequently, air quality was at moderate risk. OEHSAs identify recommended countermeasures to mitigate some potential occupational and environmental health risks. The extent to which these recommendations are being implemented is unclear due to a lack of documentation and monitoring. Despite the ongoing collection of OEHS data, both DOD and VA have used OEhs data to a limited extent to address post-deployment health conditions. For example, service component commands have begun holding and documenting monthly meetings with the CENTCOM official responsible for OEHLs to further monitor activities. DOD officials have been conducting research on the use of dosimeters. Current technology allows for a dosimeter to be used for a single known hazard. In deployed settings, servicemembers may be exposed to multiple hazards and unknown exposures. During deployments, these factors are often unknown; therefore it is difficult to determine the type of dosimeter that should be used. Additionally, it may be difficult to evaluate or treat some service members who have been exposed to occupational or environmental hazards in the field. DOD creates Periodic Occupational and Environmental Monitoring Summaries (POEMS) POEMS are made available to medical providers to help inform diagnosis and treatment of servicemembers. In September 2014, DOD implemented a new review process for the completion of POEMS. As of March 2015, 23 of the approximately 40 POEMS from Iraq and Afghanistan have been made available. VBA officials told us that they have access to unclassified POEMS through a MESL website.. VA also uses OEHS data to supplement information used to educate veterans on specific deployment issues. VA’s Office of Public Health officials told us they develop the content of the website through environmental hazard information obtained from several sources, including the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. For example, the website includes detailed information about Gulf War veterans’ unexplained illnesses, including available benefits and links to relevant research. The Millennium Cohort Study is the largest prospective study designed to assess the long-term health effects of military service both during and after deployment. As part of this study, DOD and VA conducted another study. that found that a servicemember located within 3 miles of a documented burn pit was not significantly associated with increased risk for respiratory symptoms or conditions. Neither study was able to identify a causal link between exposures to burn pits and respiratory conditions. The Institute of Medicine was unable to determine whether certain long-term health effects are likely to result from exposure toBurn Pits during deployments because the studies it reviewed lacked the support to conclude the absence or existence of an association. deployment to Iraq and Kuwait and the development of respiratory conditions post-deployment. Since 2003, DOD and VA have collaborated through the DHWG on deployment health issues related to occupational and environmental hazards. Problems with storage and quality assurance for OEHS data compromise the departments’ ability to use them in determining service-connections for specific health conditions, the authors say. The authors recommend that the Secretary of Defense determine which types of unclassified OE HS data should be used to prevent fragmentation and duplication in the storage of un classified OEhs data. They also recommend that DOD clarify the department’s policy on the storage and use of the unclassified data. service policies that are linked to the main DOD Instruction are inconsistent in identifying which system to use for storing OEHS data. DOD noted that the implementation of such a process would be complex, in that it would need to include definitions of completeness and reasonableness. While we appreciate DOD’s comments, an appropriate level of quality assurance needs to be performed to ensure the reliability of the OE HS data being collected. Otherwise, these data will not be useful for the intended purposes. committees and the Secretaries of Defense and Veterans Affairs. In addition, the report will be available at no charge on GAO’s website at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staff members have any questions about this report, please contact me at (202) 512-7114 or draperd@gao,gov. GAO staff members who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix III. The full report can be found on the last page of this report.