The Under Secretary of Defense (Personnel and Readiness) is responsible for developing the instruction for the conscientious objector application process. The Secretaries of the components, or their designees, are responsible for implementing the process and for making final decisions on whether to approve or deny applications. According to Coast Guard officials, the Coast Guard’s Director of Personnel Management is responsible. However, the Director of Human Resources makes the final decision on whetherto approve or disapprove conscientious Objector applications. conscientious objector status, servicemembers must submit clear and convincing evidence. A class 1-O applicant sincerely objects to all participation in any form of war and is discharged if the application is approved. With the exception of the Army and its reserve components, the components have the discretion to either reassign an approved class l-A-O conscientious objector to noncombatant duties or discharge them. These regulations do not recognize selective conscientious objection, that is, opposition to a specific war or conflict. Army regulation states that servicemembers approved for 1-A-O status are not eligible for discharge. The majority of these data are provided to DMDC by the military components. DMDC’s mission is to deliver timely and high-quality support to its customers and to ensure that the data it receives from different sources are consistent, accurate, and appropriate when used to respond to inquiries. The VA is responsible for providing a broad range of federal benefits and services to veterans and their families. assistance to veterans, their dependents, and their survivors. This organization administers disability compensation, pension, vocational rehabilitation and employment, education and training, home loan guaranty, and life insurance benefits. The National Cemetery Administration operates 125 national cemeteries in the United States and its territories. The Board of Veterans’ Appeals is a statutory board that makes decisions on appeals under the authority of the Secretary of VA. In 1993, we reported that between fiscal years 1988 and 1990, DOD processed up to 200 applications annually for conscientious objector status. About 80 to 85 percent of these applications were approved. the number of applications rose to 447, and about 61 percent were approved. Despite possible understatement, the numbers of known applications for conscientious objector status for calendar years 2002 through 2006 were relatively small compared to the size of the force. DMDC-provided data similarly shows a small number of separations, or discharges, for conscientious Objectors. All components of the Armed Forces follow the same basic steps to administer their conscientious Objector application processes. The application approval rate was 55 percent for the Army, 84 percent for. the Navy, 62 percent for Air Force, 33 percent for Marine Corps, and 33 percent. for the Coast Guard. objector process for each component said that the commanding officer reassigns the applicant. While temporarily assigned to noncombatant duties, an applicant must continue to meet the standards of acceptable conduct and performance of duties, such as wearing the uniform and following orders. Coast Guard officials said that in remote units in the active and reserve components where a psychiatrist or clinical psychologist is not readily available, processing is delayed. Navy and Marine Corps officials said they did not have visibility over this issue for either their active or reserve components. legal counsel, (2) given the opportunity to rebut the evidence in the record before the authorized official makes a final decision, and (3) given an explanation if the application is denied. According to their regulations, all components allow an applicant to obtain and pay for outside legal counsel. The time frame to submit a rebuttal varies among the components and ranges from 5 to 15 days. The applicant submits the rebuttal prior to the final processing of the application. On the basis of data provided by the components, the application can be approved. for calendar years 2002 through 2006, the military services took an average of about 7 months to process an application. The Air Force Reserve typically took the longest amount of time. According to component officials, processing may be prolonged when, for example, applications must be returned to the unit or the applicant for additional information. As stated earlier, Air National Guard and Coast Guard officials said that personnel who can conduct psychiatric or psychological evaluations are not always readily available and that this may prolong the processing time. Because they receive so few applications, it is necessary for officials located in the field offices to reeducate themselves about the applications. In general, servicemembers separated as conscientious objectors may be granted honorable or under honorable conditions (general) discharges, thereby making them eligible to receive the same benefits. According to Army regulation, 1-A-O conscientious objector in the Army and its reserve components are not eligible for discharge. A veteran submits an application to a veterans’ claims examiner or other qualified VA employee at a VA field facility. If it is determined that the veteran does not meet basic eligibility requirements, the VA will notify the veteran that he or she is not entitled to benefits. this report and had no comments on the findings. The Department of Homeland Security and VA provided technical comments, which were incorporated as appropriate. In calendar years 2002 through 2006, 81 percent of the applicants were enlisted males. In addition, the report will be available at no charge on GAO’s Web site at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staff have any questions on this report, please contact me at (202) 512-3604 or farrellb@gao,gov. the majority of male applicants were between the ages of 21 and 25. Eighty-four percent of female applicants were 30 years old or younger. 154 of the 202 applicants for conscientious objector status had participated in Operation Noble Eagle (ONE) and Operation Enduring (ENDURING) during calendar years 2002 through 2006. The occupational area for the majority of the applicants was general infantry (which includes weapons specialists and special forces), and most of the Applicants also had between 1 to 4 years of service. Freedom (OEF), or Operation Iraqi Freedom (OIF) (see table 9). Of the 154 who served in these operations, 153 were from Army or Marine Corps components. Top five occupational areas for the 377 enlisted servicemembers for calendar years 2002 through 2006 were general infantry, weapons specialists, special forces, and military training instructors. Of the 33 officer applicants, the three largest occupational types included 6 applicants whose occupations were designated as unknown (i.e., officer unknown occupation) This report provides an understanding of the sources of the data and the file structures. To determine how each component of the U.S. Armed Forces administers its process for approving or denying conscientious objector applications, we reviewed relevant guidance. When we found discrepancies (for example, duplicate Social Security numbers), we worked with the appropriate components and DMDC to understand the reasons for the discrepancies. We reviewed existing information about the systems that produced the data, and we interviewed component andDMDC officials to identify known problems or limitations in the data. We interviewed officials responsible for each component’s current practices for reviewing conscientious objector applications. We also interviewed VA, DOD, and component officials about the benefits available to conscientious objectors and other servicemembers upon discharge. We reviewed component-provided data to determine the characterization of discharge (e.g., honorable) received by the servicem embers separated as conscientious objecters. We used component- provided data to calculate the average processing time for conscientious objecter applications. and other benefits. 61 in 1994 (during a period when the services were larger) to 46 and 36 during calendar years 2005 and 2006. These numbers are very small, given the size of the total force—approximately 2.3 million servicemembers. Brenda S. Farrell, (202) 512-3604 or farrellb@gao.gov. In addition to the contact above, Cynthia Jackson, Assistant Director; Minty M. Abraham; Kurt A. Burgeson; Fatema Z. Choudhury; Kenya R. Jones; Mitchell B. Karpman.