Zika infection has been linked to severe birth defects and other health concerns. Local transmission of the virus has occurred in American Samoa, Puerto Rico, the U.S. Virgin Islands, and south Florida. Travel-associated cases of Zika infection have been reported in nearly every state, with the largest numbers reported in California, Florida, New York, and Texas. The public health focus, both domestically and elsewhere in the Americas, is to protect pregnant women from infection and, thereby, to prevent potentially severe birth defect. The Obama Administration requested more than $1.89 billion in supplemental funding to respond to the Zika outbreak. A major theme in congressional debates was whether unobligated (generally, uncommitted for expenditure) funds from the Ebola outbreak should be used to fund part of the Zika response. The Administration called for all these funds to be provided as an emergency requirement, which would effectively exempt them from the discretionary spending limits. Of the $589 million identified for reprogramming on April 6, $374 million was repurposed for domestic Zika control activities. $34 million was drawn from accounts at the National Institutes of Health (NIH), and $47 million in total was drawn. that designating funds for only these specific entities could prevent states or territories from directing SSBG funds to other types of entities. It is not clear whether public health departments or hospitals could have subcontracted with Planned Parenthood or other entities. Separately, the agreement (Division D) would have rescinded $750 million in budget authority, the majority of it from unspent funds in the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act. For instance, Puerto Rico's International Planned Parenthood Federation affiliate, Profamilias, does not receive Medicaid funding. H.R. 5325 was intended to establish health exchanges in the territories. The conference agreement was agreed to by the House on June 23, 2016. On June 28, the Senate voted not to invoke cloture on the measure. On September 28, that substitute amendment was adopted by a voice vote, and the bill, as amended, was passed by the Senate, by a vote of 72-26. The House agreed to the Senate amendment later that same day. The President signed the bill on H.R. 2577 appropriates $933.0 million for HHS and $175.1 million for State and USAID. Both amounts (and, therefore, the total) are identical to the funding levels in the conference report. There are some differences in how these funds may be used, including $75 million for reimbursements of health care costs for the virus. All of the funding in Division B is designated as an emergency requirement, and that division contains no rescissions offsetting the funding for the Zika response. H.R. 5325 passed in both chambers on September 28, 2016. It does not include provisions from the House-passed version. Some Members expressed concern that other portions of the bill did not provide funding to address the contaminated water problem in Flint, Michigan. Subsequently, an agreement was reached to address assistance for Flint during congressional consideration of a different vehicle, a water resources authorization bill. For more information about the Zika virus, visit: http://www.cnn.com/2016/09/28/science/zika-virus/index.html. The Administration's emergency supplemental appropriations request seeks for HHS a total of $1.509 billion. Most of the requested funds would support research, surveillance, vaccine and test development, and various domestic preparedness activities. A portion would support international response activities. The request proposes that all supplemental appropriations to HHS be designated as emergency spending, and remain available until expended. The requested PHSSEF funds could, in consultation with OMB, be transferred to other agencies within HHS or across the federal government. Puerto Rico might not have access to its full annual Medicaid allotments or additional ACA funding for a portion of the time the provision would be in effect. The request proposes language that would allow funds provided in the act to be used to reimburse HHS accounts for Zika response expenses incurred prior to enactment. There is some question about how this provision would affect Puerto Rico if it were to exhaust its additionalACA funding prior to FY2019. The proposal also proposes transferring funds to other federal accounts to "prevent, prepare for, and respond to" other vector-borne diseases. The Administration's February 2016 emergency supplemental appropriations request seeks for the Department of State and USAID a total of $376.1 million. This includes funds for control of the disease, prevention, surveillance, evacuating U.S. employees and American citizens, vaccine development, and diagnostic research. No congressional notification requirement is included. The request proposes language that would allow the government to support the advanced development and procurement of medical countermeasures against the Zika virus through Project BioShield. Also worth noting is that, unlike HHS, funds for international assistance programs have varying periods of availability, as specified below. As of January 1, 2016, the Department of State/USAID's unobligated Ebola funds totaled nearly $1.3 billion. The supplemental's request for notwithstanding authority could allow funds from this or prior acts to be expended despite any previously enacted restrictions and conditions on U.S. foreign aid. No congressional notification requirement is included. HHS Ebola funds may be reprogrammable without additional congressional action (subject to existing restrictions on reprogramming, including notification). This is because the relevant appropriations measures stated the funds are available for Ebola and other infectious diseases.