H.R. 3652 and S. 2092 were introduced by Rep. Conyers and Sen. Kennedy. The two bills are entitled the "Protecting Employees and Retirees in Business Bankruptcies Act of 2007" In 1984, the Bankruptcy Code was amended to add 11 U.S.C. Â§ 1113, which outlines the requirements that must be met before a court can approve rejection of a collective bargaining agreement. The bill asserts that executive pay enhancements flourish in business bankruptcies at the expense of workers and retirees. H.R. 3652 proposes changes to 11 U.S.C. Â§ 1113. Bill would limit the modifications to the existing CBA that can be proposed by the debtor. Current law puts no time limit on the duration of the effects a debtor's proposed modifications to a CBA may have on the relevant affected labor group. The bill would limit proposals to those that would (1) limit the effect of the labor group's financial concessions to no more than two years after the effective date of the plan. The bill's second requirement for debtors' proposals is that they must "be no more than the minimal savings necessary to permit the debtor to exit bankruptcy" David Perry: It is questionable whether this will do anything to clarify existing law. Perry: The proposed change would also specify management personnel as one of the groups to be considered in determining whether the labor group is being overly burdened. The language for proposed 11 U.S.C. Â§ 1113 could be construed to require those cuts in wages and benefits for employees must be matched by similar cuts for management employees. 11 U.S.C. Â§ 1113(b)(1) by (a) presenting a proposal that both treats all parties equitably and proposes changes necessary for reorganization. H.R. 3652 's proposed subsection (c) would have three main prongs as does the current subsection, but most of its similarity ends there. Current practices among companies in bankruptcy may have triggered a perceived need for this provision. It appears that other provisions of this subsection may be in part a part a CBA. The Bildisco Court specifically stated that approving a debtor's request for rejection should not require the courts to determine that negotiations had reached an impasse. CRS is uncertain if including "impasse" in H.R. 3652 is an attempt to resolve a long-standing issue or a response to current court decisions involving the airline industry. As noted below, courts have recently enjoined airlines from issuing CBA's without first reaching an impasse with the debtor. The word appears twice as a concept in proposed 11 U.S.C. Â§ 1113. The Railroad Labor Act (RLA), unlike the National Labor Relations Act (NLRA), requires parties to "exert every reasonable effort to make ... [an] agreement" If the changes to Â§ 1113(c)(1) are adopted, courts may need to determine if impasse is reached at some earlier point. CRS is uncertain how courts would construe the requirement that the parties be at "impasse" since the proposed bill includes the phrase "further negotiations are not not" likely to produce a mutually satisfactory agreement," courts may use a "more likely than not" standard. If the courts construed "impasse" as equivalent to the recent court interpretations of the RLA standard, requiring an impasse as a prerequisite to rejection could effectively eliminate most rejections. If bargaining takes place before or after the bankruptcy filing, if it takes place over an extended period of time, a company might be forced to liquidate rather than reorganize. Those opposing this provision are likely to argue that a company should be able to negotiate modifications to the CBA. Proposed change mirrors current law in requiring that the debtor provide appropriate information to the representative and bargain in good faith. There is nothing in the bill that explicitly gives the court the discretion to evaluate the representative's counterproposals. Since liquidation of the company normally would involve loss of jobs, it may be in the labor group's interest to make concessions if the debtor cannot reorganize without those concessions. Allowing the courts more discretion might increase those inconsistencies and lead to more "forum shopping" in bankruptcy filings. agreement with debtors and did not have good cause for refusing to agree. The effect was to encourage negotiations, which is what section 1113 was intended to do. It is unclear whether the proposed provisions would encourage both parties to negotiate. H.R. 3652 would establish a presumption that the debtor has overly burdened the labor group in comparison to other groups, including management. Unless that presumption can be effectively rebutted, the debtor will have failed to meet the requirements for rejection. Since BAPCPA became effective, there has been a move toward paying managers incentive payments, which were not restricted. Some of these incentive pay schemes have been rejected by the courts as actually being retention bonuses. In 2006, both the Senate and the House introduced bills that would have limited the use of incentive bonuses. Though the bills were not passed by the 109 th Congress, their provisions are included in H.R. 3652. This bill would extend B APCPA restrictions on retention pay to incentive and severance pay. performance bonuses as well as "bonus[es] of any kind, or other financial returns" before the bankruptcy petition was filed. The bill's proposed amendment to 11 U.S.C. Â§ 1113(c)(3) could make it difficult for the court to approve rejection of a CBA if there were any sort of incentive pay. Arguably, this could put a court in the position of having little flexibility to make decisions that could result in the debtor company's successful reorganization. days before the hearing. The court must rule on the application within thirty days unless otherwise agreed to by the debtor and representative. If the court does not rule within the required time, the debtor may unilaterally modify or terminate the CBA pending the court's ruling. H.R. 3652 would extend the period required for notice to at least twenty-one days. The bill would restrict the parties who could appear and be heard, limiting them to only only one party at a time. It would also require the court to hold the hearing within 14 days of the filing date. The creditors would have an opportunity to approve or reject the reorganization plan. H.R. 3652 would not change the current language, but would add a provision regarding allowed administrative claims. The bill proposes no changes to this section while parties continue to negotiate changes to a CBA. If so, it could lead to liquidations rather than reorganizations when interim modifications are essential for the company to remain in business, the authors say.. Currently there is no statute addressing this issue. It would require that the plan be required to provide for full payment of the claims. The bill would add a subsection that would define rejection of a CBA as a breach. This is one of the subsections where the use of a particular word may have import that is not immediately obvious. Under the bill, court-approved rejection would be a breach of contract with the same effect as rejection of any other executory contract under 11 U.S.C. Â§ 365(g) The word breach is used in this proposed subsection merely to identify the rationale for the prescribed remedy. It is possible that the word was used to legislate an effect of rejection. H.R. 3652 would change the law so that all labor groups, even those controlled by the RLA, would have the right to strike when a CBA was rejected. The bill would also preempt all other federal and state laws regarding labor groups' right to engage in self-help. Under current law, there is no provision for future modifications of a CBAs if the debtor's financial condition improves. It is unclear whether those damages are intended to be treated as an administrative expense and, therefore, a priority claim. no later than thirty days after the beginning of the hearing. The bill does not directly address which party will pay for arbitration. It appears, however, that if all of the bill's provisions were to become law, the debtor would probably pay for the arbitration as an administrative expense since subsection (j) provides for reimbursing the representative for reasonable costs and fees incurred. As administrative expenses, they would be considered administrative expenses under the proposed changes to 11 U.S.C. Â§ 1113. The bill would require the debtor and authorized representative to meet to determine the effects on the labor group. Under current law, all post-petition obligations that are required by the CBA are considered administrative expenses. The bill would also extend the right to strike to all labor groups whenever a CBA was modified or rejected without their consent. Companies in financial distress may argue that the bill's proposed changes to chapter 11 are insufficiently flexible to allow successful reorganization. If that is their conclusion, they might try to resolve their financial difficulties outside of bankruptcy or choose to liquidate rather than reorganize.