The Medicaid drug rebate program provides savings to state Medicaid programs. Rebates are based on two prices per drug that manufacturers report to CMS: best price and AMP. Best price is the lowest price available from the manufacturer to any wholesaler, retailer, provider, health maintenance organization (HMO), or nonprofit or government entity. AMP is defined by statute as the average price paid to a manufacturer for the drug by wholesalers for drugs distributed to the retail pharmacy class of trade, according to the rebate agreement. AMP and by a lack of manufacturer documentation. Although OIG in some cases identified problems with manufacturers’ price determination methods and reported prices, CMS had not followed up with manufacturers to make sure that those problems were resolved. In its first review of manufacturer-reported prices in 1992, OIG found that it could not verify the AMPs reported by the four manufacturers it reviewed. OIG recommended that CMS have the manufacturer revise its AMP data. As of October 2004, it had not required any such revision of the audited manufacturer’s AMP determinations. how manufacturers were treating repackagers. HMOs that repackage or relabel drugs under their own names. States lost $80.7 million in rebates in fiscal year 1999 because of improperly excluded drug sales. Manufacturers made varying assumptions about which sales and prices to include and exclude from their determinations of best price and AMP, OIG found. It found that in some cases manufacturers’ assumptions could have led to lower rebates and in other cases to higher rebates. CMS officials told us that they make determinations about PBM payments on a case-by-case basis. Any change in the determination of best price and AMP could raise or lower rebates. Incorporating PBM-negotiated manufacturer payments into the rebate determination could decrease the unit rebate amount for a drug. HHS agreed with the importance of guidance to manufacturers, but disagreed with our conclusion that there has been inadequate program oversight, the report said.. We acknowledged HHS’s oversight actions, but stated that HHS oversight does not adequately ensure the accuracy of manufacturer-reported prices and rebates paid to states. Price determination methods. Debra Draper, Robin Burke, and Ann Tynan also made key contributions to this statement. This is a work of the U.S. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States. It may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from GAO. However, because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material, permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately. For further information about this testimony, please contact Kathleen King at (202) 512-7118.