Postsecondary institutions that serve large proportions of low-income and minority students are eligible to receive grants from Education. Funding for Title III and V programs has increased significantly over the past 10 years. An institution can use the grants to focus on one or more activities to address challenges articulated in its comprehensive development plan. The Higher Education Act outlines broad goals for these grants, but provides flexibility to institutions in deciding what approaches will best meet their needs, the report says. of the report: Funding for the programs included in our review has almost tripled from fiscal year 1999 to fiscal year 2009, increasing from $230 million to $681 million. GAO and Education’s Inspector General have recommended multiple times that Education implement a systematic monitoring approach. In 2009, we found that Education had made progress in automating its monitoring tools and developing risk-based criteria. Since our report was published, Education required all major program offices to develop a monitoring plan for fiscal year 2010. Education has not consistently developed realistic, attainable, measurable and measurable targets for each of the tools and activities outlined in the monitoring plan. For example, Education developed specific goals for the number of site visits and technical assistance it would conduct. Education did not hold conferences for 3 years from 2007 to 2009, despite strong grantee interest. Education held a conference for all Title III and V grantees in March 2010. Education officials told us that they plan to organize another conference in 2011. Education has also created an e-mail address for grantees to express concerns, ask questions, or make suggestions about the programs. The address is displayed on every Education grantee’s website. The report recommended that Education disseminate information to grantees about common implementation challenges. program Web page and is monitored by an Education official not associated with the program office to allow grantees to provide anonymous feedback. Education lacks assurance that grantees appropriately manage federal funds, increasing the potential for fraud, waste, or abuse. In our 2009 report, we reviewed financial and grant project records at seven institutions participating in Title III and V programs in fiscal year 2006 and identified $142,943 in questionable funding. The survey will be sent to new grantees and grantees that are near the end of their grant period. expenses at 4 of the 7 institutions we visited (see table 4). At one institution—Grantee D—we identified significant internal control weaknesses and $105,117 in questionable expenditures. Of the questionable expenditures we identified, $88,195 was attributed to an activity designed to promote character and leadership development. More than $79,975 was used for student trips to locations such as resorts and amusement parks. Officials at the institution ignored multiple warnings about mismanagement of this activity from external evaluators hired to review the grant. system and risk-based criteria—to assess potential risks. Education has taken some steps to respond to our most recent recommendations, but it is too early to tell if it has fully embraced a risk- based monitoring approach. Until Education is fully committed to such an approach, Title III and V funds will continue to be at risk for fraud, waste, or abuse. The internal control weaknesses and questionable expenditures we identified at some grantees we reviewed demonstrate the importance of having a strong and coordinated monitoring and assistance program in place. grantees with the greatest risk and needs is critical to ensuring that grant funds are appropriately spent. We will continue to track Education’s progress in fully implementing our recommendations. I would be happy to answer any questions that you or other members of the subcommittee may have. For further information regarding this testimony, please contact George A. Scott (202) 512-7215 or ScottG@gao.gov. Contact points for our Office of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of this statement. the United States. The published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from GAO. However, because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material, permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S., call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255.