Forecasting future retirement income needs is a challenge, in part because of the many variables involved. Social Security is the primary source of income for many retirees. Private pensions and other sources of income serve as key supplements and help retirees receive adequate income in retirement. Estimates of future income adequacy rely heavily on projections of macroeconomic factors, including estimates of future rates of inflation, and rates of return on stocks and bonds and changes in home values. The federal government collects a great deal of data pertinent to the analysis of retirement income and wealth. The Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995 (P.L. 104-13) and similar previous legislation is designed to minimize the paperwork burden on the public. The act requires OMB to approve all existing and new collections of information by federal agencies. In approving agency collection efforts, OMB must weigh the burden to the public against the practical utility of the information to the agency. Panel members noted that efforts to reduce existing data collection requirements sometimes result in.a reduction in the overall response rate. Several laws exist to protect individuals’ rights to privacy and protect the confidentiality of personal and proprietary information held by federal agencies. Law requires federal agencies to restrict access to data they collect. Survey shows people are apprehensive about the government’s use of personal information. Public distrust of federal agencies’ use of their personal information can undermine people’S willingness to participate in federal surveys, potentially making the information collected less reliable, the authors say. The authors say lower response rates can undermine analysts’ statistical projections. agencies and researchers continue to explore options to maximize data usefulness without compromising respondent privacy and confidentiality. The Census Bureau has received permission from the IRS to link the survey records to additional items from IRS and SSA records. More sophisticated techniques include the use of methods to substitute artificial artificial values for the actual value of a respondent’s income. In this way, so many individuals are included in the high-income group that their identities cannot be determined, the Census Bureau says. It has recently increased the number of its research data centers where approved analysts can access confidential data. In December 2002, the Congress enacted the Confidential Information Protection and Statistical Efficiency Act of 2002. This act permits designated statistical agencies to share information concerning businesses for statistical purposes, but not information concerning individuals or households. It authorizes three agencies—the Census Bureau, the Bureau of Economic Analysis, and BLS—to share data on businesses with one another. Pension experts state that this method can only accommodate certain kinds of variables and, therefore, complex relationships between variables may not be maintained. This allows people to remain anonymous to the researchers using the data. With the proportion of retirees to workers expected to increase dramatically over the next couple of decades, important decisions lie ahead. Access to retirement income data needed to inform those decisions has actually decreased in some respects, the authors say. While improvements in data are essential for more reliable forecasts of retirement income, protecting respondents’ information and minimizing the burden data collection efforts impose on firms and individuals are also crucial. Finding an appropriate balance between providing wider access to data to support policy analysis and keeping data secure is a persistent and evolving challenge. panel and modified the draft as appropriate in response to their comments. Commerce had no major comments on the report (see app. VI). Labor agreed on the need for access to accurate data but did not agree with our recommendations to the Secretary of Labor. Regarding our recommendation to collect electronic copies of SPDs, Labor concluded that this is at odds with the Taxpayer Relief Act of 1997, which eliminated requirements that SPDs be regularly filed with Labor. Labor also indicated that there was little public interest in the SPDs. In both 1993 and 1995 we supported elimination of paper filing requirements. We continue to believe that it is time to phase in a requirement that SPDs be filed electronically. The costs involved should be considerably less than those incurred filing and storing paper copies. Labor estimated in 1998, for example, that it would cost an average of $1.55 to provide SPDs for health benefit plans to each plan participant. The need for improvements in retirement income data warrants renewed efforts to address the priorities identified by experts we consulted. the confidentiality of survey data may hamper wider access to SPDs. BLS assures respondents to its National Compensation Survey that their identities will be kept confidential. Arrangements could be developed through which BLS and other statistical agencies could both obtain SPDs and protect the identity of respondents. They could, for example, request SPDs from a larger number of employers without identifying which employers were being surveyed. This is the kind of improved access to data that we envisioned BLS could take. We conclude that the need for improvements in retirement income data warrants Labor's use of its existing authority. GAO conducted a Web based survey of experts in the field. The report will be available at no charge on the GAO’s Web site at http://www.gao.gov/. If you have any questions concerning this report, please contact Barbara Bovbjerg at (202) 512-7215. See appendix VIII for other contacts and staff acknowledgments. The questionnaire asked respondents to indicate the priority (from highest to lowest) they would place on 22 actions to improve retirement income data. Respondents were asked to rate each action independently. informed participants of its availability. This E-mail message also contained a unique user name and password that allowed each respondent to log on and fill out his or her own questionnaire. As of December 12, 2002, 190 of the experts responded to the survey (a 69% response rate). Eighteen percent of respondents indicated that they were affiliated with federal agencies, about half were affiliated. with colleges and universities, 24 percent were affiliatedwith other nonprofit organizations, and the remaining 9 percent were. affiliated with for profit or other organizations. Existing panel surveys of middle-aged and older people should receive continued government support. Longitudinal data from these surveys are essential to analyze retirement and savings decisions. These surveys should be refreshed periodically with new cohorts in order to offer insight into how behavior changes over time. The amounts of federal support for three major longitudinal surveys have been sustained. The scope of our work did not include an evaluation of estimated costs and benefits of specific proposals for improving retirement income data. We did not independently verify the federal funding figures provided to us by longitudinal survey administrators or agencies sponsoring the surveys. on housing and medical care. Such consumption measures are important for projections of economic well being in retirement. Labor’s Consumer Expenditure Survey provides cross-sectional rather than longitudinal data on many types of expenditures. Panel surveys of younger people, such as the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY), should include detailed questionnaire modules. The proposed American Community Survey also would provide limited detail on housing expenditures. The Medical Expenditure Panel Survey (MEPS) provides extensive data on medical expenditures. on pension coverage, wealth, health status, and retirement- and savings-related expectations. Such information is needed to fully understand life-cycle behavior and to track the disparities in income and wealth that are evident by middle age. The NLSY asks about the total amount of retirement savings, amounts contributed, and amounts withdrawn, and pension coverage. It also provides information about assets and debt and limited information about health (height, weight, and general evaluation of health), but not retirement or savings expectations. The 1991 and 1995-99 rounds of the survey included more detailed questions on amounts in retirement plans. The bracketing technique used in HRS and AHEAD that has been demonstrated to reduce nonresponse to important items should be adopted in other surveys. Federal agencies collaborate through entities such as the Federal Interagency Forum on Aging-Related Statistics. The National Institute on Aging should facilitate such collaborative efforts. The Census Bureau and other statistical agencies seek comments from a wide range of researchers on the content of questions. SIPP Working Group, which consists of federal and non-federal analysts, both advise the Census Bureau on that survey. Labor should establish an interagency task force on employer data to specify an integrated plan for collecting retirement income-related information. The plan should specify short-term and long-term goals that consider user needs, resource constraints, and the problems of obtaining information from employers. According to officials at the Department’s EBSA, Labor has not made this a priority because its resources are limited. distribution across employers of all benefit plan offerings. Comprehensive baseline information is a priority need, along with a plan for regular updating. Needed data elements include benefit plan characteristics and costs, employer characteristics (e.g., number of employees, financial characteristics, wage structure) for public and private employers and the self-employed. Recommendation: The employer data collection task force should give priority to redesigning and enhancing existing data collection systems on employer benefit offerings and related topics. The Employee Benefits Survey (now part of the National Compensation Survey) continues to provide data for categories of employers, not categories of employees. BLS has begun providing aggregate estimates for all private employers. However, the survey does not cover federal, military, agricultural, fishing, forestry, or private household employers. Data from IRS Form 5500 continues to become available well after the end of the reporting year. For example, for a firm with a 1998 reporting year beginning December 15, 1998, and ending December 14, 1999, the Form 5 500 was due July 31, 2000. Labor takes several months to review and edit the returns before making them public. researchers and policy analysts, but its Web site does not include links to the data. A private firm provides a Web site with images of the completed forms, but not compiled data sets. Linking these consolidated reports of publicly held companies with Form 5500 data is difficult because these reports can cover only parts of a company, more than one company, or privately held companies. Labor no longer requires that it receives the summary plan descriptions regularly, and as a result the public no longer has access rights to new or revised versions. more data on labor demand for older workers Recommendation: The employer data collection plan should include short-term and long-term goals. Needed data elements include employment patterns of older workers, compensation and benefit costs by age, and worker productivity by age. The Health and Retirement Study and other surveys provide much data on employment patterns and salary and wages of older Workers. But little has been done, however, concerning compensation and benefits costs or productivity by Age. The employerDataCollection.org website can be accessed at: http://www.datacollection.org/. force should consider the feasibility and cost-effectiveness of a panel survey that collects detailed information on employers and their workers. Such a survey should cover the full universe, including private for profit, nonprofit, and government employers, and the self- employed. Longitudinal data from an employer-based survey are needed to analyze the factors that affect employer decisions about recruitment and retention of older workers. The E-Government Act of 2002 (P.L. 107-347) could provide for linking National Compensation Survey (NCS) data on retirement plans to the Census Bureau’s data on business establishments. Access to linked data sets remains quite limited. Possible solutions include: (1) developing public use files that contain summary variables derived from the administrative records portion of the matched file. (2) requiring researchers to sign nondisclosure agreements with significant penalties for violations; and (3) providing researchers with access to matched files on site at secure data centers.of individual responses. Access to HRS linked data for example, is typically made available via a rigorous application process resulting in a data use agreement with the University of Michigan. extend access to our restricted data. Use data centers, which provide access to restricted information, for approved researchers. Fund regular evaluation of data quality for retirement income-related surveys. Several studies using the recommended methods have been conducted, with mixed results. The Census Bureau conducted a study comparing estimates of various types of 1990-96 incomes in SIPP and CPS to each other. The study was conducted by the Census Bureau and the National Center for Health Statistics, which is part of the National Institutes of Health. benchmark data estimated by the Census Bureau from the personal income estimates in the National Income and Product Accounts. For 1996, the aggregate wages and salary estimate based on CPS survey data was 102 percent of the benchmark based on administrative records. In contrast, the study found more substantial disparities for several other types of income. For most income brackets, however, the data match quite well, according to the study. The study is being replicated with data for 1999. The Department of Treasury’s Office of Tax Analysis has compared estimates of pension plan participation and contributions with Census Bureau survey data. The Census Bureau periodically assesses the quality of CPS data by reinterviewing a subsample of respondents. The Census Bureau has also studied the accuracy of respondent data by matching income data in the March CPS with selected income detail on individual IRS income tax returns and SSA earnings and benefit records. HRS investigators have compared employee responses about retirement income to employer provided data and Social Security records and found wide discrepancies. It is unclear to what extent these result from respondents’ responses. A similar effort is underway using 1999 data. limited knowledge of their pensions or data errors. Increase support for longitudinal studies of individuals over 50 years of age. Expand studies of retirement savings of younger individuals (age 50 or below) Improve measurement of family and household consumption expenditures in surveys such as the CEX and in panel surveys like the HRS. Highest priority (percent) priority ( percent) priority(percent) Low priority ( percentage) Lowest priority ( Percentage) opinion (percent), according to the survey's results. The survey also asked respondents about their views on employers and employee benefits. Lowest priority (percentage) opinion (percent) Henry J. Aaron The Brookings Institution Julie Agnew College of William and Mary Joseph M. Anderson Capital Research Associates Kenneth Apfel University of Texas at Austin Vickie Bajtelsmit Colorado State University Dean Baker Center for Economic and Policy Research Laurel Beedon Public Policy Institute, AARP Dan Beller Employee Benefits Security Administration Keith A. Bender University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee Mark C. Berger University of Kentucky B. Douglas Bernheim Stanford University Merton C. Bernstein Washington University. Panelists include members of the Federal Reserve Board, the Census Bureau, the Department of Commerce, the Small Business Administration, the Urban Institute and the Hay Group. Panelists are from universities across the U.S. and around the world. The panelists are also from the Brookings Institution, the Congressional Budget Office, the National Academy of Actuaries and the University of Wisconsin-Madison. The final panelist is the Social Security Administration, which is responsible for the retirement security system. For more information on the panel, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2002/09/10/seniors-retirement/senior-retirements/index.html. For the full list of panelists, click here. “synthetic data” in the LEHD program, a technique in which many relationships between variables are maintained in a data set, but in a manner that makes it impossible to identify specific individuals. Restricted access sites are a useful means of allowing confidential information to be accessed by researchers, subject to certain restrictions. A federal storage data center where a number of federal data sets could be brought together could allow agencies to share some otherwise inaccessible information. The Census Bureau allows researchers with pre-approved projects to use confidential economic and demographic survey data. researchers, unless those data are imported into the data center. BLS has a similar data center located in Washington, D.C. in which data extracted from SPDs collected as part of the National Compensation Survey are stored. Because confidential data cannot be removed from either the BLS or the Census Bureau data centers, it is currently not possible for researchers to match data sets from the two agencies. There was wide agreement on the panel that greater access to employer information was needed to accurately capture the value of employer-provided pensions. retirees’ income. Timothy Fairbanks, Nicholas Larson, Lynn Musser, Emily Pickrell, and Roger Thomas also contributed to this report. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. For support in the U.S., call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255 or visit www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org.