U.S.-AU ties have strengthened and assumed increasing prominence since the establishment in 2006 of a U.S. diplomatic mission to the African Union. Key Obama Administration goals with respect to the AU have been to support AU efforts to promote democratic and electoral reform across the continent. In mid-2015, President Obama addressed the AU in a speech focused on democracy and a range of other issues centering on governance and security. He had previously met with the AU Commission Chair, Dr. Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma, in 2013 and 2014. U.S. assistance to the AU in support of the organization and its nonmilitary program activities is limited. In recent years it has ranged between a low of $521,000 (FY2015) and a high of $1 million (FY2012) U.S support for the U.N. Security Council-authorized AU Mission to Somalia (AMISOM) and its troop contributors since 2007, for instance, stands at nearly $2 billion. The AU has funded nearly all of its operational (organizational) budget, but it remains highly dependent on external funding. The African Union is an intergovernmental grouping that includes as members all countries in Africa except Morocco. The AU, based in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, was established in 2002 as the successor to the now-defunct Organization of African Unity (OAU) OAU members formed it to achieve the goals of the 1991 African Economic Community (AEC) Treaty more quickly. That treaty, which remains in effect, and the AU Constitutive Act, the founding charter of the AU, are intended to promote African regional economic integration. The act identifies "noninterference" by member states in their peers' internal affairs as a key AU principle. Unlike the OAU charter, it recognizes exceptions and grants the AU the right to intervene in member states' affairs in "grave" situations. It also allows states to request AU intervention to restore peace and security, and calls for the AU to reject unconstitutional changes of government. The creation of the AU was, in part, spurred by criticisms that OAU's long-standing doctrine of noninterference had often caused it to prioritize member state sovereignty over human rights. The AU's policy of providing immunity from arrest during AU forums to heads of state facing International Criminal Court (ICC) criminal prosecution has also drawn criticism from advocacy groups. In 2013, the AU celebrated the 50 th anniversary of the formation of the OAU and its later transformation into the AU. During the celebration it released a 50-year AU development plan, Agenda 2063: The Africa We Want, which is complemented by a number of shorter-term general and sector-specific plans. enhancements in standards of living and citizen well-being, especially in the areas of education and skills, health, habitats (e.g., urban services), gender equality, and youth empowerment. Economic transformation and job growth, notably through agricultural investment and development, underpinned by infrastructure improvements, environmental sustainability, and climate resilience. Increased political and economic regional integration based on the ideals of Pan Africanism and greater African agency in global affairs. improved governance, deepening of democratic values, and "entrenched" respect for human rights, justice, and the rule of law. The AU is a policymaking, representational, and diplomatic body that also undertakes peace- and security-related efforts and programmatic development work. Various donors have funded initiatives to strengthen the AU's organizational development and program implementation, the most notable of which is a 2014-2018 World Bank program. While the AU directly undertakes many functional programs, attainment of many of its goals (e.g., in the areas of regional economic growth, development, and integration) is delegated to Africa's various regional economic communities. Chadian President Idriss Déby was elected chair of the African Union in early 2016 and is to serve in the post until January 2017. Peace and security are major goals of the AU, given that so many African countries have been or are affected by armed conflict or violent extremism. Dlamini-Zuma has also prioritized efforts to streamline the AU Commission and make it more effective. The post is largely ceremonial and rotates annually, but it offers a high-profile policy advocacy platform. AMISOM undertakes robust, often offensive operations to counter threats from Al Shabaab and other armed groups. It also protects the government, trains government forces, and supports humanitarian aid deliveries. AMISOM receives logistical and other support through the U.N. Support Office in Somalia (UNSOS). The most recent major AU military decision took place in early 2015, when the AU PSC authorized four member states of the Lake Chad Basin Commission to establish a Multinational Joint Task Force (MNJTF) AU also helps coordinate joint regional, U.S.-aided military responses in central Africa to counter the Lord's Resistance Army. The United States has provided or pledged financial support for all AU military interventions, except for its 2008 mission in Comoros. A key long-term AU goal has been to create an African Standby Force (ASF) made up of five REC-based brigades, to be tasked with peacekeeping or peace enforcement operations, conflict monitoring, and post-conflict mandates. other serious offenses committed during the conflict, although its prospects are unclear. The AU has taken no concrete steps to do establish the court, and key South Sudanese leaders reportedly oppose it. In 2008, the AU Assembly decided to merge the AfCHPR with the Court of Justice, a body authorized by the AU Constitutive Act but not established. In addition, as a result of a 2014 AU Assembly decision, the new court would also have jurisdiction in Africa over crimes of genocide, crimes against humanity, war crimes, and certain other crimes. is controversial because it does not define the relationship between the planned court and the ICC. It arguably represents a rejection of the ICC and its mandate to try genocide and other serious international crimes. The protocol would protect AU heads of state and certain other senior state officials from prosecution before the court during their tenure in office. This provision appears to relate to concerns by some African leaders over the ICC's attempted prosecution of sitting national leaders and seeming prioritization of cases in Africa (see text box). Botswana, for instance, has strongly supported the ICC’s work in Africa. Human rights groups and some analysts see them as prioritizing leaders' political positions and power at the expense of accountability for serious violations of human rights. Often missing from deliberations over the AU's relationship with the ICC has been the role of other, ad-hoc international courts. Examples include the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR); hybrid courts of mixed jurisdiction, such as the Special Court for Sierra Leone (SCSL); and possibly national courts. The United States financially supported the ICTR and the SCSL, and has voiced support for the SCC. The New Partnership for Africa's Development (NEPAD) is the AU's main strategic policy framework and plan for continent-wide socioeconomic development. A key NEPAD program is the Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Program (CAADP), aimed at boosting investment in food and agriculture production. The EU uses the latter to provide technical assistance, loan interest rate subsidies, investment grants, and loan guarantees in support of the AU-NepAD Infrastructure Action Plan. Other key NepAD-facilitated initiatives include the Program for Infrastructure Development in Africa (PIDA) and the linked Africa-EU Infrastructure Trust Fund. African Resilient Landscapes Initiative (ARLI) focuses on forest and ecosystem restoration, biodiversity conservation, "climate smart" agriculture, and rangeland management. EU-funded AU Inter-African Bureau for Animal Resources (AU-IBAR) Vaccines for the Control of Neglected Animal Diseases in Africa (VACNADA) project. Various programs to support the African Peace and Security Architecture (APSA) Progress toward regional integration, a key REC and NEPAD goal, has often been slow, but is improving. improving. Challenges have included governments' sovereignty concerns, uneven economic capacities among states, protectionism, and institutional and legal/regulatory incompatibilities. Despite the existence of two multi-country central banks (for West and Central Africa), country participants do not fully overlap with REC boundaries. Additional REC macroeconomic and monetary convergence initiatives have often experienced difficulties. While interstate travel and trade within REC regions are often slow and costly, due both to poor infrastructure and burdensome border controls. Some RECs now have regional passports that are complemented by AU passports. In June 2015, the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA), the East African Community (EAC), and the Southern African Development Community (SADC) united to form a Tripartite Free Trade Area. The AU launched negotiations for the establishment of a Continental Free Trade area (CFTA), which would integrate the eight RECs into a single continental customs union. Regional economic integration and trade growth within the EAC is a major Obama Administration goal under the AEC Treaty. Regional integration could have significant implications for potential increases in U.S. trade with and investment in Africa. The challenges facing the AU are profound. Securing the financial resources to strengthen the AU's institutional, technical, and staff capacities is one key obstacle. In recent years, while member states have made progress, there has been a lack of financial wherewithal and the presence of obstacles comparable to those facing similar efforts in richer regions of the world. The AU has been criticized for its lack of effectiveness, but some observers have noted that its institutional development has been relatively rapid. The demise of the Qadhafi regime in Libya, which had provided large amounts of funding for the AU, exacerbated such trends. The AU has had to reduce its budget several times in recent years after receiving insufficient donor commitments to fund its initial plans. In June 2015, the AU Assembly adopted a new scale of assessment targeted, in part, at having AU member states fund 100% of the AU operational budget. The U.S.-AU ties have strengthened over the past decade, and have assumed a higher profile in U.K.-U.S. relations. President Obama's speech was wide-ranging, focusing on various issues of shared concern. A key topic that drew particular attention among observers was the President's call for strong adherence to democratic norms in the region. He also stressed the need for respect for "human dignity," a concept that he used as a vehicle to address issues of peace and security. President Obama had previously engaged with the African Union in meetings with AUC Commissioner Dlamini-Zuma in mid-2013 during a trip to Africa and in 2014 during the U.S.-Africa Leaders Summit. The U.S. move toward closer ties began in 2005, when then-President George W. Bush granted the AU international organization status. The first AU ambassador to the AU was accredited in 2007. The United States is the first non-African country to have an accredited AU mission. The mission's key goals under the Obama Administration have been to support the AU in playing a lead role in democratic and electoral reform; develop inclusive economic development through improved trade and investment; strengthen Africa's capacity to address peace and security challenges. Total U.S. aid for the AU is challenging to track, but totaled an estimated $7.6 million in 2015. In 2014, the total was $4.7 million, along with a one-time $10 million grant to support the deployment of the AU Response to the Ebola Epidemic in West Africa (ASEOWA) The United States has nonetheless increased cooperation with the AU in recent years. The 2013 MOU prioritized cooperation centering on the Obama Administration's 2012 U.s. Strategy Toward Sub-Saharan Africa. In 2013 USAID and the AU also agreed to jointly pursue geothermal energy development in East Africa. U.S. sectoral aid is funded through various bilateral, sectoral, or regional programs. Other aid helps the RECs implement their programs, which are often linked to overarching AU policies or programs. According to the Obama Administration's FY2017 State Department foreign aid Congressional Budget Justification (CBJ), current aid to RECs is estimated to be $1.2 billion. The United States also supported the AU's recently-established African Centre for Disease Control and Prevention (African CDC) Outgoing Administration's planned FY2017 U.S. assistance would build on current programs. A core target in FY2017 would be support for the AU 2014-2017 Strategic Plan "in areas of mutual interest with the United States" The request also seeks to maintain the deployment of a USAU-based rule of law adviser to support the AU Department of Political Affairs and Office of the Legal Counsel. Whether Congress and the incoming Trump Administration may pursue a similar or different approach to providing aid to the AU in FY 2017—or potentially cut it in whole or in part—remains to be seen. For the United States, there is arguably much potential scope for expanded cooperation with the AU. Future AU Commission leadership changes, including one expected in early 2017, could reshape the organization's goals and priorities. The AU's overall policy objectives, however, are collectively set by the AU member states' leaders, and are unlikely to fundamentally shift in the short to medium term. The United States is therefore likely to continue to direct the majority of its aid and diplomacy through bilateral and sub-regional channels.