The New Car Assessment Program (NCAP) was established in response to a requirement in the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act of 1972. NCAP provides consumers with information regarding the crashworthiness of new cars beyond the applicable Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards with which all vehicles sold in the United States must comply. In fiscal year 2004, NCAP conducted 85 crash tests and 36 rollover tests, with a budget of $7.7 million. NHTSA’s policy, although not required by law, has been to make changes to the safety standards before considering changes to NCAP. The full frontal crash test is equivalent to two identical vehicles moving toward each other at 35 mph. The angled side crash test simulates an intersection collision in which one moving vehicle strikes another moving vehicle. The rollover test is actually a series of four runs, two left/right tests and two right/left tests, at two different steering wheel angles and different speeds. NHTSA separately rates the frontal, side, and rollover tests. It assigns one (worst) to five (best) stars to communicate the results. NCAP and the three foreign programs performed their side tests using a moving deformable barrier with a front end simulating a passenger car. Insurance Institute’s barrier simulates the front end of a typical pickup truck or SUV. The Insurance Institute barrier weighs about 3,300 pounds (1,500 kilograms—kg) compared to the U.S. barrier and 2,095 pounds (950 kg) for the Australian, European, and Japanese barriers. The pole side test involves a side impact to a vehicle placed on a platform and propelled into a stationary cylindrical pole. Each vehicle testing organization used crash dummy readings as a principal part of its rating process. NHTSA officials said they use these measures because they are the most important indicators of serious or fatal injury in frontal and side crashes. The four organizations we reviewed used more dummy measures in calculating a vehicle’s safety rating than U.S. NCAP. In Europe and Australia, rating scores can be modified depending on the existence or absence of certain safety features, the report says. The Insurance Institute hopes this test will encourage manufacturers to install side curtain air bags that extend low enough to protect smaller passengers. All programs except the U.S. NCAP observe or measure changes to various parts of the occupant compartment after the frontal crash test. Japan has established fixed measures that if exceeded will result in a lower score in a particular area. Another basic difference in scoring vehicles is the use of a modifier system in Europe and Australia. This system adjusts the score generated from the dummy injury data where injuries to occupants can be expected to be worse than indicated by the dummy readings or the vehicle deformation data alone. All programs used stars to convey test results, except for the Insurance Institute. Officials from the NCAPs noted that star ratings are well understood by the public. NHTSA officials said they used focus groups in 1993 to examine various options to communicate crash test results to the public, and the five-star rating was found preferable. None of the programs has plans to change its rating measures, according to the NHTsa. The National Academy of Sciences noted that stars are inherently positive symbols and the public understands them. Australia, Europe, and Japan NCAPs provide summary ratings. The U.S. NCAP provides only individual ratings for each seating position that is included in the test for the frontal and side crash tests. Australian and European officials explained that they believed potential potential customers may not understand the distinctions between the different levels of stars. The Insurance Institute said it considered these types of qualitative measures as being clearer to the general public. It said most people would associate the star rating with hotels and that staying in a three-star hotel would be quite acceptable to most people. Vehicle purchasers can be confused by the large amount of detail available on the test results and that summarizing results makes the ratings more useful. NHTSA officials noted that overall or summary ratings might hide or mask deficiencies in some areas of the tests. For example, they said that if a vehicle were to get a very high frontal rating and a very low side rating, merging the results could give consumers a misleading impression of the overall safety of that vehicle. Similarly, officials with publications like Consumer Reports and The Car Book told us they have found it helpful to provide consumers with summarized rating information. The Internet was the most relied-upon source for getting information to consumers. Each organization made the results of its testing program available on the Internet. Some programs also work with the news media to increase awareness of test results. Euro NCAP uses color-coded dummy injury diagrams to display how the specific body regions perform in the frontal, side, pole, and pedestrian tests. The level of government and industry involvement varies among the crash test programs. programs we examined used a variety of approaches to share safety results with the public. a matter of agency policy and follows an informal rulemaking process where industry and other interested parties can submit comments. The Insurance Institute, which is funded by private insurance companies, has no such process and can make an internal decision to modify tests at any time. In Australia and Europe, NCAP officials told us that by not being exclusively controlled by government, they have flexibility when modifying their programs. They said that as a result they can make changes quicker because they do not have to follow governmental procedures. NHTSA is upgrading its frontal and side crash tests in the Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards. Automakers told us that vehicle safety and NCAP test results have become an important marketing tool. There are now more than 85 million pickups, minivans, and SUVs on the road. The change in vehicle fleet presents new safety challenges that NCAP’s testing does not fully address—vehicle incompatibility and rollover. Without addressing these changes, NCAP provides little incentive to manufacturers to continue to improve safety. Some safety experts say NHTSA could improve its program by developing an overall safety rating. Consumer Reports, The Car Book, the Insurance Institute, and all of the other NCAPs provide more summary information for consumers. Australia and Japan provide more comparative information by supplementing their star ratings by adding bar charts that show how well the vehicle performed in the tests. It could provide summary ratings, present information in a comparative manner, increase public awareness, and make results available earlier in the model year. uses the Internet, brochures, and press releases to inform the public of NCAP ratings. The Euro NCAP also stages a public display of crash vehicles. Recent events were held in Wenceslas Square, Prague; Athens; and London. There have also been proposals to increase public awareness ofNCAP results by requiring their inclusion on new car stickers. For example, S. 1072, a bill introduced in the 108th Congress to reauthorize funds for NCAP was introduced. NCAP ratings are often released late in the model year, after many of the vehicles have already been purchased. NHTSA could conduct vehicle tests earlier and release NCAP ratings sooner. Consumer advocate groups say they support such an approach because consumers would have information available at the time of their purchase decisions. The usefulness of the current testing has been eroded by changes in the vehicle fleet that have occurred since the program began, authors say.- frontal side-impact safety ratings, four- and five-star frontal-impact ratings do not provide enough incentive for manufacturers to improve safety. To rate a vehicle’s crashworthiness, NHTSA combines information about (1) the forces that would injure a human during a crash and (2) the effects of those forces on areas of the human body. The forces of impact are measured by anthropomorphic test devices, commonly referred to as crash test dummies, which serve as proxies for human vehicle occupants. These dummies are fitted with accelerometers and load sensors that measure the forces of hit on particular areas of their bodies. The Abbreviated Injury Scale (AIS) ranks injuries, from minor through currently untreatable, for particular areas. NHTSA develops crashworthiness ratings, expressed in stars, for both frontal and side crashes. NHTSA calculates the probability of severe injury to the head and chest for both the driver and the front passenger dummies in the frontal NCAP test. The Thoracic Trauma Index score and its associated probability of receiving an AIS level 4 or greater injury is the sole basis for the side NCAP star rating. NTHSA assigns a vehicle a rating of one (the worst) to five (the best) stars for each of the dummy occupants. initiating commands for the programmable steering controller, which actually maneuvers the vehicles. Outriggers are attached to the vehicle to prevent the vehicle from tipping all the way over. The result of the dynamic rollover test is either “tip-up” or “no tip-up.” The general steering parameters are 270 degrees ( about a three-quarters turn) for the initial turn and 540 degrees (about one and one-half turn) For the correction turn, as shown in figure 39. NHTSA first began to rate vehicles’ rollover avoidance in model year 2001. NHTSA now links the SSF and the risk of rollover using a nonlinear model. A vehicle’s rollover rating is an estimate of its risk of rolling over in a single-vehicle crash, not a prediction of the likelihood of a rollover crash. The Insurance Institute for Highway Safety recommends that vehicles with a high SSF be rated as more likely to roll over than those with a low SSF. Safety is a nonprofit research and communications organization funded by the U.S. auto insurance industry. The Insurance Institute began crash testing and rating vehicles for frontal collisions in 1995 and for side collisions in 2003. Insurance Institute officials told us that scrutinizing the outcomes of both controlled tests and on-the-road crashes gives researchers and the public a better idea of how and why vehicle occupants are injured in crashes. This research, in turn, leads to vehicle designs that reduce injuries. It also chooses the vehicles for crash tests directly from dealers. The Insurance Institute tests vehicles in categories, such as small cars, minivans, and midsize SUVs. The offset frontal test is conducted at about 40 mph to simulate a typical head-on collision of two vehicles. The perpendicular side test measures the impact of a moving deformable barrier striking the driver’s side of a passenger vehicle at 31 mph. The Insurance Institute uses a frontal impact dummy, called the 50th percentile Hybrid III dummy, to measure the risk of injury. A vehicle’s side crash test performance and overall rating are based on the injury measures recorded on the two instrumented SID-IIs dummies. The injury measures are used to determine the likelihood that the driver, the passenger, or both would have sustained serious injury to various body regions. Measures are recorded from the head, neck, chest, abdomen, pelvis, and leg. The overall side rating depends on the risk of injury measured for small female occupants mainly to the head and neck. based on the injury measures recorded on the two SID-IIs dummies, is the lowest rating scored for any injury within that region. The Insurance Institute’s rating system provides qualitative ratings of Good, Acceptable, Marginal, and Poor. Figure 44 shows how the Insurance Institute presented its ratings to consumers in its Status Report. The print version is available only to subscribers, and some of the publications can can can some of these publications can be found online and on TV. The Australian New Car Assessment Program (NCAP) provides information for consumers. The main purposes of the program are to provide new vehicle buyers with independent advice. The program also uses European NCAP (Euro NCAP) crash test results. In 2004, the Australia NCAP performed three crash tests and a pedestrian protection test. in Australia and New Zealand. The Insurance Institute of Australia’s crash test report can be downloaded from the Insurance Institute”s Web site. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. by a post-crash inspection and by viewing a high-speed video recorded from various angles during the crash test. For example, according to Australia NCAP officials, air bag performance could be compromised by the dynamics of a crash. Each body region receives a score based on the dummy measurements, the vehicle deformation data, and the findings of the post-Crash inspection (using modifiers). For example,. excessive rearward movement of the steering wheel could lower the head score by a point to reflect identified risks. Other modifiers include lack of air bag stability, steering column movement, A-pillar movement, structural integrity. Scores are based on injury measurements recorded on one EuroSID-II dummy positioned in the front driver’s seat. The injury assessment evaluates four body regions: the head, ribs, abdomen, and pelvis. A post-crash inspection and high-speed video are also used to evaluate structural collapse. Sixteen points can be achieved in the frontal test and 18 points in the side tests, for a maximum of 34 points. If a vehicle has head-protecting side air bags, the manufacturer of the vehicle has the option of accepting a side impact pole test. Australia NCAP began summarizing full frontal and offset frontal head, chest, and leg test results. In November 1999, to align with the Euro NCAP, the Australia NCAP first used a five-star system to report crash test performance. The European New Car Assessment Programme (Euro NCAP) provides information for consumers with an assessment of the safety performance of some new vehicles sold in Europe. The program is operated and funded by a consortium of six European governments and motoring and consumer organizations. The three crash tests are the 40 percent offset frontal test, the perpendicular side-impact test, and the side- Impact pole test. The frontal test involves a moving test vehicle traveling at 40 mph (64 km/h) crashing into an offset deformable aluminum barrier where 40 percent of the vehicle’s width engages the barrier on the driver's side. The pedestrian protection test evaluates the impact of dummy parts against the bumper, hood, and windshield areas of a vehicle. The Euro NCAP bases its assessment of crashworthiness on three types of observations made during or after a crash test. The Japan NCAP began testing vehicles in 1995, starting with a full frontal collision test. The program added the side-impact test in 1999 and the offset frontal test in 2000. By 2004, the program had evaluated 79 vehicles representing over 80 percent of those that were on the market at that time. Ratings for 60 of these vehicles were carried over from previous years’ testing, and ratings for 19 vehicles were based on tests performed in 2003. In 2005, the institute plans to open a new test facility with multiple tracks. A EuroSID-I dummy is placed in the driver’s seat. This dummy is the same height as the Hybrid III dummy but weighs about 20 pounds less. The dummy was designed to measure the risk of injury to the head, chest, abdomen, and pelvis. The Japan NCAP conducts a braking performance test that measures how far a vehicle travels before it stops and how stable it is at the time of braking when it is stopped abruptly. The test is performed under wet and dry road conditions for a vehicle. To ensure consistent testing, Japan NCAP officials said, the dry road surface temperature must be 95.0 degrees plus or minus 18.0 degree Fahrenheit. The wet road surface must be 80.6 degrees and the temperature of the road surface affects the distance it takes to stop the vehicle. Professional drivers conduct the tests, and the speed of the vehicle and force with which the drivers depress the brake pedal are monitored electronically to ensure consistency. All braking tests must be performed at the same location because road surfaces vary and surface differences could affect test results. Japan NCAP assesses and scores the ease with which doors can be opened and the dummies removed after a crash test. The pedestrian test measures the effect of a pedestrian being hit by a vehicle traveling at about 22 mph if the pedestrian’s head strikes part of the hood or windshield. The Japan NCAP measures injuries to the head, neck, chest, and upper (femur) and lower (tibia) The test is conducted on vehicles with three different body types, as shown in table 10. The Japan NCAP measures injuries to the driver’s head, chest, abdomen, and pelvis. Points vary by body region, from 2 points for upper and lower leg injuries to 4 points for head, neck, or chest injuries. The maximum score that a vehicle can achieve is 12 points because of the way the injuries are weighted. For the pedestrian test, a series of head injury scores is used to assign injury probability levels from 5 (the best) to 1 (the worst) Child seats are evaluated according to their performance in a collision and their ease of use. Cars with hoods that are more flexible and compress upon impact can receive better scores than those that are rigid and leave no room between the hood and the engine for the impact to be absorbed. For the collision test, overall ratings of Excellent, Good, Normal, and Not Recommended are assigned. The ratings are primarily based on the head and chest injury scores taken from the dummies used in the test. For each area, the specialists assigned points, from 5 (the best) to 1 (the worst) The Japan NCAP uses a four-letter system to rate vehicles’ crashworthiness. Many vehicles have achieved a five-star rating, and some have received a six- star rating for occupant protection. In addition to the star ratings, the JapanNCAP reports the percentage of possible points that each vehicle received and provides a bar chart indicating how well the vehicles performed in these tests. Although not shown as part of the crashworthiness rating, the ratings for the pedestrian tests are provided, as well as rescueability. the ratings for the child restraint seats (Excellent, Good, Normal, and Not Recommended). Furthermore, the Japan NCAP has provided consumers with comparative information on vehicles’ braking capability on wet and dry pavements. In addition to those named above, Vashun Cole, Michelle Dresben, Colin Fallon, Kathleen Gilhooly, Doug Manor, Terry Richardson, Beverly Ross, Brian Sells, Jena Sinkfield, Stacey Thompson, and Frank Taliaferro made key contributions to this report.