The Framework Agreement is the latest achievement in the Doha Development Agenda(DDA) round of trade negotiations at the WTO. Trade ministers set an ambitiousagenda to negotiate an accord by January 1, 2005. The work program devised at Doha folded in continuing talks (the built-in agenda) onagriculture and services. It also launched negotiations on the reduction or elimination of non-agricultural(industrial) tariffs, clarification and improvement of disciplines for existing WTO agreements onantidumping and subsidies. Negotiators looked toward the 5th Ministerial to resolve the modalities. The CancúnMinisterial, however, failed to achieve even these expectations. Trade ministers becameembroiled in disputes over agriculture and the Singapore issues. The G-20, an informal group ofdeveloping countries, led by Brazil, India, China, and South Africa, took over the negotiations in September 2003, but failed to reach an agreement on the framework for negotiating the modalitiesto be used in future negotiations. Deadlock over the Singapore issues broke upthe talks before agriculture issues were even formally discussed. U.S. and EU negotiators criticized both the substanceand tactics of the G-20 group. Developing countries defended their actions as representing theirparamount interest in breaking down the agricultural barriers and subsidies in the United States and the EU. The EU'sacceptance of the elimination of agricultural export subsidies "by date certain" alsomoved the negotiations along. Compromise was also achieved over the negotiation of the Singaporeissues. After intense negotiations in late July 2004, WTO members reached what has become known as the Framework Agreement (or the July package) The agreement contains a 4-page declaration, with four annexes (A-D)covering agriculture, non-agricultural market access, services, and trade facilitation. The agreement also abandons the January 1, 2005 deadline for thenegotiations, but instead sets December 2005 as the date for the 6th Ministerial to be held in HongKong. The U.S. has sought expansive tariff liberalization in the non-agricultural market access talks. The United States has also made cross-border trade in services a priority. Previous rounds of trade liberalization were successful in reducing tariffs in the manufacturedgoods sector. That negotiated liberalization has proceeded further in this area perhaps is reflectedin the distribution of world trade. Of the $7.6 of all export subsidies, $1.6 is from the United States, according to the World Trade Organization. Agriculture, though previously negotiated, remains a thorny issue for both producer and consumer,and developed and developing countries. Industrialgoods comprised 71.9%, agriculture 7.6%, and services 20.5%. Trade in services was only broughtunder world trade rules by the Uruguay Round's General Agreement on Trade in Services in 1995. Key provisions in the agriculture framework address trade-distorting domestic support,export competition, market access, cotton subsidies, and other issues. For most U.S. farm groups, the trade-offof most interest is substantial market opening by developing countries in exchange for substantialreductions in domestic support. be subject to deeper cutswith some flexibility for "import-sensitive" products. Developing countries will be able to designate a number of products as "special products,"based on criteria of "food security, livelihood security, and rural development needs" A Special SafeguardMechanism (SSM) will be established for developing countries, while a Special AgriculturalSafeguard (SSG) for developed countries (as currently provided for in the Uruguay RoundAgreement) remains under negotiation. Cotton was not mentioned in the 2001Doha Ministerial Declaration. proposal for zero-for-zero tariffs in oilseedsadvanced earlier by the United States. Disciplines on exportprohibitions and restrictions will be strengthened. Rules on agricultural trade policy monitoring andsurveillance will be enhanced so as to ensure transparency, including "through timely and completenotifications" with respect to commitments in the three pillars. The market effects of global agriculturaltrade liberalization are difficult to estimate at this point in the negotiations because such specifics are still to be negotiated. The harmonizingapproach in the agriculture Framework suggests that others, notably the European Union (EU),would have to cut trade-distorting support more than would the United States. In the EU case, itsbound level of amber box support is currently (depending on exchange rates) around $80 billion while the U.S. bound level is $19 billion. According to U.s. trade negotiators, the United stateslikely should have no difficulty in meeting the aim of cutting the sum of trade- Distorting supportlevels by 20% in the first year. actual spending could be considerably less, rendering the20% cut in the first year meaningless for the United States. Future cuts could be higher, provided that other countries also substantially reduce trade-distorting support and tariffs. Cotton is the only agricultural commodity mentioned by name in theagriculture Framework. U.S. cotton producers object to this singling out of cotton for specialattention. The elimination of EU export subsidies has been a longstanding objective of U.s. agriculturaltrade policy. EU to offer to eliminate them by a date certain. In exchange, however, the EUcountered that all forms of export subsidies, including U.S. export credit guarantees and food aid,should be eliminated. USDA's export credit guarantee programs, which have provided guarantees for about $4 billion of agricultural exports annually in recent years, would be substantially altered by the agreement. U.s. food aid programs which meet the criterion of not displacing commercial sales appear to be unaffected bythe Framework Agreement. grant form" will be addressed in thenegotiations. The role of international organizations vis-a-vis WTO member countries' food aidprograms will also be addressed. Congress would be taking up a new farm bill tosucceed the six-year Food Security and Rural Investment Act of 2002 ( P.L. 107-171 ). Farm bill programs that mostlikely would be candidates for change would include commodity price and farm income support. The DDA and the Next Farm Bill. Non-agricultural market access (NAMA) received less scrutiny than agriculture innegotiations for the Framework Agreement. The Framework integrated draft language on NAMA prepared for the Cancún Ministerial in September 2003. Developed nations sought to include the language wholesale, yet developing countries resisted. They insisted on a paragraph, included in thefirst paragraph of the text, indicating that "additional negotiations are required to reach agreementon the specifics of some of these elements" The elements being the formula, treatment of unboundtariffs, flexibilities for developing countries. Doha round,trade of industrial and primary products, the subject of the NAMA negotiations, continue to makeup the bulk of world trade. The outcome ofthese negotiations could have a substantial impact on U.S. trade patterns and on the world economy. The Framework Agreementendorsed the use of a non-linear formula applied on a line-by-line basis as a modality to conduct tariff reduction negotiations. Under the Framework Agreement, tariff reductions would be calculated from the bound,rather than the applied, level. tariff is set as a percentage of the value of an imported good, while a non- ad valorem tariffuses some other measurement such as a fixed rate per unit or weight of goods. While non-ad valorem tariffs are more prevalent in agriculture, they continue to be employed for non-agricultural tariffs andare not solely a developing country phenomenon. A recent study calculated that 4.2% of lines in theUnited States tariff schedule remained non ad-valorem and for Switzerland the figure was 82.8percent. services is only mentionedbriefly in the WTO negotiating framework. Authors of initial drafts of theFramework had lumped services trade in with "other issues" "Services" refers to a broad range ofeconomic activities, essentially any economic activity that is not a tangible good. Services account for a major and growing portion of the U.S. economy and for a good portionof the rest of the world economies. In 2003, services accounted for about 58% of U.s. GrossDomestic Product (GDP) In 2003, services accounted for 30.1% of U.S. exports of goods and services. Services are bought and sold via four means or "modes": (1) cross-border trade; (2)consumption abroad where the consumer physically travels to another country to buy the service; (3)commercial presence where the service is provided by a firm in one country via its branch, agency,or wholly-owned subsidiary located in the country of the buyer; and (4) Multilateral rules on trade in services are very new and were established under the General Agreement on Trade in Services (GATS) They are administered by the World Trade Organization(WTO) which wasestablished on January 1, 1995 also as part of the Uruguay Round. The GATS contains basicprinciples and rules ontrade in services, some of which, for example, national treatment andmost-favored-nation treatment, are parallel to long-established rules for trade in goods under theGeneral Agreement on Tariffs and Trade. part of the so-called WTO "built-in agenda" It wasagreed before the Doha Ministerial that services negotiations would operate in a request-offer format. The negotiations onservices were folded into the agenda of the new round at the November 2001 WTO Ministerial in Doha, Qatar. EachWTO member first indicates what general concessions they request from the other members and then, separately, each member indicates what concessions it is willing to offer. (26) Doha Round Negotiations. in services and, by March 31, 2003, shouldsubmit their offerings of what their initial commitments would be toward liberalizing trade inservices in their economies. The United States had completed its requests for commitments from other member countries on July 1, 2002. The U.S. requests call for many of the countries to improve transparency inregulations of services to boost efficiency across all services industries. (27) Other countries, including the 15 members of the EU, submitted their own requests, including requests made of the United States to reduce trade barriers in services. Developing countries were reluctant to make offers on services until they saw how far some of thedeveloped countries were willing to go on agriculture. Because the Framework Agreementaddressed many agricultural trade issues, supporters of liberalized trade in services are anticipatingthat the services negotiations will gain momentum. The Framework itselfmentions services only briefly because they were not the focus of the negotiations over theframework and the parameters had already been established as part of the "built-inagenda" and in the Doha Ministerial Declaration that launched the new round. as possible, to submit revised offers by May 2005and to ensure that the offers are of high quality. The negotiating Framework notes the particular interest that developing countries have inissues pertaining to mode-4 supply of services. In many member countries, services are a large portion of economic activity. Yet, servicesaccount for only a small portion of total trade, indicating many untapped opportunities for trade inservices. For many countries, especially developing countries,liberalization in services trade is a very sensitive issue that may make achieving the opportunitiesdifficult if not elusive. of international trade through strengtheningtrade rules concerning customs procedures. In the modern "just in time" economy, where traders rely on quick turnaround andshipping to meet orders, this poses a significant problem. According to the United NationsConference on Trade and Development, the average customs transaction involves 20-30different parties, 40 documents, 200 data elements (30 of which are repeated 30 times), and there-keying of 60-70% of all data at least once. WTO negotiations on trade facilitation seek to improve trade procedures by utilizing technology more effectively. enhancing cooperation among customs and other officials, reducingdocumentation requirements and other administrative burdens, and ensuring a fair and transparentsystem of administering trade. Trade facilitation has the potential to reduce the cost of trade,increase opportunities for trade, diminish corruption associated with customs procedures, increasecompliance with customs rules. Reducing the costsof trade with developing countries could help U.S. businesses establish new export markets andlower-cost suppliers. The United States may also benefit from trade facilitation in the same way as other countries. The United States has worked with other WTO members toward launching trade facilitationnegotiations. The negotiations are to consider the principle of special and differential treatment for developing countries. The existing WTO rules singled out for attention are Articles V, VIII, and X of the GeneralAgreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) The Framework recognizes that a negotiated agreement mayrequire some members to further develop their infrastructure, and this may be burdensome for somedeveloping countries. However, developed countries are expected to make every effort to ensuresupport and assistance for implementing the commitments. it does not receive adequatesupport from developed member countries. Much work remains to be done to flesh out the Framework to an actual agreement ontrade liberalization. Agreement to reduce domestic support according to aharmonizing formula represents substantial progress, but difficult negotiations are expected over specifics. In turn, the manner by which these issues are resolved may influence the level ofCongressional support for any resulting agreement. For the Doha negotiations to succeed, however, these issues must be addressedand resolved. such as thepercentage cuts in overall support and in specific categories of trade distorting support (amber box,newly-defined blue box, and de minimis ). Similarly, the EU's concession on eliminating export subsidies is supposed tobe matched with U.S. cuts in export credit guarantees and food aid programs. Resolving this trade-off is critical to bothrealizing market benefits from further agricultural trade liberalization as well as gaining eventualsupport in Congress for a WTO trade agreement.  mode-4 delivery of services will likely be an issue of critical interest to some members of Congress. Mode-4 is the most critical issue for a number of largedeveloping countries, including India and China. Members were stronglycritical of trade agreements that included provisions affecting U.S. immigration policy, and vowed to oppose future agreements that did so. The NAMA language wasreplicated from the 2003 Cancún text, but language inserted at the insistence of the developing countriescasts doubt on the finality of these decisions. The success of the NAMA negotiations may also depend on cooperation of developing countries. Developing countries may prove more likely to engage in the talks if they are confident that they will not be forced to take measures beyond their capacity. In establishing talks on trade facilitation, membercountries may first reach an agreement on whether to negotiate new rules, or merely guidelines, fortrade facilitation. This may be accomplished by first reaching agreement on concrete steps for theprovision of technical assistance, and the application of special and differential treatment.