The 1986 Compact of Free Association between the United States, the FSM, and the RMI was a framework for the U.S. to work toward its three main goals. The goals were to secure self-government, advance economic development and self-sufficiency, and ensure certain national security rights for all of the parties. The first goal has been met. The second goal has not been achieved. The third goal of the Compact–securing national securityrights for all parties–has been achieved, the authors say. The Compact grants the United States a “defense veto.” The United States secured continued access to military facilities on Kwajalein Atoll in the RMI. Of these rights, only the defense veto is due to expire in 2003 if not renewed. Through the original Compact, citizens of both nations are allowed to live and work in the U.S. as “nonimmigrants” and can stay for long periods of time, the Compact says. The Compact also grants citizens of the FSM and RMI unique immigration rights. Congress authorized Compact impact payments to address the financial impact of these nonimmigrants on Guam, Hawaii, and the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands (CNMI) By 1998, more than 13,000 FSM and RMI citizens had made use of the Compact immigration provisions and were living in the three areas. The governments of the three locations have provided the U.S. government with annual Compact nonimmigrant impact estimates. In 2000, Guam received $7.58 million in impact funding, while the other two areas received no funding. Under the U.S. proposals, annual grant amounts to each country would be reduced each year in order to encourage budgetary self-reliance. Under the amended Compacts with the FSM and the RMI, new trust funds would be established to replace expiring annual grants. The RMI trust fund would replace grants in fiscal year 2024 but would become insufficient for this purpose by fiscal year 2040. If the trust funds earn a 6 percent rate of return, they would be insufficient to replace annual grants by 2023. congressional authorizations of approximately $6.6 billion could be required for U.S. payments from fiscal years 2004 to 2086. The share of new authorizations to the FSM would be about $2.3 billion and would end after fiscal year 2023. Further funding of $3.1 billion for the remainder of the period corresponds to extended grants to Kwajalein and payments related to U.s. military use of land at Kwajalin Atoll. Using published U.S. Census population growth rate projections for the two countries, the real value of grants per capita to the FSM would begin at an estimated $687 in fiscal year 2004 and would further decrease over the course of the Compact to $476 in fiscalyear 2023. The decline in annual grant assistance could impact FSM and RMI government budget and service provision, employment prospects, migration, and the overall gross domestic product (GDP) outlook. For the RMI, the proposed level of Compact grant assistance in 2004 would actually be 8 percent higher in real terms than the 2001 level. The amended Compacts were designed to build trust funds that, beginning in fiscal year 2024, yield annual earnings to replace grant assistance that ends in 2023. Both the FSM and the RMI are required to provide an initial contribution to their respective trust funds of $30 million. In designing the trust funds, the Department of State assumed that the trust fund would earn a 6 percent rate of return. However, whether the estimated value of the proposed trust funds would be sufficient to replace grants or create a buffer account would depend on the rate ofreturn that is realized. grow in perpetuity, the FSM trust fund would eventually deplete the buffer account and fail to replace grant funding by fiscal year 2048. I will now discuss provisions in the amended Compacts designed to provide improved accountability over, and effectiveness of, U.S. assistance. This is an area where we have offered several recommendations in past years, as we have found accountability over past assistance to be lacking. In sum, most of our recommendations regarding future Compact assistance have been addressed with the introduction of strengthened accountability measures. Fiscal procedures agreements would establish a joint economic management committee for the FSM and the RMI. The United States could withhold payments if either country fails to comply with grant terms and conditions. Grant conditions normally applicable to U.S. state and local governments would apply to each grant. The amended Compacts’ trust fund management agreements would grant the U.s. government control over the trust fund Management Committee for 20 years after the initial 20 years of the Compact.. The fiscal procedures agreement would require numerous reporting requirements for the two countries. no evidence demonstrating that an overall assessment of the appropriateness, effectiveness, and oversight of U.S. programs has been conducted, as we recommended. The successful implementation of the many new accountability provisions will require a sustained commitment by the three governments to fulfill their new roles and responsibilities. Appropriate resources from the United States, the FSM, and the RMI represent one form of this commitment. While the amended Compacts do not address staffing issues, officials from Interior’s Office of Insular Affairs have informed us that their office intends to post six staff in a new Honolulu office. The most significant defense-related change in the amended Compacts is the extension of U.S. military access to Kwajalein Atoll in the RMI. We have estimated that the total cost of this extension would be $3.4 billion (to cover years 2017 through 2086) The majority of this funding ($2.3 billion) would be provided by the R MI government to Kwajialein atoll landowners, while the remainder ($1.1 billion) will be used for development and impact on the atoll. The original Compact’s immigration provisions are not expiring, but the Department of State targeted them as requiring changes. The amended Compacts would strengthen the immigration provisions of the Compact by adding new restrictions. The Kwajalein Atoll landowners have not yet agreed to sign an amended land-use agreement with the RMI government to extend U.S. access to Kwajalin beyond 2016. Departmental responsibility for authorization and appropriation for Kwajaliin-related funding beyond 2023 has not been determined. The Attorney General would have the authority to issue regulations that specify the time and conditions of a Compact nonimmigrant’s admission into the United States. The implementing legislation for the amended Compacts would provide $15 million annually for U.S. locations that experience costs associated with Compact nonimmigrants. This amount would not be adjusted for inflation, would be in effect for fiscal years 2004 through 2023. Allocation of these funds between locations such as Hawaii, Guam, would total $300 million. and the CNMI would be based on the number of qualified nonimmigrants in each location. I would be happy to respond to any questions you or other Members of the Committee may have at this time. For future contacts regarding this testimony, please call Susan S. Westin or Emil Friberg, Jr., at (202) 512-4128. Individuals making key contributions to this testimony included Leslie Holen, Kendall Schaefer, Mary Moutsos, and Rona Mendelsohn.