U.S. Coast Guard provides and operates icebreakers to meet military, logistic, and research needs. The Arctic region is a very harsh operating environment, making research expensive and risky. A 340-foot vessel was designed with significant icebreaking capability and the capacity to perform 90-day missions in the Arctic region. This vessel is expected to cost about $120 million and is scheduled to begin duty in 1998, Coast Guard officials say. But a 1990 study of national polar icebreaker requirements did not call for the construction of the proposed vessel. National Science Foundation analyzed options for buying and leasing Arctic research vessel. Analysis found that the federal government would have the least cost if it purchased the proposed vessel. Cost advantage of government purchase over long-term leasing of the vessel is related to two factors. After bids are solicited, NSF will need to decide whether to buy or lease the vessel. The range by which purchase was advantageous ranged from $22.9 million to $99.6 million, each in terms of present value. GAO: We reviewed many relevant studies, including those written by the Interagency Arctic Research Policy Committee, the Arctic Research Commission, the Polar Research Board, the University National Oceanographic Laboratory System, and NSF. We did not independently verify and validate the cost data that NSF used in the analyses. The observation that the United States does not possess a dedicated Arctic research vessel is insufficient justification for spending $120 million to construct the proposed vessel. We disagree with NSF’s view that we imply a reduced need for scientific research platforms. The first copy of each GAO report and testimony is free. Additional copies are $2 each. Orders should be sent to the following address, accompanied by a check or money order made out to the Superintendent of Documents. Orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent. The Coast Guard solicited, and, in some cases, implemented input from the scientific community.let, and assembly of component parts has begun in several locations. Each day, GAO issues a list of newly available reports and testimony. reports and testimony. To receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days, please call (301) 258-4097 using a touchtone phone. A recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255.