The electric utility industry was considered one of the nation’s most regulated industries. In the past, electricity service providers enjoyed a natural monopoly. Restructuring is underway for wholesale markets, which involve the sale of electricity for resale. States, however, vary greatly in their response to restructuring, authors say. They say some states have introduced competition to the retail markets in their states, others have begun to restructure but then delayed or suspended these efforts, and others still have taken no steps to restruct their markets. FERC and EIA are the two leading entities for the collection, analysis, and evaluation of electric power information. FERC collects information to assure just and reasonable rates on the basis of costs. EIA is mandated to collect, assemble, evaluate, analyze, and disseminate energy data and energy information for the Congress, the federal government, the states, and the public. The Federal Power Act (FPA) of 1935, PURPA, and EPACT drive FERC’s information collection activities. The North American Electric Reliability Council (NERC) is one of the most important nonfederal entities that collect data from the electricity industry. NERC, formed as a result of a devastating outage in the northeast during November 1965, was established to promote the reliability of the interconnected electric power system. One of its key functions is to collect information from its members, and provides a forum for the electric utility industry to develop policies, standards, and guidelines designed to ensure reliability. OMB is also responsible for the implementation of the Government Paperwork Elimination Act. Federal agencies collect three types of electricity-related information for widely varying purposes. FERC, EIA, RUS, SEC, and EPA specifically collect information related to generation, transmission, and/or distribution functions of electric power. Restructuring has led to a greater need for a second type of information, focusing on current activities, for purposes of monitoring by FERC in particular. Third-party sources, such as Bloomberg’s Professional Services, provide current and historical information on regional electricity and gas markets. FERC, an independent regulatory agency, was established in 1977 as a successor to the Federal Power Commission. Among its other duties, it reviews the rates set by the four federal power marketing administrations. FERC does not have legislative authority over electricity generation siting, construction of transmission lines, intrastate transmission, or retail sales. It also has no direct authority over system reliability—that is, ensuring that consumers can obtain electricity from the system, when, and in the amount they want. EIA is the principal source of comprehensive energy information for the Congress, the federal government, the states, and the public. EIA and its customers use the information it collects for a variety of purposes. Fossil Energy collects information on electric power imports and exports from both presidential permit and authorized export holders. The mandatory information is used in an annual report that summarizes the electricity trade between the U.S. and Mexico or Canada during each calendar year. (See app. II for FERC’s third-party sources of current market information.) Fossil Energy official tells us that EIA will eventually take over the responsibility of collecting information on imports and exports of electricity. EPA’s mission requires it to collect electricity-related information for regulatory purposes. The Acid Rain Program specifies that all existing utility units serving generators with an output capacity of greater than 25 megawatts must report their emissions. The emissions that must be reported include sulfur dioxide, nitrogen oxide, and carbon dioxide. While not an emission, the unit heat input (the caloric value of the fuel burned) must also be reported. monitoring system. Units report hourly emissions information to EPA on a quarterly basis. At the end of each calendar year, EPA uses this information to compare the tons of actual emissions reported with each company’s authorized emissions. If a company exceeds its limits, then it will be penalized in accordance with the rules of the program. An EPA report in February 1998 identified mercury emitted by coal-fired electric utilities. It represents a significant commitment of personnel with about 40 full-time-equivalent staff currently assigned to its maintenance and use. mercury emissions from coal-fired plants as the toxic air pollutant of greatest concern for public health from these sources. EPA has also developed the Emissions and Generation Resource Integrated Database, the first complete database of emissions and resource mix for virtually every power plant and company that generates electricity in the United States. The information, which encompasses more than 4,600 power plants and nearly 2,000 generating companies, is used to provide plant-specific analyses of emissions. It can also be aggregated at various levels, for example, individual. states and larger regions, to provide more comprehensive analyses of issues relating to air quality. RUS is a lending agency whereas EIA is a statistical agency and FERC and EPA are regulatory agencies. Officials are interested in obtaining information on the sale and purchase of electricity and especially in determining whether their borrowers are buying and selling power from each other. Officials told us that it provided about $4 billion in loans during 2002 and has a total of about $34 billion in outstanding funds plus new new funds. 45 percent or more of the electricity sold by rural electricity cooperatives comes from outside sources. Potential borrowers have to meet RUS’s criteria as serving rural consumers and also criteria for financial viability. Some loans to nonprofit cooperatives are for facilities that may become part of a transmission system operated by an independent system operator ( ISO) or a regional transmission organization (RTO) RUS uses two main forms to collect the relevant information. Both forms state their purpose as being to review an applicant’S financial situation. The SEC was established under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 as an independent, nonpartisan, quasi-judicial regulatory agency. As of October 31, 2002, there were 18 electricity-and-gas and 7 electricity-only, registered holding companies. Other agencies, including the Department of Justice, the Federal Trade Commission, and the Commodity Futures Trading Commission, do not collect information on an ongoing, regular basis. The collection of information ensures that SEC has comprehensive information on holding companies conducting substantial activities in more than one state. Justice and the Federal Trade Commission have responsibilities to enforce antitrust laws, among others. The impetus for these investigations may come from the trade press and other news sources. If a trend emerges, additional general information is gathered on the issue. This may lead to a finding that there is no further ground for concern or to the opening of a formal investigation. The Federal Trade commission has no ongoing information collection or standardized forms to obtain information on electricity markets, an assistant general counsel says. The agency’s activity is largely confined to two reports and some comments on other federal and state agencies’ proposed rulemakings. The Federal Trade Commission has discontinued its information collection on electricity markets. The agency’s role in reviewing mergers, including those involving the electricity industry, has declined. Restructuring, which has led to increasingly complex market activities with greater need for oversight, has highlighted the need for sharing information. Agencies are increasingly using the Internet and a mix of other methods to enhance their ability to share information with other agencies and the public. In the past, agencies provided paper copies of reports. Since the advent of the Internet, most federal agencies are using it to allow access to documents. Restructuring has significantly affected FERC while other agencies were affected to a lesser extent. To diminish gaps in its information, FERC relies on information from third-party sources, some of which is suspect. FERC created a new office to actively monitor competitive electricity markets and undertook efforts to identify sources of market information and better understand its own information needs. The formation of these organizations remains in question. FERC says it has no jurisdiction over power sales by federally owned entities, publicly owned utilities. Nonjurisdictional utilities own 27 percent of the U.S. electric transmission system. They serve large areas of the country and provide service in conjunction with 25 percent of nation's demand for electricity. FERC does not collect price information, for example, on up-to-the-minute electricity prices, fuel costs, and spot and futures contract prices, authors say. They say FERC also needs information on electricity imports from neighboring countries, particularly Canada. FERC cannot access other nonfederal information it needs to assess reliability of the power grid and monitor overall electricity market performance. Price and transaction information, as well as operational information, is important in order for FERC to be able to detect changes in the market, determine the legitimacy of market outcomes, and if needed, take corrective action. FERC lacks regulatory authority over all entities in wholesale electricity markets and is therefore unable to gather all of the information it needed to understand markets across the nation. FERC surveyed reporting firms for both natural gas and electricity and found that these firms lacked formal verification or corroboration. FERC reported that this lack of verification allowed an opportunity for entities to deliberately misreport information in order to manipulate prices and/or volumes in electricity. In at least one recent instance, FERC used such third-party information as a basis of a key decision regarding California’s electricity market. The information, however, later turned out to be inaccurate. Using this methodology, the judge ordered refunds of about $1.8 billion to the state of California. FERC plans to rely extensively on RTOs and ISOs to assist in its monitoring efforts. FERC officials said they expect to have access to all the data collected by the market monitors. According to FERC, it currently obtains timely information from some existing RTO and ISO monitors to help support its market oversight processes. However, relative to the Paperwork Reduction Act, they are not sure whether the market monitor will be able to collect information on FERC’s behalf that FERC itself has not been authorized to collect. FERC’s effort to expand the number and/or market coverage of RTOs as well as standardize electricity market rules has met with resistance from the Congress, state commissions, and others. FERC believes that market transparency provisions in proposed legislation will address issues related to jurisdictional entities that don’t participate in RTO. Among the other agencies, EIA has been the most affected by restructuring while the EPA has been more stable. The U.S. Department of Energy says it is working with FERC to address the issues raised in this report.  restructuring has led to changes in the number of entities from which EIA collects data. It has expanded EIA’s database by about 2,000 new sources of information and has nearly doubled its database. EIA now posts electricity prices for several of the largest markets on its Web site. The third effect of restructuring on EIA is to significantly alter the way that EIA examines energy sectors and electricity in particular. EIA has had to revise its energy models to accommodate restructuring because of changes in how electricity is supplied and distributed. Past, some companies failed to answer a question about the delivered fuel price on EIA’s Form 423. Congress is considering repealing or modifying PUHCA because the emergence of nonutilities reflects the fact that utilities are no longer the sole source of electricity energy. Restructuring has not had significant effects on the collection of electricity information by the other agencies included in our review. The Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 has established the legal framework to address some of the concerns related to corporate disclosure. The number of electricity entity mergers has slowed down, but should these mergers increase, Justice may need to increase its information collections for merger investigations. The Commodities Futures Trading Commission has reinstated its practice of collecting information on these trades. Events such as the collapse of Enron Corporation bring to light jurisdictional issues in helping to oversee electricity markets more generally, the authors say. The authors conclude that the agencies should become more involved in collecting electricity information as competitive markets develop. The Authors: The agencies should also be aware of the impact of electricity restructuring on their respective roles. FERC and SEC have been questioned about their lack of diligence in following through on Enron’s activities. Enron took advantage of jurisdictional gaps that enabled it to earn tens of millions of dollars above what it would have otherwise earned from its wind farms. FERC and the Commodity Futures Trading Commission provide a second example of problems resulting from jurisdictional uncertainties. Until Enron's collapse, the two agencies did not participate in meaningful discussions to identify and coordinate their respective roles. Restructuring has made the issue of confidentiality concerning electricity information more prominent. The sensitivity of this information, according to the companies asked to provide it, is greater because of fears that other companies could use it to seek competitive advantages. This dilemma has led to controversy about the electricity information that is to be made publicly available and shared with other federal agencies. Both EIA and FERC have procedures regarding restrictions on access to information and have modified these procedures, as appropriate, they say. 9/11 has heightened national security concerns about protecting the nation’s energy. the date of this letter. At that time, we will send copies to appropriate congressional committees. We will also make copies available to others upon request. In addition, the report will be available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staff have any questions about this report, please contact me at (202) 512-3841. Key contributors to this report are listed in appendix. The full report can be found at: FERC may prescribe a system of accounts for jurisdictional companies. FERC may determine the accounts in which particular outlays and receipts will be entered, changed, or credited. Department of Energy’s of each year for the previous calendar year. Energy Information Administration publishes Form 1 data in aggregate form. Accountant uses the data in its audit program and for continuous review of the financial conditions of regulated companies. Office of Markets, Tariffs, and Rates uses theData in rate proceedings and supply. FERC is authorized to collect basic cost and quality of fuel data at electric generating plants. Other government agencies use the data to track the supply, disposition, and fuel prices on a regional and national basis and conduct environmental assessments. FERC collects this information to monitor public utilities’ interlocking directorates for possible conflicts of interest. The data is used to conduct authorized fuel reviews, rate investigations, and monitor changes and trends in the electric wholesale market. The information is also used to help satisfy their reporting requirements for public utilities and licensees. 20 of the largest purchases of electric energy. Lists customers and their business addresses if they were 1 of the top 20 largest purchasers. Used to identify large purchasers and possible conflicts of interest. Filed biennially on June 1st for preceding calendar period. used to evaluate fuel costs in individual rate filings, to supplement periodic utility audits, and to monitor changes and trends in the energy market. Filing biennium on June 2nd for the year following the reporting period. On March 1 of each year for the period prior to reporting. the electric wholesale market. Used by DOE’s EIA to study various aspects of coal, oil, and gas transportation rates. Used to assess the electric marketplace during the transition to a competitive marketplace. FPA sections 202, 207, 210, 211, 212, and 213, as amended, and sections 4, 304, 309, and 311 of the same act. Collects information from any public utility or group of public utilities operating as a control area that has a peak load greater than 200 megawatts based on energy for load. also serve to correlate rates and changes; assess reliability and other operating attributes in regulatory proceedings; monitor market trends and behaviors; and determine the competitive impacts of proposed mergers, acquisitions, and dispositions. FPA section 213 (b), as amended, by the Energy Policy Act (Public Law 102-486) requires FERC to collect annually from transmitting utilities sufficient information about their transmission systems to inform potential transmission customers, state regulatory authorities, and the public of available transmission capacity and constraints. Data are now restricted and designated as critical energy infrastructure information. EIA is mandated to collect, evaluate, assemble, analyze, and disseminate information on energy resource reserves, production, demand, technology, and related economic and statistical information. Collects information on regional electricity supply and demand projections for a 5-year advance period and provides information on the transmission system and supporting facilities. This information is used to assess the adequacy of energy resources to meet near and longer-term domestic demands. The information reported includes (1) peak demand and energy for the preceding year and 5 future years. plant location (longitude and latitude) and tested heat rate. Each NERC Regional Council should file by April 1 and after review, NERC should file the Form EIA-411 by June 30. Used to monitor the current status and trends of the electric power industry and to evaluate the future of the industry. EIA is required to provide company-specific data to the Department of Justice, or to any other federal agency when requested for official use, which may include enforcement of federal law. A court of competent jurisdiction may obtain this information in response to an order. Department of Justice, or to any other federal agency when requested for official use, which may include enforcement of federal law. A court of competent jurisdiction may obtain this information in response to an order. To be submitted no later than April 30 following the close of the reporting year. Data from this form appear in the EIA publications—Electric Power Annual, Annual Energy Review, and Carbon Dioxide Emissions from the Generation of Electric Power in the United States. EIA is required to provide company-specific data to the Department of Justice. The EIA-826 is the only timely source of information on the price and volume of power sold to retail customers in the United States. Data from this form appear in the EIA publications—Electric Power Monthly, Electric Power Annual, Monthly Energy Review, and Annual Energy Review. EIA is required to provide company-specific data to the Department of Justice, or to any other federal agency when requested for official use, which may include enforcement of federal law. A court of competent jurisdiction may obtain this information in response to an order. 2001 report, beginning with data collected from the year 2000, the Forms EIA 860A and 860B are obsolete. FriedWire is an energy information provider, specializing in Web-based data collection and integration. Genscape provides current information related to generation and transmission of some fossil and nuclear power plants in the United States. NERC provides real-time information on transmission constraints in the northeast. Open Access Technology International provides information on electricity transmission useful for scheduling and meeting electricity deliveries. the power sector and the forces affecting the market, prices, and emerging trends and technology. Other services include its North American Natural Gas Advisory Service and its Electric Transmission Advisory Service. In addition to the individual named above, Angelia Kelly, Dennis Carroll, Jose Martinez-Fabre, Jon Ludwigson, Jonathan McMurray, Frank Rusco, and Barbara Timmerman made key contributions to this report. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org.