Under the Defense Environmental Restoration Program, DOD is authorized to identify, investigate, and clean up environmental contamination and other hazards at FUDS. To be eligible for cleanup, a property must have been owned by, leased to, possessed by, or otherwise controlled by DOD during the activities that caused hazards. These hazards consist of unsafe buildings, structures, or debris, such as leaning or weakened. Under the environmental restoration program, DOD’s activities addressing hazardous substances, pollutants, or contaminants are required to be carried out consistent with section 120 of CERCLA. load-bearing walls or supports; open-sided platforms or floors more than 6 feet above the next lower level; and any pit, depression, or tank that can collect or contain standing water. According to DOD’s fiscal year 2001 report on the status of its various environmental cleanup programs, there were 9,181 properties identified by the Corps, the states, or other parties as potentially eligible for cleanup. Figure 1 shows examples of the types of hazards that might be found at FUDS properties. The Corps conducts a preliminary assessment of eligibility to establish whether the property was ever owned or controlled by DOD. At the end of the preliminary assessment, the Corps determines if any further study or cleanup action is needed. The Corps does not consult with EPA or the states when making its determination. Based on our review of NDAI files, we estimate that the Corps doesn't have a sound basis for about 38 percent or 1,468, of the estimated 3,840 determinations in our study population. information that would have allowed it to identify all of the potential hazards at the properties or that it took sufficient steps to assess their presence. In many cases, when attempting to identify potential hazards resulting from DOD activities, the Corps apparently did not obtain relevant information about former DOD activities and facilities. In a number of cases, it appeared that the Corps overlooked or dismissed information in its possession when it looked for evidence of potential hazards. The problems we noted occurred, in part, because Corps guidance is not specific about what documents the Corps should obtain. 15,000-gallon underground storage tanks, an area adjacent to a drinking water source that is “highly” contaminated with oil by-products are hazards. A concrete structure (15 feet wide, 70 feet long, and 60 feet deep) filled with water presents a drowning hazard. These hazards have all been determined to result from DOD use of the property and are eligible for cleanup under the FUDS program. Information on potential hazards found at certain types of FU DS properties may also be useful in identifying potential hazards at other similar properties. We found that at times Corps officials overlooked or dismissed information in their possession that indicated potential hazards might be present. In other cases, the information in the file suggested potential hazards at the site and did not indicate the basis for the Corps’ NDAI determination. We estimate that the Corps either overlooked or failed to adequately assess the potential for hazardous wastes at about 88 percent of the properties. The state environmental agency performed independent reviews in 1999 and 2001 to document any threats or potential threats to human health or the environment posed by the site. reported finding hazardous wastes exceeding state cleanup levels that were believed to have occurred during DOD ownership of this site. Fort Pickens is an approximately 1,600-acre FUDS property on the Florida coast that was used to defend against invasion during World Wars I and II. The Corps identified numerous facilities, including a power plant building, oil houses, ordnance warehouses, an ordnance magazine, search light towers, transformers, electric poles, water and “miscellaneous” facilities, and underground storage tanks. The former Othello Air Force Station (Z-40) was a 77-acre aircraft warning station in the state of Washington. At this site the Corps initially identified approximately 106 facilities, including a diesel plant and an auto maintenance shop. The presence of these facilities suggests the potential for both containerized and freestanding hazardous wastes and ordnance hazards at the property. There was no evidence the Corps considered the former facilities and their characteristics during its assessment and site visit. Despite noting the potential hazards associated with these types of facilities and uses, the Corps designated the site as NDAI. An independent study of this site by the state found hazards (i.e., petroleum compounds such as gasoline, diesel, lube or hydraulic oil) and some chemicals exceeding state cleanup levels. At the Millrock Repair and Storage Depot of New York, the Corps identified potential aboveground storage tanks, gas pumps, a dynamite storage building, and a generator shed. The initial Corps proposal for designating the site as NDAI was rejected by the appropriate Corps district office. A cleanup project was proposed to sample for gasoline-related chemicals at the site of former storage tanks. The Corps overlooked information in its possession indicating possible ordnance hazards. Despite the presence of potential hazards, the file contains no evidence that the Corps took additional steps to determine the source of the hazards or that it reported their presence to the appropriate regulatory agencies. Subsequently, the proposed project was rejected on the grounds that there was no Evidence that the hazards were related to DOD’s use of the site.and a gas pump. At the Mount Vernon Municipal Airport in the state of Washington, a nearly 1,900-acre site previously used by both the Army and the Navy. Although the Corps assessed the site for unsafe buildings and debris and containerized hazards. Corps searched for possible unexploded ordnance despite guidance issued in 1994. In some cases files did not contain evidence that Corps staff conducted a site visit. A site visit is one of the primary methods used by the Corps to determine if the potential hazards are in fact present at a site. For example, if the Corps identifies underground storage tanks as potential hazards because a site was once used as a motor pool facility. A typical site visit would include at least a visual check for signs of. About 18 percent, or 686, of the estimated 3,840 NDAIs in our study population did not receive site visits that met Corps requirements. About 428 properties received no site visits, and about 258 properties received site visits conducted from the air or from a vehicle. For some files designated as NDAI, it appeared that Corps staff remained in their vehicles and took no action before designating the site as an NDAi. The Corps revisited the site and found two underground storage tanks, several 55-gallon drums, and a storage battery. site visit photos from the site’s periphery. hazards typically found at Nike sites include petroleum compounds, paints and solvents, leaking underground storage tanks, and lead from batteries. Gap filler annexes are typically unmanned radar sites that are remotely located. On-site dumps were usually located in secluded areas that “would evade the attention of inspecting military officers,” according to a 1986 guide for assessing Nike missile sites.. Transformers containing toxic wastes (polychlorinated biphenyls) have also been found at. similar sites. Because 30 or more years may pass between the closure of a former defense site and a Corps site visit, it is likely that potential hazards would go unnoticed from a vehicle. The area may be too large to see or may be overgrown with vegetation that could hide any evidence of potential hazards. Corps officials told us that site visits conducted from the air or a vehicle are considered inadequate and would not fulfill the requirement to conduct a site visit. A number of other factors contributed to inadequate preliminary assessments of eligibility. The Corps estimates that at current funding levels, cleaning up the hazards already identified will take more than 70 years. In the files we reviewed, we found no evidence that the Corps consistently notified owners of its NDAI determinations, as required by Corps guidance. The Corps also generally did not notify federal or state regulatory agencies of potential hazards that it identified but determined were not caused by DOD’s use. If the increased funding were approved and sustained, the Corps could complete cleanup by 2050. further study or cleanup actions by DOD were needed. State regulators also told us that they could provide the Corps with best practice guidance on conducting site visits and engaging the public in data-gathering. One example where state involvement has led to the reconsideration of an NDAI determination is the former Wilkins Air Force Base in Ohio, where a school is now located. Following increased public interest in school sites that were once owned by DOD, the Corps designates the property as NDAi. the state regulatory agency became concerned about the number of FUDS in the state where schools or school activities are now located. The Army is taking steps to improve communication among the Army, regulators, and other stakeholders. We also noted during our review of NDAI files that the Corps routinely did not notify regulatory agencies when it identified potential hazards that were not the result of DOD use. The Corps proposed a new project at the former Wilkins Air Force Base. In 2000, the Army created the F UDS Improvement Working Group to (1) address the concerns of regulators and other. stakeholders about the program and (2) identify new or modified policies and procedures. official, it is “common sense’ that the Corps would notify EPA or state regulatory agencies of non-DOD hazards. The Corps does not have a sound basis for about a third of its NDAI determinations for FUDS properties, they say. Without knowing the full extent of the hazards at these properties, the Corps cannot be assured that the properties it is currently cleaning up or that it plans to clean up in the future are the sites that pose the greatest risk. The report recommends that the Corps develop and consistently implement more specific guidelines and procedures for assessing FUDS properties. The Corps should contact other interested parties, including federal, state, and local agencies, as well as owners during the preliminary assessment of eligibility to discuss potential hazards at the properties. DOD disagreed with our conclusions, but partially agreed with each of the three recommendations included in this report. In its comments, DOD stated that the FU DS eligibility determination was never intended as a means to characterize all the hazards at a site. sound basis for its determinations that more than 4,000 formerly used defense sites need no further study or cleanup actions. We reviewed a statistical sample of 635 NDAI files at nine Corps districts that execute the FUDS program. The Alaska district was selected with certainty because it had the highest number of NDAIs when we began our review. Thirty-two of the properties whose files we selected for review were excluded from our analysis because the files contained evidence that either the property was not eligible for the program or that a cleanup project was proposed. GAO conducted review from May 2001 through June 2002 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Report will be available, at no charge, on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov/. The objectives of our review were to determine the extent to which the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (Corps) (1) and the Army National Guard (Army NDAI) were working together in a joint effort to build the Keystone XL pipeline. has a sound basis for determining that more than 4,000 formerly used defense sites (FUDS) need no further study or cleanup. We analyzed a statistical sample of 603 NDAI files at nine Corps districts that execute the FUDS program. The districts selected were (1) Alaska, (2) Fort Worth, (3) Jacksonville, (4) Louisville, (5) New York, (6) Omaha, (7) Sacramento, (8) Savannah, and (9) Seattle. Evidence to support the information recorded on the DCI. From the DCIs, we created an electronic database. The members of our team reviewing the files and the person conducting the supervisory review changed for each district. While we rotated staff to reduce bias, we also used this rotation to help increase consistency of judgments. Our error rate was 0.379 percent—less than ½ of 1 percent. All errors found were corrected. In addition, we verified 100 percent of the data for every question, sub-question, and comment box. of the responses to questions and sub-questions on the DCI that were key to supporting our findings. The information presented in this report consists, in part, of statistical estimates based on our review of randomly selected files. The results of our analysis are projectable to NDAI determinations nationwide, excluding the Huntington district. Because we followed a probability procedure based on random selections, our sample is only one of a large number of samples that we could have drawn. We are 95 percent confident that each of the confidence intervals in the report will include the true value in the study population. percentage estimates from the file review have 95 percent confidence intervals. The widths of the confidence intervals are shown as footnotes to the text, where appropriate. All numerical estimates other than percentages (such as averages or totals) have 95% confidence intervals whose width does not exceed 10 percent of the value of those estimates, unless otherwise noted. The results of our analysis are generally projectable nationwide. We also used our selected samples to develop case examples of the preliminary assessments of eligibility conducted by the Corps. These case examples are for illustration only. designating those properties as “No DOD Action Indicated” (NDAI), we reviewed and analyzed a statistical sample of 603 NDAI files at nine Corps districts. Table 2 shows the property name, the FUDS number, and whether we found, based on our review of the evidence in the file, that the Corps had a sound basis for its NDAi determination. In those cases where we do not believe that the corps has a sound base, the table includes an explanation for our finding. containerized hazardous, toxic, and radioactive waste (CON/HTRW); and ordnance and explosive waste (OEW) In addition to those named above, Ian Ferguson, Ken Lightner, Sherry McDonald, and Aaron Shiffrin made key contributions to this report. GAO’s commitment to good government is reflected in its core values of accountability, integrity, and reliability. The fastest and easiest way to obtain copies of GAO documents at no cost is through the Internet. GAO issues a list of newly released reports, testimony, and correspondence. GAO posts this list, known as ‘Today’s Reports,’ on its Web site daily. To have GAO e-mail this list to you every afternoon, go to www.gao.gov and select “Subscribe to daily E-mail alert for newly released products” under the GAO Reports heading. The list contains links to the full-text document files, including charts and other graphics.