Since the 1960s, the U.S. has operated two separate operational polar-orbiting meteorological satellite systems. These satellites obtain environmental data that are processed to provide graphical weather images and specialized weather products. Polar satellites also provide data used to monitor environmental phenomena, such as ozone depletion and drought conditions. In the future, both NOAA and DOD plan to continue to launch additional POES and DMSP satellites to provide additional global coverage of conditions that affect the weather and climate. satellites. Each satellite makes about 14 orbits a day. As the earth rotates beneath it, each satellite views the entire earth’s surface twice. satellites every few years, with final launches scheduled for 2008 and 2010, respectively. Each of the polar satellites carries a suite of sensors designed to detect environmental data either reflected or emitted from the earth, the atmosphere, and space. The satellites store these data and then transmit the data to NOAA and Air Force ground stations when the satellites pass overhead. The ground stations then relay the data via communications satellites to the appropriate meteorological centers for processing. The processing centers also use the Internet to distribute data to the general public. When first received, satellite data are considered raw data. Processing centers format the data so that they are time-sequenced and include earth location and calibration information. These data records are then used to derive weather products called environmental data records (EDR) EDRs range from atmospheric products detailing cloud coverage, temperature, humidity, and ozone distribution; to land surface products showing snow cover, vegetation, and land use; to ocean products depicting sea surface temperatures, sea ice, and wave height. Numerical weather prediction models are used in producing hourly, daily, weekly, and monthly forecasts of atmospheric, land, and ocean conditions. Table 1 provides examples of models run by the processing centers. Figure 11 depicts the output of one common model. All this information is used in mapping and monitoring changes in weather, climate, the ocean, and the environment. These data and products are provided to weather forecasters for use in issuing weather forecasts and warnings to the public and to support our nation’s aviation, agriculture, and maritime communities. Within the military, these data and products allow military planners and tactical users to focus on anticipating and exploiting atmospheric and space environmental conditions. accurate wind and temperature forecasts are critical to any decision to launch an aircraft that will need mid-flight refueling. In addition to these operational uses of satellite data, there is also a substantial need for polar satellite data for research. Given the expectation that merging the POES and DMSP programs would reduce duplication and result in sizable cost savings, a May 1994 Presidential Directive was issued. Decision Directive required NOAA and DOD to converge the two satellite programs into a single satellite program. The converged program is called the National Polar-orbiting Operational Environmental Satellite System (NPOESS) NPOESS is considered critical to the United States’ ability to maintain the continuity of data required for weather forecasting and global climate monitoring. To manage this program, DOD, NOAA, and the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) have formed a tri- agency Integrated Program Office. NPOESS is a major system acquisition estimated to cost almost $7 billion over the 24-year period from the inception of the program in 1995 through 2018. The program is to provide satellite development, satellite launch and operation, and integrated data processing. According to the Integrated Program Office, 8 of the 14 planned NPOESS instruments involve new technology development, whereas 6 others are based on existing technologies. The planned instruments and the state of technology on each are listed in table 2. The user community designated six of these data products—supported by four sensors—as key EDRs. the development and production contract was awarded to TRW in August 2002. At that time, TRW assumed system performance responsibility for the overall program. This responsibility includes all aspects of design, development, integration, assembly, test and evaluation, operations, and on-orbit support. Northrop Grumman Space Technology purchased TRW and became the prime contractor on the NPOESS project. In May 1997, the Integrated Program Office assessed the technical, schedule, and cost risks of key elements of the program. The program office determined that three elements had high risk components. were assessed as high risk in all three areas. The launch segment and the command, control, and communications segment were determined to present low or moderate risks. The program office expected to reduce its high risk components to low and moderate risks by the time the development and production contract was awarded, and to have all risk levels reduced to low before the first launch. Table 3 displays the results of the 1997 risk assessment as well as the program office’s estimated risk levels by August 2002 and by firstLaunch. the development of key sensor technologies in advance of the satellite system itself. Because environmental sensors have historically taken 8 years to develop, the program office began developing six of the eight sensors with more advanced technologies early. Another major risk reduction initiative expected to address risks in three of the four segments with identified risks is called the NPOESS Preparatory Project (NPP) NPP is a planned demonstration satellite to be launched in 2006, several years before the first N POESS satellite launch in 2009. The schedule for launching the satellites was driven by a requirement that the satellites be available to back up the final POES and DMSP satellites. In general, program officials anticipate that roughly 1 out of every 10 satellites will fail either during launch or during early operations after launch. Key program milestones included (1) launching NPP by May 2006 in order to allow time to learn from that risk reduction effort, and (2) having the first NPOESS satellite available to Back Up the Final POES satellite launch in March 2008. This shift will affect the NPOESS deployment schedule. Unless the existing operational satellite is able to continue operations beyond its expected lifespan, there could be a gap in satellite coverage. In the early 1990s, the development of the second generation of NOAA’s geostationary satellites experienced severe technical problems, cost overruns, and schedule delays, resulting in a 5-year schedule slip in the launch of the first satellite. In 2000, we reported that geostatedary satellite data coverage was again at risk because of a delay. The cost estimates for all four critical sensors have increased, due in part to including items that were not included in the original estimates. While all the sensors are still expected to be completed within schedule, many have slipped to the end of their schedule buffers. The timely development of three of these sensors (the visible/infrared imager, the infrared camera, and the X-ray camera) is expected to help reduce the cost of the project. The program office reduced some of the risks inherent in developing new technologies by initiating the development of these sensor early. radiometer suite, the cross-track infrared sounder, and the advanced technology microwave sounder. These sensors are to be demonstrated on the NPP satellite, currently scheduled for launch in October 2006. Officials anticipate that there could be cost increases and schedule delays associated with addressing performance issues. Any delay in that launch date could affect the overall NPOESS program because the success of the program depends on learning lessons in data processing and system integration from the N PP satellite. The interface data processing system is especially critical. a ground-based system that is to process the sensors’ data so that they are usable by the data processing centers and the broader community of environmental data users. The development of this system is critical for both NPP and NPOESS. When used with NPP, the system is expected to produce 26 of the 55 EDRs that NPOess will provide, processing approximately 93 percent of the planned volume of N POESS data. These activities will allow system users to work through any problems well in advance of when the N Poess data are needed. for operational use, but program officials noted that there is still uncertainty in how much time and effort it will take to complete this conversion. Any significant delays could cause the potential coverage gap between the final POES and first NPOESS satellites to grow even larger. Program officials are working to address the changes in funding levels and schedule, and to make plans for addressing specific sensor and data processing system risks. They acknowledge that delays in the program and efforts to address risks on key components could increase the overall cost of the program. budget for the NPOESS program. Officials noted that this rebaselining effort will involve a major contract renegotiation. Program officials reported that they hope to complete the new program baseline by August 2003. This new satellite system is considered critical to the United States’ ability to maintain the continuity of data required for weather forecasting and global climate monitoring through the year 2018. The first satellite was expected to be ready to act as a backup should the launch of the final satellites in the predecessor POES and DMSP programs fail. GAO: Our objectives were to provide an overview of our nation’s current polar- orbiting weather satellite program and the planned National Polar-orbiting Operational Environmental Satellite System (NPOESS) program. GAO relied on prior GAO reviews of the satellite programs of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) and the Department of Defense (DOD) We reviewed documents from NOAA, DOD, and the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) that describe the purpose and origin of the polar satellite program. Integrated Program Office and NASA officials to determine the program’s background, status, and plans. To identify key risks to the successful and timely deployment of NPOESS, we assessed the NPOess acquisition status and program risk reduction efforts. We also reviewed documents and interviewed program office officials on plans to address N POESS challenges. NOAA, DOD, and NASA generally agreed with the facts as presented in this statement and provided some technical corrections, which we have incorporated. We performed our work at the N POES Integrated Program Office, NASA headquarters, and DOD offices. work was performed between April and July 2003 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. This is a work of the U.S. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States. It may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from GAO. However, because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material, permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org.