Vaccination is the primary method for preventing influenza and its more severe complications. When the match between the vaccine and the circulating viruses is close, vaccination may prevent illness in about 70-90 percent of healthy people aged 64 or younger. It is somewhat less effective for the elderly and those with certain chronic diseases but, according to CDC, it can still prevent secondary complications and reduce the risk for influenza-related hospitalization and death. During the average flu season, for every 1 million elderly persons that are vaccinated approximately 1,300 hospitalizations and 900 deaths are prevented. CDC’s ACIP recommended this period as the best time to receive a flu shot. If flu activity peaks in February or March, vaccination in January or later can still be beneficial. Producing the vaccine is a complex process that involves growing viruses in millions of fertilized chicken eggs. In 1999, more than 70 million doses of vaccine were available by the end of October. In 2000, fewer than 28 million doses were available in the U.S. and the UK by that date. Manufacturers that produced the smallest volume of vaccine did not experience production problems or delays in shipping its vaccine. Purchasers who ordered vaccine from the manufacturer with no major production problems were far more likely to receive their vaccine on time. Those who purchased vaccine in the fall because they did not want to wait for their early orders to be delivered later, had orders canceled or reduced, or just ordered later found themselves paying much higher prices. Because only three manufacturers remain, the difficulties associated with vaccine production, and the need to formulate a new vaccine involving one or more new strains each year, the future vaccine supply is uncertain. Some vaccination campaigns open to both high-risk and lower-risk individuals were delayed as recommended by CDC. Many private physicians and public health departments raised concerns that they did not have vaccine to serve their high- risk patients. CDC and ACIP did not provide guidance about how to implement priority deliveries. Manufacturers and some distributors reported using various approaches in distributing their vaccine in 2000.. Because there generally has been enough vaccine to meet demand in recent years, there was little practical need for the fragmented distribution process to develop the capability to determine which purchasers might merit priority deliveries based on serving high- Risk individuals. In response to the production and distribution problems experienced with flu vaccine for the 2000-01 flu season, HHS has undertaken several initiatives. Success of these initiatives relies to a great extent on the willingness of manufacturers, distributors, private physicians, other vaccine providers, and the public to cooperate. Completion of HHS’ national plan to respond to an influenza pandemic could help foster this type of collaboration and provide a foundation to deal with vaccine shortages or delays in non- pandemic years. Increasing immunization rates against pneumococcal pneumonia, which can follow the flu, may help reduce influenza-related illness and death. The population most at risk for pneumococcal pneumonia includes the elderly and those with chronic illnesses. Pneumococcal vaccine provides some protection against one of the serious complications associated with influenza if the annual influenza vaccine is unavailable. HHS has set its goal for 2010 to achieve 90 percent immunization against the disease among the elderly, and 60 percent among other high-risk adults. CDC also supports efforts to increase adult immunizations for people aged 65 and older and others with medical conditions placing them at high risk. The circumstances that led to the delay and early shortage of flu vaccine during the 2000-01 flu season could repeat themselves in the future. HHS’ actions to help mitigate any adverse effects of vaccine delays or shortages need to rely to a great extent on collaboration with private-sector participants. HHS should assess the relative success of its past outreach and education efforts and identify those means that are most effective in changing behavior to meet public health priorities. CDC should focus CDC’s funded efforts on increasing pneumococcal immunization in the high-risk non-Medicare population. CDC Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices issued guidance in April 2000. For the first time, the committee lowered the age for universal vaccination from 65 years to 50 years of age. The reason for this expansion was to increase vaccination rates among persons aged 50-64 with high-risk conditions. Updated recommendations were issued on October 6, 2000, stating that a shortage had been averted. The update also recommended that mass vaccination campaigns should be scheduled later in the season and that these campaigns should try to enhance coverage among those at greatest risk.