Jake Xia: This is the second time we are having this class. The purpose of this course is really to give you a sampling menu to see how mathematics is applied in modern finance. We will be doing a bit more polling along the way, mainly to get feedback of how you feel about the class. And so hopefully, this will give you enough information to decide this is a field you would like to pursue in your future career. The class will be held every Tuesday and Thursday afternoon from 2:30 to 4:00. Brokers take principal risks, market makers match trades and earn commission. Hedge funds find opportunities to profit from inefficient market positioning or pricing. Private equity funds look to invest in companies and either take them private or invest in a private equity form to improve the company's profitability. Government always have a very large impact on the market, because they are the policymakers. The beta and alpha, the concept comes in. If you're a portfolio, some people don't worry about buying stocks. But if you want to beat the S&P 500 index fund, you have to beat that index fund. Risk management, nowadays, becomes pretty widespread responsibility. It's not just the corporate treasury's responsibility. Even if you are not a finance guy, you work in a corporate, you just do you import, export, or building a factory, you have to know, actually, what the exposure is. Let's talk about market making. If it's a simple transparent product, everybody pretty much knows where the price is. So, if you buy Apple stock, I think a lot of people know pretty much where it is. that liquidity, and then takes the risk. They manage the book by balancing those Greeks, which I mentioned earlier. Delta, which describes the relationship of this whole book to the underlying stock, or underlying whatever currency. That's called delta. Gamma is really the change of the portfolio. Take the derivative to the delta, or the underlying spot. So, that's second-order derivative. Delta is the first order. So gamma, now you have curvature or convexity coming in. And theta is really-- nothing changes in the market. Nothing changes in your position. Vasily Kuznetsov: Arbitrage is really to find the relationships between prices, and try to profit from those relationship mispricing. He says the systematic trader builds computer models. Kuznets: Math is very useful in risk management, which I will give you some quiz -- questions -- to test your knowledge of the market. He adds that math plays a very important role to quantify how much exposure you have to the risks you have in your bank account or in the stock market. Prof. Jake Xia: "I just want to give you the sense how math and intuition and judgment can come into the same place" "When you go to the market, you buy a stock. When the stock goes up, makes bit of money, the natural tendency is to let's take profit," he says. "If you have the discipline to get out, that's great. Trading is really all about how do you risk manage," he adds. "I'm not trying to tell you which one is right or wrong, but think about it" your bank account balance is-- let's say you are a freshman student. Your choice will be very different from someone has $100,000 in his bank account. And also, your risk tolerance, how much you can tolerate. Math is very powerful and useful in finance. So learn the math, learn the finance first, but keep those questions along the way when you are learning during this class. So suggested homework, optional. Go to the course website, read what we have put up for the financial glossary. every time. So, if you want to differentiate this functions and get a derivative, then this derivative will be quite noisy. And so, instead of getting the true derivative, you might obtain something quite different from true derivative just because there is a confidence interval around any point. So obviously, there is somewhere balance, and the question was, is there an optimal shift size to get the derivative? And that's what-- uh oh, the slide got corrupted. There was an answer. And we are implementing it in our systems and plan to use it in practice. what we had, we had the noisy observation of broker data and it was coming out at different non-uniform times. So, we decided to use Kalman filter and to study how it can predict. And that's one of the nice graphs [INAUDIBLE] produced, which again, we will use this strategy and the Kalman filters which he constructed in our e-trading platform in Moscow. Just to remind, the website is fully functional. We will be posting a lot of materials there. Probably most lectures will be published there.