HONG LIU: We have two sides if you want to relate things on two sides. And you have to do guess work. How does this quantity translate into that quantity, et cetera? And then check the consistency. So now let's talk about some further aspects of the duality. AUDIENCE: But being the right hand side, we still have some SO 5, S5. HONG LIu: I will talk about that. So this is more like a space time symmetry. So in N equals 4 super Yang-Mills theory. HONG LIU: In principle, the corrections beyond this limit can again be studied on the gravity side. In the classical string limit, still you can see the N go to infinity, which corresponds to GN. But here, the alpha prime can be arbitrary. And here the [INAUDIBLE] coupling can be arbitrarily. So let me just say alpha prime finite no longer zero. And then this is just corresponding to Lambda finite, which is no longer infinite. So this is a standard t Hooft limit. a general correspondence between some conformal field theory and some AdS gravity theory. HONG LIU: Yang-Mills theory lives on Minkowski space. And then you say you can imagine that this is the boundary, this relation is related to the bulk and the boundary. And this is a postulate based on that fact. AUDIENCE: So if it's a sort of postulate that's just thinking about it, it's not required that the theory live on the boundary of AdS. guesswork is based on some very small clues. Good physicists do is that they can see non-ordinary things from ordinary things. So let me start with that relation. Related to the GS. GS string coupling can be considered as the expectation value of the dilaton field. The bulk field phi due to O has a boundary value phi 0. Any questions about this? Yes? AUDIENCE: Your choice of operator O should be consistent with all symmetries, right? HONG LIU: No. O can be anything. You can choose any O. and the field theory. And that also tells you that if you have a theory which due into a higher dimensional theory, and then that theory has a stress tensor, then this bulk theory must have gravity. So you can say, if any field theory is due to a theory of one higher dimension, that theory must involve gravity-- nothing about quantum gravity. Let's stop here. We're not going to get into quantum gravity right now, we're just going to talk about the theory of gravity.