Coded imaging is a form of a co-design between how you capture the image and how you process the image. In the Fourier domain, convolution in the image domain is multiplication in the standard Fourier transform. If you have a sharp photo and a blurred photo, you can basically represent that as asharp photo. The concept of a position or superposition applies to all three types, shadows- or refraction- or reflection-based techniques. It's a way to recover the sharp detail afterwards in software. that's your 1010 inquiry. Instead of keeping the shutter open for the entire duration and getting a well-exposed photo, the shutter is open for only half of the time. The support for the representation of the Fourier domain of that function that you describe there is infinite, right? So you actually truncate this in order to-- RAMESH RASKAR: It's not infinite because you still have some width. But when you get to invert the process then, that's why you're still not getting the perfect images. Lenses are very carefully designed by camera makers to be the same plane where you put your aperture. When you change your f-stop and decrease it and increase it, it's all happening in the center of projection. When it's in focus, it doesn't really matter what the code is, so the photo will be half a square, so you're talking about the light, so half a light, right? And that's why you have some dust on your lens and so on, unless you have the lens on your front. digitally. RAMESH RASKAR: In 1D, the Fourier transform is flat, and almost all of them are the same. In 2D, it's more distributed instead of just all being near the center, he says. Raskar: The magic of a broadband code is that it can recover all the information. He says coded aperture is very similar to the [INAUDIBLE].. AUDIENCE: Are the bokehs kind of uppity? RASkar: It depends on your-- I mean, for your average consumer. Don't know whether this matters. But you're right. If you're looking at something that's-- we have bright lights in the scene. At a distance, take our false photo. They will all look like this. Or you could put hearts in it, or, like, like-- AUDIENCE: Right, yeah, I was thinking maybe-- RAMESH RASKAR: I mean, that's totally possibly. But even if you use a cluster, it's still a pretty big number. Ramesh Raskar: Astronomers are already using circular convolution in astronomy. He says the technique can be used to create 3D images of the universe. He explains how to create different codes for different applications. RaskAR: The chances of a random sequence doing the right thing for you is very very low, so you have to choose a similar sequence that doesn't work for you, but it can work for astronomy. The code is called RAT code, R-A-T, which is after three quarters of a quarter. Ramesh Raskar: Compressed sensing is taking a photo and compressing it. He says the idea is to take a single photo and then recover it in a compressed way. Rasksar: If you're on 2 megapixels, then you need to take 2 million [? pics] All right? So the claim this group made at Rice University was that if I wanted a million-pixel image, I don't have to really take a million readings, he says. Rasa: I can take this picture effectively with just 10,000 pixels but recreate a million pixel image. which is how to write a paper and wishlist for photography. Which isHow to Write a Paper and Wishlist for Photography: How to Write A Paper and Write A Wishlist For The Camera. For more information on writing a paper or wishlist, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/30/photography/how-to-write-a-paper-and-wishlist-for-photography-how- to- Write-A-Paper-And-Wishlist.html.