In automotive design Dynamics plays a very important part because it's not rigid body Dynamics it's a bunch of rigid bodies with springs the Springs are called starts with an S suspens suspensions right and there's a trade-off between how comfortable the ride is and how tightly the car handles. In Dynamics there two sides to it one is here's the system what is its trajectory going to be in other words how will its various degrees of freedom behave over time if you you know stretch it and let it go and it goes twang you know boing right. class but he also solves the problem the direct way and by coincidence the problem not comes out to be the same. I might go to like a Monday off M um like later on a Monday or maybe Wednesday later or something like that. There's no class next Monday and um we posted the solution to that problem from class. I won't have officers today only because you don't want to hear me Babel I'm really sick um but I'm also going to change my officers um several people suggest so the timing isn't right. I'm referring to something with no Dimensions but with a finite Mass you know that someone asked me the other day and I just want to be sure to say this. Let's say that you have a particle Point Mass heading that way some direction and let's define its velocity we'll call it a v p okay so I have um two questions both of which you probably know the answers to the first is what is the angular momentum of that particle just from your memory go ahead say it aha. This is a really badly designed classroom in the sense that there's not enough room but it's a huge classroom so I'm going to write it big right and I'm not that neat so you're going to have to bear with me so this is a velocity of Point P minus a Velocity of Point Q cross product M velocity P. I'm just going down I'm doing something odd but not wrong because I know with where it needs to end up question yep very likely there shouldn't be another M here. There is this term and you need to know about it okay it just so happens the term vanishes in many situations but it's key that you know see for Force f is equal to D by DT of P momentum completely coer Crystal Clear when you come to angular momentum it's say artifice yeah there's this funky term which vanishes. The reason this will become important is that when you look at rigid bodies it it actually you will end up doing something so this is a silly term but these are the two conditions yeah Q is fixed. it's not Kosher can't do it if I do I need to include that term right and you you've got a figure that a simple thing like my a robot is a very typical Dynamics application okay common mistake okay now that we've done this let's try and figure out why angular momentum is useful let's solve a problem any questions about this any questions bottom line if you're taking angle momenta about moving points be careful bottom line many conditions it'll be okay we'll elucidate we'll Express we'll we'll nail this conditions in fact that's the whole point of the next two weeks. call this Theta the initial length is L one and the initial velocity is we'll call it a scalar because this is how I'm defining the problem of V1 when we actually solve it we might have to define a vector okay. As the thing's going around this person is going to pull the string down and as it kind of goes around it's going to spiral in and end up it's a new length L2 and the question is what is V2 going to be okay. would have to do one of two things I would have had to either calculate this term or calculate or make you know make my frame attach it to the truck. I've just done it in a very precise way okay so in the end there's no surprise the whole point is to show you they could be surprises but be careful any questions about this all right snap quiz in the next 3 minutes I want you to calculate for me the final velocity literally 3 minutes because I have toDo the dumbbell problem.  angular momentum is a vector out of plane in 2D you see that okay is energy conserved for this particle why not. For energy you need a little more detail of what I'm doing here right any questions can you get the angle the from the we did in fact we did right if you think about this angle the angular momentum formulation actually came precisely from FAL to ma. I told you I'm on drugs okay and there's a master missing as well there you go and the mm will cancel out okay go ahead.