JACK HARE: Let's do a little recap on electron cyclotron emission. We expect to have multiple different peaks, even from a single particle. These peaks are going to be occurring at frequencies. And we can say this is m equals 1, m equals 2,. m equals 3. And they're evenly spaced. And so, we have these peaks here. But if we neglect that, the frequency depends only on the magnetic field. So, if you see some emission at some certain frequency, then you know that it's been emitted by a region of plasma which has this magnetic fields. This is correlation ECE, often called CECE. We want to measure temperature fluctuations within the plasma that are maybe on the order of 1% of the baseline temperature, delta T upon T about 0.01. And that 1% is actually extremely hard to measure. And this is because the noise is just too high on these systems. There are lots of different contributions to the noise. But, in general, they all add up to make it very hard toMeasure these very small fluctuations. want to understand in plasmas so that we can build an economically viable fusion reactor. Now, the fact that the noise is too high does seem like a big limitation. But there are some clever tricks that we play where we use correlations. And I'll talk now about what exactly these correlations are and how they provide us with information that allows us to get a signal out despite the overwhelming [INAUDIBLE]. So our setup here is borrowed from ASDEX Upgrade. And, in effect, I referred to Alex Creely's PhD thesis, which you can find online if you want more information. Many oscillations. And so, it will average out to 1 or something like that. So it's some DC offset that we can subtract off after. So all this is doing here is mixing the signal down so it gets to a regime that we could effectively digitize. Yeah, another question. STUDENT: [INAUDIBLE] JACK HARE: So if we were doing geometric optics, which we're not, then you would have a lens like this. That lens could collimate your beam. And if it collimated that beam, that would mean there'd be a focus point at some distance f away. very small region on the order of 100 microns. Anyone know how micro splitters work? Looking at you? STUDENT: RF. JACK HARE: The answer I got was RF, which I don't think is much more satisfying than my answer. But, you're right, you could come up with some clever analog way of doing the splitting. But this is getting way beyond what I was hoping to talk about on this. So let's get on to correlation ECE see what that does. The technique is incredibly powerful because it's enabled people to measure, again, delta on the order of 1%. Someone called it nominative determinism, and they've done it on 1%. And it's used in a variety of applications, but this is an example of what these angle brackets are doing. There are actually lots of different ways of doing this, but there are a few different ways to do correlations, and I'm not going to go into them, but I will give you a citation at the moment. Bremsstrahlung is a term used to refer to a type of radiation in the universe. It involves electrons being deflected and breaking and emitting these photons. There are lots of different ways to deal with bremsstahlung to do the actual calculation. The main thing we can say in a classical treatment is that the bremstahlt is going to be isotropic in every direction. That's actually quite different from electron cyclotron emission, even though we didn't really look at the anisotropy of that in any detail. here with the ions and electrons as point particles. There's a semi-classical approach where you start bringing in some quantum physics and treat, I think, the electron as a wave. And then there's a full quantum approach. What's remarkable about all of these approaches is they all give the same answer with just a very slightly different coefficient. The scalings are the same. So, in some sense, although it's important to get the exact coefficient, it doesn't matter exactly which one of these techniques you use. Professor Jack HARE: We're going to switch to a slightly quantum model of the atom. We have a range of different discrete energy levels that the electrons can occupy. These energy levels are labeled by the principal quantum number n. And, up here, infinity, this is ionization. If your electron gets this much energy, it becomes free again, HARE says. But, of course, there's another case where this photon takes away so much energy that this starts, I guess it becomes imaginary. Bolometry is, in some sense, a very simple diagnostic. It cares not at all about the detailed spectrum of what the emission is. It just wants to know how much power is being radiated by the plasma. We have a little sensor sitting at the wall of our vacuum vessel. And that sensor is just a resistor. It has a resistance M, and that resistance M is a function of temperature here. And, from that temperature, we can make an estimate of the radiation power incident upon it. difference between those. neutron damage leads us to use much thicker substrates, which gives us a longer time response and so, therefore, a worse bolometer. So, ironically, the bolometers that will be used on [INAUDIBLE] are significantly worse than the bolometer used on existing devices. And I'm sure that [? Spark ?] will have exactly the same problem. Almost everyone in the world uses this design of bolometer that they pioneered on ASDEX Upgrade in the '80s. No one has come up with a better system yet.