David KAISER: Today, we're going to pick up where we were on the most recent classes. We'll look at the coalescence of what came to be called the Big Bang model. And then we'll see how cosmic inflation emerged from that particular moment to try to address some of the shortcomings while retaining some the successes. And the asterisks are to remind you there's a set of strictly optional lecture notes on the Canvas site which go into a little bit more detail of some of these parts from the lecture. In the early universe, charged particles had a mean free path to cross the dance floor. Gamov, Alpher, and Herman were putting real numbers to try to make sense of these different phases of the very early universe. Very high temperature, early dense state should be qualitatively different in its behavior than a later lower energy state. They predicted as early as 1948 that there should be this remnant glow from the Big Bang, all those photons that only then at 380,000 years after the Big bang were able to start streaming freely. 20 years later, two radial physicists working at Bell Labs, Robert Wilson and Arno Penzias, were using a new horn antenna sensitive to radial microwave and radial band frequencies. This should've been among the most precise instruments available on the planet for that band of the spectrum. They couldn't get rid of a residual hum. At one point, they climbed inside that huge horn antenna on their hands and knees to scrub out what they graciously called special dielectric materials from pigeons who had made a nest. In the early universe, there was a huge plasma everywhere, not just in one corner, but everywhere. The photons were everywhere. And it's like sitting in a bathtub full of these photons. And they're just losing their energy as the overall size of space continues to grow. The Big Bang happened at x equals 0, and x equals 1, equals 2. Any place we could put spatial coordinates to on this model, those all experienced the Big Bang at the same time. And we're just immersed in it trying to measure it as we flow through it. stuff per volume, the actual density of matter and energy per volume. If omega is larger than 1, you have more stuff for volume. You expect it's open or hyperbolic geometry. So far so good. Then Dicke plugged this quantity into Einstein's own equations. A universe should generically become more and more different from flat over time. And that seems like this very strange or unexplained fine tuning. If the universe has been stretching for 14 billion years, what set it to be so arbitrarily close to flat is an unstable equilibrium point? like circa 1980. He was not originally asking questions about the cosmos, but he was haphazardly encountering some of those questions, again, very much like Tony Zee around the same time. What Alan was interested in was in things like spontaneous symmetry breaking and the Higgs mechanism. He realized that this kind of feature could actually lead to a cosmologically distinct kind of evolution. If you have a time even briefly during which the energy density, the amount of stuff per volume gets stuck, then the energy could remain constant. That stretch of growth in the size of space will stretch exponentially. grows very fast in time-- while the energy density remains nearly constant. Now you'd see this expression, the deviation of the universe from spatially flat. That deviation should rapidly fall to 0. The universe today should look indistinguishable from a flat universe because the difference from flatness was driven to 0 dynamically. If inflation happened, there should've been a very brief period before what had previously been called the Big Bang. It didn't keep doing that during the rest of this Big Bang, and the universe grew by 30 orders of magnitude. higher energy photons in the CMB and slightly lower energy photons. And the idea now is that the regions of the sky from which these photons were emitted are telling us about the very, very tiny unevenness in the distribution of matter and energy. They have been mapped by three generations of satellites above the ground with increasingly precise ground based measurements as well. Each of these came out 10 years apart with an increase of about a factor of 30 in the angular resolution of thesky. And so we can now make plots like this. Inflation says similar kinds of things should've been happening in the earliest moments everywhere in space through this very violent, rapid stretching of space. At the moment when the electrically neutral atoms start to form, if there were this sea or bath of gravitational waves, then the high school auditorium-- imagine where this dance is happening. These are mathematically more complicated structure. You should have this periodic squeezing, stretching, and then inverted by 90 degrees. So a version of these were found by the LIGO collaboration and announced early in 2016. March of 2014, a team using the BICEP satellite at the South Pole announced they had actually measured exactly that corkscrew pattern. It remains an open question to this day whether these primordial curling, twisting patterns really can be detected. So why is the universe lumpy? Why is this cascade of scales? Because space time is wiggly, and matter is jiggly. An alternate hypothesis for why the universe is so messy is because Alan's been generating the mess in his own office, and it's expanded to cosmic scales.