David Kaiser: particle cosmology is a new subfield within physics. He says it studies the smallest units of matter, the fundamental forces and elementary constituents of matter. Kaiser: The field is doing pretty well these days by other measures. Its annual budget just within the U.S. is on the order of $1 billion a year, roughly, he says. It is really a booming, booming subject of study, Kaiser says. The field literally didn't even exist 45 years ago, he adds. Carl Brans and Robert Dicke proposed the Brans-Dicke theory of gravity in 1961. It was an attempt to modify Einstein's theory of general relativity in response to this challenge of Mach's principle. In Einstein's version, you can represent Einstein's general theory of relativity by an action, in a sense, by writing down a Lagrangian. It's the geometer's tool of quantifying the warping of space and the curvature scalar of time. The idea was that instead of having a single constant unit strength of gravity labeled by Newton's constant capital G-- that's the G that's in like Newton's force law. In 1961, Carl Brans and his advisor Robert Dicke suggested a new form of matter called phi. Phi is extended throughout all of the universe through every nook and cranny of space. As omega becomes large, the behavior reduces to the kind of constant strength of gravity of the original Einstein theory. The equations for the governing nuclear forces could retain all the fancy symmetries for which these new particles were introduced to reinforce that symmetry at each point in space and time. more than just the letter that they chose. There was a lot of what we might have considered similarities. And yet, the two sets of ideas really were treated so separately. By the end of the '70s, things did not look very good for Brans-Dicke gravity experimentally. In fact, Einstein's theory was not highly favored, and that's why everyone else started paying attention on the gravity side of the field. So we might wonder, well, was it changes in data? Did experiments force a new evaluation? two sets of ideas consider them side by side. The main story that's mostly given-- I alluded to this in the very beginning of today's class-- is actually hearkens to changes in ideas and, in particular, on the particle physics or particle theory side. These ideas are well worth appreciating. And they came in rapid fire in 1973 and 1974. The first of them is called asymptotic freedom. And actually, it's the reason why our friend and colleague here at MIT, Frank Wilczek, received the Nobel Prize. vast majority of those came really in the later '70s, in the wake of these pedagogical reforms. So remember that big report comes out in 1972. You start seeing curricular changes as early as '73, '74. By '75, '76, '77, you start seeing, in some sense, the market respond with many textbooks being really rushed into print. Some of these textbooks were basically mimeographed lecture notes. And now there's very, very fancy books published in a more typical way. In 1979, two separate theorists introduced a whole new model where they didn't only cite Brans-Dicke and Higgs, they literally united them. They proposed a new model in which these two fields were literally the same. Here they're coming along almost 20 years later to say, maybe there's actually the same field in space and time, with which other matter interacts. So there's a direct coupling between this new field and this hypothetical geometrical structure. And so you can think of it as like the balance of energy between the local curvature of space and so on. He wandered into this field really accidentally. He finished his PhD at Harvard in 1970. His work was squarely in particle physics, the fancy new symmetries and new nuclear forces. He then had a sabbatical early on in his faculty career, and he happened to go to Paris. He was basically in a stranger's apartment, reading the mail, just reading papers on the coffee table. And these looked really interesting. And in fact, they sparked. his interest in gravitation and cosmology. counts as natural can shift in a pretty short time scale. And as we've been seeing throughout the whole term and including today, those shifts can be driven as much by things well outside of the physicist's control, geopolitics, and national scale budgets. So that's where I'll actually pause. And we have time for a few more questions or comments. Any other thoughts on that? With my last moment here, I'll say, before the construction for the new Center for Theoretical Physics, I had an office just down the hall from Alan's. And by a quirk of the old building 6, we had the same key. soon, everyone. Soon, everyone will be able to play together again. Soon. Everyone will be playing together.soon. Everyone. Will be. Playing together again soon.soon,everyone. Everyone, playing together againsoon.soon,. everyone. soon, everyone, will be. playing together once again. soon.everyone. will be Playing Together again.soon! everyone. will. be.playing together soon. soon! Everyone. will play together soon! everyone will.be. playing again soon! soon.