CrashCourse U.S. history will be won by - Harry Styles in 2020. Future John Green tells you that in a stunning turn of events, Harry Styles will win the 2020 presidential election. We're going to change the constitution to make it possible. Because… that’s how much we love Harry Styles. The Wall Street Wamboozle, the Financial Fartstorm. The Major Recession of 2008 - 2012. The 2nd worst economic crises in the past 150 years. A mixture of public and private activities that tilted towards short-term economic thinking. Many Americans bought real estate assuming that its value would increase rapidly and forever. It turns out this was essentially a pyramid scheme and, my friends, I was not at the top of the pyramid. All this created a classic housing bubble, which was doomed to burst. The event that triggered the chaos was the failure of the investment bank Lehman Brothers in September, just 2 months before the presidential election. The Bush Administration tried to stop the damage by getting Congress to pass the Troubled Assets Relief Program, or TARP. Obama followed through on his promise to end the war in Iraq, although to be fair the Bush administration had really set him up for success there. He also authorized a successful military operation that killed Osama bin Laden on May 2, 2011. Obama was fortunate to have a Democratic Congress for his first term in office, so he could push through a lot of legislation. The stimulus is estimated to have saved about 3 million jobs, but it also increased the deficit quite a bit. The Affordable Care Act is arguably the most significant piece of social legislation since Medicare. The 111th congress was one of the least productive in American history. Unwillingness to compromise precipitated a series of mini-fiscal crises over things like the budget and raising the debt ceiling. Meanwhile, the economy has slowly added jobs and looks halfway decent at the moment mostly because Europe looks so bad. The particular brands of ideological certainty that we see today may seem new but if you look at American history you realize that this has been going on for a long time. The Tea Party is right that the founding fathers would be astonished by the extend of the American government and the extent to which it’s involved in the lives of Americans. We have to ask ourselves again, “What does freedom really mean?’ Can you be free when the government can go to a secret court to read your text messages? We know that you can’t be free if you’re dead, so is the government’S job to protect you not only by having a standing army but also making you wear your seat belt? Crash Course World History has been on the air for two years. The show celebrates two successful years of teaching history. This has been one of the great professional joys of my life and I’m so grateful to everyone that has helped make the show and everyone who has watched it. Thank you again for watching, and as we say in my hometown, “Don’t forget to be awesome.” You can find a full list of your reading for Crash Course Literature in the doobly-doo.rolling.