Adam Martin: How do you go from something you're interested in learning about an organism to actually identifying genes and mechanisms that are important for that? Martin: The two heroes of today's lecture will be the roundworm, Caenorhabditis elegans, and the fruit fly, Drosophila melanogaster. He also highlights a couple important vertebrate-model organisms-- the zebrafish and the mouse. Martin: Most of them are fairly small, and they're easy to house large numbers of them in a lab. Drosophila larvae looks like. And you can see it has a segmental pattern here. But you see there are these segments that alternate between smooth cuticle and hairy cuticle. And because there's a lot of hairlike projections here, it reminded the researchers of a hedgehog, and so this mutant became known as "hedgehog" The hedgehog gene was the founding member of an entire signaling pathway that plays important roles in human development and also, human cancer. There are now a number of drugs that are being developed to target the hedgehog pathway. Robert Horvitz won the Nobel Prize for his work on how cells decide what fates they give rise to. His lab at MIT studied the worm Caenorhabditis elegans, which has 947 somatic cells. 131 cells, during the development of this animal, underwent programmed cell death. This is not random cell death; it's the same cells every time. A mutation that affected cell death that blocked this process is called ced-1. And what you see in this worm is a bubble-like structures that are dead cells but haven't been engulfed.  defects in the genes that were identified in Drosophila actually are relevant to human sleep disorders. So this screen identified a gene called "period" This is a gene. And there's a hammer log of the period gene in humans. And the gene in human is associated with familial advanced sleep-phase syndrome. So these mutants that the Benzer Lab identified had altered period of the sleep-wake cycle, and therefore, the gene was named "period." All right, I'm all set.