Professor: Can you explain the physical significance of the crystal momentum? Professor: The information about the momentum can be encoded in these spatial variation of the phase of the wave function. Professor: A central property from the Schrodinger equation is at the time variation d dt of p is equal to the expectation value of minus d the potential of x d x. The momentum expectation value is time independent, so it can be written in the form of e cubed, equal to e to the minus i upon h bar p l. can always write it as some q naught plus n pi over l. And so now really what's going to happen, what I'm doing here is I'm labeling q, not by a single number. And then we pick a different function, felicitously, called Phi sub q, which is contained in Phi q. So this is the potential. So in this statement that what we have this translation by x is just some function. It has to do with the potential of the wave function. So if we translate by nothing, then I construct a new function. Professor: When you have a perfect lattice, there is actually no current flowing in response to an applied electromagnetic field. Professor: You can build a system that has exactly a periodic potential. He says you can do it with lattices not of atoms, but lattices of dielectric. Professor: Optical fibers can be used to control the phase of the light that's shining through a glass fibers, and you can shine your light in a way that's reasonably well localized, and that's a lot of fun. beautiful block oscillations. And this has been proved in a very small number of real honest quantum mechanical systems. The most elegant experiment that I know of was done by Wolfgang Ketterle, who's here at MIT. And he got three data points because it was preposterously difficult and declared victory. But, the basic question is how robust is this. And the answer is it's not robust at all, but which you can tell because everything in the real world has enough impurity that it conducts. the induced electric field? Nothing. Any electric field that you send in will be opposed by an induced current. So this behaves like a classical conductor. You turn on an electric field, and the charges will flow to oppose that externally imposed electric field. You get charges then building up on the walls of your capacitor plates. So, this is where we have a conductor. Because there's an unfilled band. And back here , we had an insulator because we had filled bands separated by gap. The gap between the filled band and the next available band is actually called a band insulator. yeah. There aren't [INAUDIBLE]. But what would we need? What we need is one of two things. We need either the band gap coincidentally is ridiculously small. What's a good example of that? A free particle. In the case of a free particle, these band gaps go to 0. Right? And so that's a conductor. Just an electron. It conducts, right? OK. But that's sort of stupid. But a better answer would be, well, can you have a system where there are bands but you didn't have one electron per potential well? And yeah. You could orchestrate that in lots of ways. Photonic crystals have bands of allowed energy and gaps of disallowed energies where no waves propagate through. Photonic crystals form exact crystals that reflect at very specific wavelengths. So why would a butterfly put a photonic crystal on its surface? Well it's extremely light. It's fairly rigid. And it's like the best thing you could ever do if you wanted to be a shiny, fluttery, flying thing. OK. So that's it for band gaps. And I want to move on to the remainder, the last topic of our course. Which is going to be entanglement and quantum computation. give you one quick observation and then move on to the punchline of today. We've talked about identical particles before. And we've talkedabout identical particles in funny states. So for example, imagine I have two particles described by a wave function where the first particle could be in the state a and the second particles in theState b. And I can build aWave function for the first particles being in state a. And this tells us something totally awesome. But if I've taken these particles, put them in this entangled state, and sent one particle off to a distant planet, the second particle to my sister in DC, this should be yet another moment of serious discomfort. Einstein moved to Princeton in 1933. He left Germany in 1932 December, about three weeks before Hitler took power. He created a thought experiment which we're going to study in detail next week called the EPR experiment. And I want to share with you a really lovely description of the way the problem was represented in a way by-- this is from a book that I recommend to all of you. It's actually really hard to find. I was going to read you his actual quote. Now I'm just going to paraphrase it. stupid. He was Albert Einstein. But he was aesthetically incapable of pursuing this new physics in ways that were possible under the research possibilities of the time. And that is what I would leave you with. Physics is an aesthetic as well as an intellectual pursuit. So thank you all. [APPLAUSE] Back to Mail Online home. Back to the page you came from. Follow us on Twitter @dailymailonline and @MailOnlineernews. Back To the pageyou came from, back to the Daily Mail home.