Protein three-dimensional structure and its implications for the binding of small molecules such as drugs. How can we use these basic motifs to recognize other macromolecules, other proteins and nucleic acids? We have these motifs that we could find, weight matrices for them by aligning lots of sequences. Now instead of aligning sequences, let's see what we can do by mutating both the protein part and the nucleic acid part. And then we know from the three dimensional structure that it interacts mainly with the middle nucleotides. The topic today is proteins, and this really is the main contact between the exquisite regulatory mechanisms. Here, we need sensors to sense the environment. We need actuators to then deliver back into the environment what the cell wants to do or to interact with other cells. You have to have feedback, synchrony, so on that you can basically program the almost digital nucleic acid world inside the cell but via clearly analog inputs and outputs. We also-- I've listed some of the scariest proteins that I could think of. And we're going to talk about three of them. The way we program proteins is either transgenics, where we might overproduce the protein, or homologous recombination. But there are ways that you can program, and conditional, meaning you can regulate under what conditions the protein is expressed or not or active or not with an entire domain, or with single nucleotide polymorphisms. In the case of the zinc finger, we made an altered specificity. We made new zinc fingers with bind to completely new trinucleotides. With the DNA polymerase, by changing one amino acid, we could make it now accept almost four logs better. Solid phase comes up again and again in arrays. It's very obvious why you have a solid phase. You want to be able to address it by its positions in x and y on the array. But the other reason-- technical reasons are, it's a fantastic way of getting purification of your products simply by washing. And it allows you to, in the case of beads, there now-- you can think of it as an ultimate and flexible array. You can move the beads around and put them in new arrays, and identify them later. Protein synthesis is a completely synthetic way of getting short peptides. You can think of these as drug-like molecules. These are naturally related-- they can be analogs of nucleic acids and proteins. And we'll talk about opportunities for making these analogs. A large class of pharmaceuticals, including most of the antibiotics, are made by a fairly small class of organisms, streptomyces in certain plants. And this process by which it's made in more detail, is very akin to fatty acid synthesis.