Professor: We're describing interaction between the electromagnetic field and atoms. He says the problem of resonance can be "fixed" by adding an imaginary part to the energy level. Professor: I want to show you what are the tools to treat those infinity source divergences in a consistent and a systematic way. He explains how to calculate the Fourier transform of the time evolution operator to infinite orders, and how to sum up an infinite number of diagrammatic tricks and summation. The course is part of MIT OpenCourseWare, which offers free online classes. Professor: In general, a real part and imaginary part. It's a function of the initial energy E. And it has an imaginary part, and it's the same if you have the function 1 over x. The imaginary part gets us Fermi's golden rule. And the real part has actually-- remember when we discussed the AC Stark shift. The AC Stark Shift has a 1 over [INAUDIBLE] dependence. So this is actually nothing else than theAC Stark shift not due to a laser beam, but due to one photon per mode. we calculate here-- has no resonant structure at the energy Eb. So therefore, we can neglect the energy dependence of that and simply replace the argument E by the energy we are interested in, namely energies close to Eb. This replace, neglect E and set, or replace the dependence by E, by taking the value at Eb. And we obtained, as promised, the imaginary part, which we can approximate by Fermi's golden rule. If we now Fourier transform back and obtain the time evolution of this state, it no longer evolves with theenergy Eb. It has a shifted energy by this self energy. And this is called the radiative shift. But in addition, because of the imaginarypart, it has now an exponential decay. Damping is a consequence of the fluctuation dissipation principle. We do not get any form of damping without at least the fundamental quantum noise. The tool which we use for that is the density matrix. The density matrix can be written as a probabilistic sum over states. This will actually play a major role. We will make certain models for damping. And it's really beautiful. On Monday, I will give you the beam splitter model for the optical Bloch equation. Because it's a microscopic model. processes. OK, any last questions? Well then, let's enjoy the open house with incoming graduate students, and I'll see you on Monday. I'll be back on Monday to talk to you about the classes we'll be teaching next year. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from. Click here to read the full transcript of this interview. Back To the pageyou came from, click here to see the full Transcript of this Interview. Back in the page, please share your questions and comments.