RAFAEL JARAMILLO: Let's talk about intermediate phases and line compounds. He recalls intermediate phase in a three-phase system. He says the solution model becomes very narrowly shaped, like a pin. All possible common tangents are going to converge at the same point, he says. "I no longer need a solution model. I only need one point," Jaramillo says. 'I can't help myself. I got to draw the mouse-face plot' Magnesium nickel system has a number of different phases. At high temperature, this Laves phase develops some width. But when you drop down to low temperature, both of these intermediate phases appear as line compounds. These are very distinct structures, and they're only occurring at very distinct compositions. That's a hallmark of an intermediate phase. That is a line compound. Let's talk about compound formation energy. It is the free energy change for formation of 1 mole of compound from elements in their reference states. There's an infinity of examples of line compounds. Silicon tends to be a pretty useful additive for copper-based alloys. Doping semiconductors is why we're able to talk to each other over there. Without doping, there is no semiconductor devices, and no electronics revolution. So the fact that you can dope some metals into silicon is as important as the solubility limits can be in the parts per billion. It's a very famous line compound, so on the last P set, you're going to do some problems. RAFAEL JARAMILLO: Let's look at the silicon-carbon system at low temperature. Carbon here is a line compound. Silicon is not a compound, but it has zero apparent solubility of silicon in carbon. Carbon from carbon doesn't take any energy to form. Silicon from silicon doesn't. Take a stab at how I would draw a free-energy composition diagram for the. silicon- carbon system. Here's silicon. Here're carbon. And here's delta G. And let's say this is 50/50. RAFAEL JARAMILLO: I want to introduce this and get this in your minds. Let's imagine reacting metal M with 1 mole of oxygen to form an oxide. So zM plus O2 gas reacting to form MzO2. What's z? How do I determine z? Anybody? Does anyone know some oxides? Name for me a common oxide that you know. And these oxides are line compounds. That z is not a variable. We're going to use this property of being line compounds in Wednesday's lecture.