well welcome back everybody to uh the last lecture 162. this is kind of a a special lecture um i did get some requests for more information about distributed storage and quantum computing and so i think we're going to do that. i want to make sure that we talk through the chord algorithm since that's a i think relatively simple thing to understand and is uh very cool and applied pretty much everywhere. At the very end of uh last lecture we were talking about key value stores and uh the cool thing about keyvalue stores is they're very simple in interface excuse me. Security is basically computing in the presence of an adversary so i'm assuming several of you have all taken 161. Security is basically using those mechanisms to prevent misuse of resources so for instance virtual memory is a mechanism that can be used for protection. One of the questions that's important is do you know where your data came from that's a provenance question. Data integrity is making sure that the data read only by authorized users so that's an important thing. Non-repudiation is a surprisingly important thing that people don't often talk about. how we want to be dealing with data all right sorry if that's a lot of information but i wanted to see if there's any questions there before i switch over to some quantum computing all righty give me a second i'll be right back. So first question is how do we know the data is secured so um just like with a blockchain let me just back up to the picture here which i think is a is a good one to be talking about um what we know is the following. The vision here really is of pretty much everybody using data capsules everywhere okay and if you can get that to happen then you could potentially have a very interesting scenario here. We're working with roboticists and machine learning folks to put their data and their models for grasping and so on inside of data capsules and as a result they can reside securely in the edge in say your robots or whatever in a way that can't be breached. If any of you want to come work on this project come talk to me uh separately we have plenty of places we can talk to you. me i'm going to show you shores factoring in one slide so this is something that would break rsa okay we can basically say the difficulty of factoring rsa is figuring out how to take a large number which is publicly known and factor it into two large factors that are primes. If you can do that you break the cryptography so classically this is an exponential time algorithm and so as long as these are big enough nobody's going to break it quantum computer can do it polynomial time. question is is this something to worry about the answer is well so far no but it's looking like um it's getting closer and closer okay. We actually investigated ways of optimizing that and we could actually look at performance of different options for the shortest factoring algorithm as quantum circuits. So we built a cad tool to do that so um i i don't know i think it's a pretty interesting area right now and there's a lot of interest in it all right so um sorry i kept you guys way over but this is the last lecture i figured if anybody was interested we talked about key value stores.