So, homework two is out now. What the default projects will be, uh, for this class. Um, and you guys will get to pick whether or not you wanna do your own construction project or, um, the default project. The assignments, [inaudible] are they limited to TensorFlow? asked the question if, if the assignment is limited toTensorFlow. If you have any questions about getting setup without feel free to use the Piazza channel. We also released a tutorial for how to just sort of set up your machine last week. Deep Neural Networks and Convolutional Neural Networks are both used extensively in deep reinforcement learning. In 1994, we had TD backgammon which used Deep Neural Networks. And then we had the results that were kind of happening around like 1995 to maybe like 1998, which said that, "Function approximation plus offline off policy control, plus bootstrapping can be bad, can fail to converge" So I think it sort of really changed the story of how people are perceiving using this sort of complicated function approximation. Lemme just to clarify, if we set alpha to zero, what's the rule for selecting tuples among the existing tuples? It's a great question. Lemme just clarify. If you are fixing, um, uh, your w minus, then, if you were looking at our case that we had before, then you wouldn't be able to continue propagating that back, because you hadn't update yet, yet, that's exactly right. So there's gonna be this tension between, when you fix things versus her propagating information back. It's very computationally, expensive or impossible in some cases to figure out. could be super tempting to try to start, by like implementing Q learning directly on the ATARI. Highly encourage you to first go through, sort of the order of the assignment and like, do the linear case. Even with the smaller games, like Pong which we're working on, um, it is enormously time consuming. It's way better to make sure that you know your Q Learning method is working, before you wait, 12 hours to see whether or not, oh it didn't learn anything on Pogge.