Today we're gonna talk about learning in the setting of games. What does learning mean? How do we learn those evaluation functions that we talked about? And then, er, towards the end of the lecture, we wanna talk a little [NOISE] bit about variations of the game- the games we have talked about. So, uh, how about if you have- how about the cases where we have simultaneous games or non-zero-sum games? And an example of that is rock, paper, scissors. Can you still be optimal if you reveal your strategy? So, so that's kind of how we do it. We call these policies. We get a bunch of episodes. We go over them to make things better and better. So then we generate episodes and then from these episodes, we want to learn. These episodes look like state action reward states and then they keep going until we get a full episode. And then we had a target that you're trying to get to. And my target, which is kind- kind of acts as a label, is going to be equal to my reward, the reward that I'm getting. Is it possible to have, an end state and not end state have the same feature vector, or no? If you use like, uh, initialize rates do not be zeros which you update throughout instead of just to the end. If there were kind of the same and have same sort of characteristics, it's fine to have feature that gives the same value. If it is always 0, it doesn't matter like what the weight of that entry is. So in general, you wanna have features that are differentiating and you're using it in some way. Minimax sca- strategy seemed to be pretty okay when it comes to solving these turn-based games. But not all games are turn- based, right? Like an example of it is rock-paper-scissors. You're all playing at the same time, everyone is playing simultaneously. The question is, how do we go about solving simultaneously, okay? So let's start with, um, a game that is a simplified version of rock- paper-sc scissors. This is called a two-finger Morra game. look at them, would be useful for projects. And with that, I'll see you guys next time. Back to the page you came from! Back to Mail Online home. Back into the fold! Back To the pageYou came from: Back To The Page You Came From. Back from the Page you Came From: back to the Page You came from.back to thepage you came From: Back to The Page you cameFrom: The PageYou Came from: ThePageYouComingBack to: ThepageYouComing Back to: