This is part 2 of a guide to clinical reasoning or how to create an accurate differential diagnosis from a patient's presentation. The patient is a 75 year old woman presenting with epigastric pain for four hours. She was in her usual state of health until four hours prior to presentation at which time she developed the onset of abdominal pain. The pain is relatively well localized to the midline in the region between her humble ankus and xiphoid process. There did not seem to be any particular trigger and the duration from initial to final pain was relatively short. The patient is a 75 year old woman with abdominal pain for four hours it is epigastric well localized progressed over 45 minutes is constant with no exacerbating or alleviating factors and associated with nausea from the rest of her history. She has hypertension diabetes moderate alcohol use smoking and is drinking water from a newly drilled well on exam. Her husband is concerned about contamination from a new well that was drilled on their property for drinking water one week ago on exam she is an elderly woman a piercer stated in moderate discomfort secondary to abdominal pain. The epigastrium would obviously be the most critical anatomic region to include organs that lie directly underneath it. The major structures are of course the liver and gallbladder along with other components of the extra hepatic biliary system. The spleen can cause pain with either a splenic infarct or splenic abscess. The chest referred pain to the upper abdomen from intrathoracic diseases is a common phenomenon organs in the chest to consider include the esophagus and the heart. and what that impact was that is obviously very tedious and time-consuming an expert clinician would probably start with the key features focusing on the ones that were either most prominent most unusual or those which clearly clustered together. Then thinking about which specific diagnoses were impacted by those features for the purposes of demonstration I'm going to take an approach here somewhere in between by going through each diagnosis one at a time but only mentioning those key features would seem particularly relevant so first up is gastritis the patient has some risk factors for gastritis with our alcohol use in smoking so these increase the probability of this diagnosis also gastritis can be associated with nausea. of diabetic ketoacidosis which can definitely present with acute abdominal pain and nausea in a diabetic however the normal metabolic panel which implies a normal glucose completely rules out this possibility. After all of this discussion what's our differential diagnosis to answer that we need to decide which combination of arguments for and against the diagnosis based on the key features results in the most likely possibilities. The most likely diagnosis for this patient is acute pancreatitis. pancreatitis is a relatively common diagnosis among patients presenting to the ER with abdominal pain overall this is a fairly classic presentation of a common disease.