Sadhana sadhana is a machine learning scientist at Themis Ai and the lead TA of the course intro to deep learning at MIT. She'll be teaching us more about specifically the bias and the uncertainty of AI algorithms which are really two key or critical components towards achieving this Mission or this vision of safe and trustworthy deployment of AI all around us. Sadhana will talk about how we can build very modular and flexible methods for AI and building what we call asafe and trustworthy Ai. behalf of Themis so over the past decade we've seen some tremendous growth in artificial intelligence across safety critical domains in the Spheres of autonomy and Robotics. A lot of these Technologies were innovated five ten years ago but you and I don't see them in our daily lives so what is what's the Gap here between Innovation and deployment. We'll talk about how Themis is innovating in these areas in order to bring new algorithms in this space to Industries around the world after we talk about the ramifications for this for real world AI. lecture so so far we've been focusing mainly on facial recognition systems and a couple of other systems as canonical examples of bias. bias is actually far more widespread in machine learning consider the example of autonomous driving many data sets are comprised mainly of cars driving down straight and sunny roads in really good weather conditions with very high visibility. In some specific cases you're going to face adverse weather bad um bad visibility near Collision scenarios and these are the samples that are the most important for the model to learn. epistemic uncertainty let's go back to our real world example let's say the again the input is the same as before it's a RGB image of some scene in a city and the output is a pixel level mask of what every pixel in this image belongs to. We can use bias and uncertainty to mitigate risk in every part of the AI life cycle. analyzing the data before a model is even trained on any data we can analyze the bias that is present in this data set and tell the creators whether or not they should add more samples.