NORVIN RICHARDS: Today is phonetics, which means that today we begin making funny sounds at each other. One standard way of talking about different kinds of speech sounds is to talk about where in the vocal tract the flow of air can get obstructed. So for example, there are what are called bilabial sounds. These are sounds which are made with both lips. And so that's what you do for the sounds that are at the beginnings of words like "paint" and "bath," and "mouth," and well, "wipe" Inventor: "r" is one of the kinds of sounds that people classically have trouble with. "z" is voiced and that "s" is voiceless. "g"s and "zz" are consonant sounds that agree with the consonant that's at the end of "cat" and "dog" The difference between "cats" and 'dogs' is voiced or voiceless, the phonologist says. "R" might be an example, but we'll get to "r," eventually. The way nasal stops work is you're stopping the flow of air somewhere in your vocal tract, but you're allowing the air to flow through your nasal cavity. You can have an alveolar nasal, right? "n," or a velar nasal, "ng" What would a glottal nasal sound like? Trick question. You would need surgery. So you would need, again, as I say, probably there are unethical surgeons who would modify you so that you could makeglottal nasals. English has interdental fricatives and alveolar stops, "t" and "d" There are languages out there that have what are called dental stops. Part of your job, if you're learning Tagalog, for example, is to learn to make dental 't's instead of alveolars. There's all this work on what people do to compensate for various kinds of obstructions in the vocal tract. And on the website, there will be a link to charts that will have more official charts by the IPA. Student: "Sue says he's a bad egg." Student: "Top chopstick shops stock top chopsticks" Student: [INAUDIBLE] Student: "[INAUDITED] Top chopsticks. Top chopstick. shops stockTop chopsticks." Got that from a book of tongue twisters. Student: ["INAUDible] Top Chopstick. Shops stock top Chopsticks." Student. "Top Chopstick shops. stock top. chopsticks". Student: "Top chop stick shops stock. top chop sticks." Student.: " top chop stick shop stock top chops" Student."Top Chop Stick Shop Stock Top Chopsticks"