James W. Swan: I hope everybody saw the correction to a typo in homework 1 that was posted on Stellar last night and sent out to you. We don't want to give you a homework assignment that's punishing. We're still going to talk about transformations of matrices. We looked at one type of transformation we could utilize for solving systems of equations. Today, we'll look at another one, the eigenvalue decomposition, and on Monday, we will look at the singular value decomposition. be stuck. It won't proceed after that. So it's the difference between getting a solution and writing a publication about the research problem you're interested in and not. So how do you do reordering? Well, we use a process called permutation. There's a certain class of matrix called a permutation matrix that can swap rows or columns. So if I want to swap columns, I multiply my matrix from the right, IP transpose. If I swap the rows and then I swap them back, I get back what I had before. James W. Swan: We discussed sparse matrices and a little bit about reordering and now permutation. He says permutation is a form of preconditioning a system of equations. He shows a simulation that tells us how probable it is to find the Plinko chip in a particular column. Swan: We could construct an alternative model that didn't have that part of the picture that we wanted to have. He's happy to answer questions on.at and he'll be back in a few minutes. For a real N-by-N matrix, there will be eigenvectors and eigenvalues, which are the amount of stretch. Eigenvalues are special vectors that are stretched on multiplication by the matrix. They're non-linear because they depend on both the value and the vector, the product of the two, for N plus 1 unknowns. So we can never say what an eigenvector is uniquely. We can only prescribe its direction. And that describes the eigen vector-eigenvalue pair. triangular form for this matrix. We'll talk next time about the singular value decomposition, which is another sort of transformation one can do when we don't have these complete sets of eigenvectors. You'll get a chance to practice these things on your next two homework assignments, actually. So it'll come up in a couple of different circumstances. I would really encourage you to try to solve some of these example problems that were in here. Solving by hand can be useful.