JACK HARE: Let's do a little recap on electron cyclotron emission. We expect to have multiple different peaks, even from a single particle. These peaks are going to be occurring at frequencies. And we can say this is m equals 1, m equals 2,. m equals 3. And they're evenly spaced. And so, we have these peaks here. But if we neglect that, the frequency depends only on the magnetic field. So, if you see some emission at some certain frequency, then you know that it's been emitted by a region of plasma which has this magnetic fields. Many oscillations. And so, it will average out to 1 or something like that. So it's some DC offset that we can subtract off after. So all this is doing here is mixing the signal down so it gets to a regime that we could effectively digitize. Yeah, another question. STUDENT: [INAUDIBLE] JACK HARE: So if we were doing geometric optics, which we're not, then you would have a lens like this. That lens could collimate your beam. And if it collimated that beam, that would mean there'd be a focus point at some distance f away. very small region on the order of 100 microns. Anyone know how micro splitters work? Looking at you? STUDENT: RF. JACK HARE: The answer I got was RF, which I don't think is much more satisfying than my answer. So let's get on to correlation ECE see what that does. And this is where the correlation comes in. We are going to find that the noise is uncorrelated at random, but at less than the length of the scale. Bremsstrahlung is an isotropic radiation. It emits photons as it's deflected from its trajectory. There are lots of different ways to deal with the radiation. All give the same answer with just a very slightly different coefficient. So it's not really a big difference if you design your reactor. But, from the point of view of this course, it makes no difference. So, again, if you want the full treatment, go have a look in Hutchinson. difference between those. neutron damage leads us to use much thicker substrates, which gives us a longer time response and so, therefore, a worse bolometer. So, ironically, the bolometers that will be used on [INAUDIBLE] are significantly worse than the bolometer used on existing devices. And I'm sure that [? Spark ?] will have exactly the same problem. Almost everyone in the world uses this design of bolometer that they pioneered on ASDEX Upgrade in the '80s. No one has come up with a better system yet.