Jeremy Bentham's principle is that "the greatest happiness of the greatest number" is maximized. Bentham thinks all utility is quantifiable. He allows interpersonal comparisons of utility. If you take one unit of utility from one person and give it to another person their utility will go up and the first person's utility is going to go down. The total here's bigger than eighteen, so it's obviously preferable, on the scheme, to the status quo. Maximal utility is perhaps the greatest majority, perhaps the majority of the majority. In Bentham's system, classical utilitarianism, we see that he get the next marginal increment of utility. So we should expect rich people to be greedy by this theory, not to become more and more indifferent to money. Every serious economist since the eighteenth century has assumed that the principle of diminishing marginal utility is true, including Jeremy Bentham. If you want to see how people are to get it right, you need to get this idea right. It's going to get you closer to the truth than not. Focus on the difference between the status quo and distribution IV here. These people might be on the verge of starvation. Surely giving them a unit of utility is going to be much more enhancing to their happiness. Anyone know what the principle behind that idea is? Anyone want to take it? How many of you have done ECON 101, the first econ course? Yeah, so what is the principle that would tell you if you have no food and I give you a loaf of bread, your utility goes up a lot more than if I have ten loaves of bread. Somebody? Okay. Diminishing marginal utility. integrity is a great example because once you start putting values like that out there it, I think, threatens the idea that it's all reducible to a single index, right? Because you can't--having a little bit of integrity is sort of like being alittle bit pregnant, right?" Professor Ian Shapiro: What about health? It's not quite binary because you can be in medium health, but I think it would be pretty useful to be healthy and then super healthy, ad infinitum. some people are sighted and some people are blind and you could do eye transplants. Arguably the blind person would gain more utility from getting one eye than the sighted person would lose from losing one eye. So that can also give you some ways of proceeding that would make you queasy, right? I don't think those are actually deep problems for Bentham's theory because I think what he would say is, "Well, you'd drink beer and at some point you would sell the beer" with some of these counter examples. Let's suppose a two-person society, again, and let's suppose it consists of Donald Trump and a homeless woman living out of a left luggage locker in Grand Central Station. And the question is, should we take a dollar from Trump and give it to the bag lady? What? Should we? Yes? No? How many think yes? Okay, yeah, almost everybody. Why? Because by assumption with the principle this point of practical equality, or when the gains from downward redistribution are offset by the losses from the shrinking of the pie. to be profoundly radical and frightening to rich men, because it has this built-in impetus for downward redistribution. Now, Bentham was a fairly radical guy. He was a supporter of democracy, which was a radical thing at that time. But he wasn't as egalitarian as all that, and he wanted to temper the downward redistribution that flows from his principle, and so he makes a distinction between what he refers to as "absolute" and "practical" equality. Reagan thought a top marginal tax rate of 40 percent was beyond the point of practical equality. because it's where you start to see our old friend the workmanship ideal creeping by the backdoor into utilitarianism. Bentham says, "Law does not say to man, Work and I will reward you but it says: Labour, and by stopping the hand that would take them from you, I will ensure you the fruits of your labour" So another way of thinking about this is, that Bentham's idea of the state is essentially regulatory. It stays the hand of somebody else who would steal your goods, but the government cannot itself create utility. find, if you go back now and look at what happened during the 1980s, perfectly credible economists will line up on both sides because they cut the taxes. And disentangling how much the tax cuts were responsible for what happened, versus how much many other things that happened were responsible, nobody really knows. And so a lot of the problem in debating incentives, once you get into the real world of macroeconomic policy-making, is that (a) you never have the counterfactual.