Professor Shelly Kagan: Life on the experience machine is perfect as long as you've got the right tape playing. But the vast majority always says, no, there's something missing from that life, she says. Different theories of well-being might answer that in different ways, he says. He says we don't have any kind of accomplishments, we're not in the right kinds of loving relationships, because we want to have explanations as to why we're valuable to be with. In principle we could still evaluate rival lives. We could still say it's--how good your life is, is a matter of adding up the goods and subtracting the bads. But we would now have a somewhat broader, or more encompassing or inclusive, list of goods, and a more broad and encompassing list of bads--not just experience, but also these various other accomplishments, whatever exactly that list comes to. It varies from case get bad enough, that can outweigh the value of being alive so that the grand total is negative. Hedonism is a version of the neutral container theory. Life may have value in and of itself, but it's not mere life. What we want is the life of a human. We want a life in which we're accomplishing things, there's agency. Because you have to be a knower in order to have knowledge. The life of somebody who can have an emotional side is something like theLife of a person that, when we say, that being alive per so is valuable, presumably what they mean is being alive as a person per se. subtract the ignorance and deception. Doing that in terms of the contents gives you a subtotal, but that subtotal is no longer the entire story. If we accept a valuable container theory, we also have to add in some extra positive points to take account of the fact that, well, at least you're alive or have the life or a person--or whatever it is that you think is valuable in and of itself. Even if your content subtotal was negative ten, that doesn't mean you're not better off alive. If you're a modest, if you accept the modest version of the valuable container theory, then if the contents get bad enough, that can outweigh the positive value of life. Against that, fans of the fantastic valuable container Theory can say, it doesn't really matter whether Williams is right. The value of being alive per se outweighs that. So more life would always be better, no matter how horrible the contents might be. So being immortal really would be a good thing for you. Death always is a bad thing. optimists say, "Even if immortality would be bad eventually, the next chunk of life would've been good for all of us" pessimists might say "Boy, death comes not a moment too soon for any of us." moderates say "For some of us, death does not come too soon" Some of us make it to the ripe old age of 80,90 a 100 or more. Others of us die at 20, or 15, or 10, or younger. Even if death were inevitable, it wouldn't have to come in different-sized packages. LZ Granderson: The fundamental badness of death is that it deprives me of life worth having. He says there are other features of death, as we experience it, that are separable from the deprivation account. LZ: We might ask, what about this inevitability of death? Does that make things worse? He says if we realize that there's nothing I can do about the fact that I'm going to die, then perhaps some of the sting, some bite, is eliminated. in life is necessary, then we'd get a kind of emotional distance from it. We could no longer be disappointed, because to be disappointed in something presupposes that it could've been some other way. Spinoza thought if you see that it couldn't go any other way, then you can't be sad about it. Well, maybe that's right, but going back to the firsthand, I don't know how many of you have read Dostoyevsky's short novel The Underground Man. even worse is I'm going to get even less than the average amount of life. That's clearly an extra-bad. But we might then wonder, for every person who gets less than. the average, there's another person who has more than the median amount of. life. We care more about being short-changed than we do about being, as we might put it, overcompensated. We've had inevitability; we had variability. What about unpredictability? Not only is it inevitable that you're going to die; you don't know how much more time you've got. kinds of plans. And in particular, it's hard to know how to pace yourself. We all know the Horatio Alger story right? care about the overall shape of our lives, we might worry about wanting it to have the right shape overall. Where and when do you want to peak, as it were, in terms of your accomplishments? Well, that matters to us, but the trouble is, without predictability you don't know where to put the peak. All of this suggests then that the unpredictability of our death adds an extra negative element. It makes it harder to plan what the best way to live my life would be. Somebody starts out poor and makes his way through hard work and dedication to riches and success. That's the Horatio Alger life--H.A. Great life. Instead of the rags to riches life, imagine the riches to rags life. It's the reverse. The story "bad to good" is the kind of story we want for ourselves, while the story "good to bad" is a story we don't want for our own lives. Why do we care more about future non-existence than pastnon-existence? to be in the future or did it take place earlier today? You don't remember. We're not indifferent. We want the bad behind us, not the bad in front of us. We have to worry then that because of the unpredictability of death that our lives may not have the ideal shape. A lot of us might feel that a life like this, where we peak but then we stick around--you know, isn't--can at least fail to be as desirable in which we end with a bang. time.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery. Please submit your best shots of the U.S. for next week. Visit CNN.com/Travel next Wednesday for a new gallery of snapshots. Visit Time.time.co.uk/Travel each week for a different gallery of photos from across the globe. Click here for a gallery of the best shots from around the world. Visit TIME.com: Travel next week for snapshots of the world's most popular destinations.