Norvin Richards: A word like "unlockable" can mean either it's possible to unlock it, or it is not possible to lock it. Richards: We can account for this kind of ambiguity in the following way. He says there are two "un-"s, which can go before the "un" that can go after the "-able" And so we get to attribute it to basically the fact that there are 2 "un-s" Richards: There's a suffix that changes verbs into adjectives, and then there's an "un"-s. "Un-" combines with adjectives and makes adjectives that mean more or less "not (adjective) " "Un-" is kind of picky about what it can combine with. Joseph: Does the final-- after you "un-" something, is that going to be able to be redone? So if I untie a shoelace by cutting it up, now-- NORVIN RICHARDS: Yeah. It can't be tied again. Well, let's see, does it have to be possible to do the operation again? I don't know, maybe.  syntax is the study of how words are assembled to make sentences, words, sometimes things smaller than words, as we'll see. We're going to see that it's useful to think of sentences as being put together in a bunch of operations more or less the way "unlockable" is-- that we take pairs of words and put them together to form larger objects the way I just did for "unLockable" Just as with "unlockedable," we were taking pairs of things and putting them together in pairs to create these larger and larger structures. Vince Richards: syntacticians have to care passionately about the difference between one sentence, which is complete gibberish, and another sentence. "Up the stairs" is a prepositional phrase, "up the cats" is not. "I will walk them up." What are you going to do with those stairs? You have to say I will walk up them. You can't say, 'I will wake up them.' You must say 'I'll wake them up.' So these "up"s are different. CNN's John Sutter gives three sentences to slay a hypothesis that you might be entertaining. The existence of the second class of sentences shows that that's hopeless, Sutter says. Sutter: What if it's not particular sentences that we're remembering, but structures of sentences we've built up over time? "Stop entertaining that hypothesis. Make it go home. It's not a good hypothesis. It won't do you any good," he says. "This is the theory that covers "cough, hack, splutter," "sudden heart attacks," "flies" In many languages, including Latin, you have to say, "About what are you talking?" in order to ask a question. In English, you always bring the question word to the beginning of the sentence. "To whom are youtalking?" sounds fancy and snobbish, but still right. We're not going to be talking about prescriptive studies of English grammar, we're just going to talk about how you do it. The only point of these few slides has been it's possible to study syntax independently of meaning, where by independently I just mean the facts of syntax don't just reduce to facts about meaning. Noam Chomsky: We're capable of distinguishing grammaticality, even in sentences that don't mean anything. "Colorless green ideas sleep furiously" is meaningless if you don't mess with the meanings of the sentences. If the words meant something else, the sentence would be fine. We can have English sentences that consist of two adjectives modifying a noun, and then there's a verb, but "Big green monsters snore loudly" that would be OK. "We're class going to" is a meaningless sentence, but the words are fitting together the way they should. really, really desperately trying to end the conversation, I bring out these kinds of pairs. So it's not about meaning. We have this intuition that there are sentences that are OK and sentence that are bad. I've just been asserting things about our feelings about these sentences. Do people have this feeling about these sentence? First, that they're meaningless, and second, that the first one is OK and the second one is bad? Yeah, Raquel? AUDIENCE: I can't remember the word for this, but you were saying that certain types of words are categories that you can add more words to. English speakers end sentences with prepositions every day. In English, there's a distinction between the examples where leaving a preposition behind is what you prefer. "About what are you talking?" is worse than "To whom are youtalking?" "Despite what did you leave?" and "What did you avoid?" are both OK. "We left despite her warnings" is a bad example, but there are other examples that are really quite bad, too, he says. He says we should be proud of the fact that we can say this, because, as he says, it's rare. grammar. So what we are doing in this class is trying to figure out what people actually say, what the rules are for putting sentences together in English. We're not going to talk about that stuff, except to mock it the way I did just now. So prescriptive grammar is the study of rules that your teachers might have taught you in school about how to speak, some of which, just to stop mocking it for a second, might have tried to improve the quality of your writing. Inhale a fly. So I say, "This is the--" and then I stop. And then imagine that this experience is so traumatizing for me and also for the fly, that I just I never complete that sentence. That's the sentence I uttered. And I'm a native speaker of English. So there are two kinds of things we could say. One would be to say, we're developing a theory of all of the kinds of sentences that Native English speakers can say. that says English sentences can be arbitrarily long. Nobody ever performs an infinitely long sentence, but we're competent to produce them. There is no question to which the answer is "The red book," like "What will you find?" "Find the red" is a substring that has certain privileges, can be used for these various types of phenomena, as opposed to "find the red," which you can't do those things with. "I will find the red I will book, leave the blue I will pencils." Can't do this with just any random three-word string. In a sentence like, "I will find the red book" for example, we'll see that syntax treats that string, "The red book," as a unit. It's OK to take a substring like that and put it together with another similar substring conjoined with the word "and" It is OK to use "thered book" as a possible answer to a question. This is like the stuff we were Because this is syntax and not semantics, we won't worry too much about what it means. say, "The red book?" But if I tell you that I will find the red book and you're amazed, you're not going to say, "Find the red?" I think. Do you think that's true? But yeah, I take your point about-- to the extent that you can use "the red" as shorthand for " the red one" It's red acting as the noun, not red acting-- NORVIN RICHARDS: Yeah. Several people have points about that point. this part is the verb, the part that determines that that's the kind of phrase that can go in that position. "Find the red book" we're going to give that the label verb, because having a verb is the important part for that. "In the garage" is a unit, it's a constituent. And again, if I say, "I will find the book in the garage," and you're amazed, you can say "in the garage?" If I want to, I can topicalize "inThe garage" It's a prepositional phrase. just contain a preposition, like, "I will look up," where, again, if I say "I would look up" and you're amazed, you can say, "Up?" (Why will you look up?) "I said I would lookup, and up I will look"-- Maybe. "I think you might be right that this is an adverb in the sense that it modifies the verb. I think I might also be right in thesense that it's a prepositional phrase that's being used as adverbially" don't want to think of "up the cats" as a unit that has the cats as an object. We want "up" to not be a preposition that's combining with the cats. "I will walk her up" is modifying "to her room," but I don't think [? so? ?] NORVIN RICHARDS: It doesn't have to, does it? No. I think you also have to walk the student up. You can't walk the stairs up. But for "walk up them" we want "up" and "them" to combine to be a propositional phrase. But for these other two, we want something else. We're going to want to circle around and try to find out what that other thing is. Does anybody else-- yeah? AUDIENCE: I was going to suggest something else [INAUDIBLE] Even though you can't say, walk the-- "walk the stairs up to your room." NORVIN RICHARDS: "I walk--" "I want to ruthlessly squelch everything else you guys want to say," he says. "I have a triumphant slide that I want to show you. And then maybe we can unsquelch you and come back" "We want to construct a structure for this that's sensitive to all of the tests for structure that we've been developing, and it's going to involve putting things together via pairwise merge" "When we merged "the book" or "the garage," we're going to create something we're Going to give the label "noun" to," he adds. construct syntactic trees for strings of words. It's often the case that we get ambiguities like the "unlockable" ambiguity. There is more than one way to combine things. And what we'll do is develop tests that allow us to see which way we've combined words in different ways. And we'll find cases where, depending on in what order you combine things, you get different meanings, and our tests will combine with that. All right. We will do this again on Tuesday.