Borat: I want to talk about my favorite part of the Second Discourse, a book that never grows old. Borat: Inequality begins in a faculty or a disposition that is the first and most durable to be miserable. He says Rousseau takes the side of the poor and the dispossessed but it isn't property, or poverty rather, that rouses Rousseau's anger as it is the attitudes and beliefs shaped by inequalities and of wealth and power. In many ways, Rousseau like Plato finds his voice when discussing the various complexities of the human soul, Borat says. Amour-propre is an untranslatable word but related to a range of psychological characteristics such as pride, vanity, conceit. Rousseau distinguishes amour- propre from another disposition that he calls amour de soi-meme, a sort of self-love. He speculates that the passion of vanity was born as soon as people became conscious of the gaze of another, he says. "Each one," he says, "began at the first hand and shame and envy on the other hand" Rousseau would argue that the deeper cause seemed to be that the protesters believed was disrespect being shown to them, to their beliefs. Toleration in many ways is a liberal virtue because it requires us to distinguish between beliefs that we may take with utmost seriousness in private life. But it is one thing, you might say, to tolerate other views and another thing to accord them respect and esteem, says Julian Zelizer, a professor of history at the University of California, Los Angeles. Rousseau's Second Discourse ends on a note of utmost despair. It offers no positive answer to cure the problem of civilization but only hints at best at two possible solutions. Democracy for him is the social condition that most closely approximates the equality of the state of nature. The Social Contract begins with theState of war? This is the question that the Social Contract sets out to answer and to which his formulation, his famous formulation of what he calls the general will, is the solution. This feeling of existence without a thought for the future, without care or fear, the individual somehow psychologically returns to the natural state. Only a very few people, Rousseau writes, are capable of finding their way back to nature. Rousseau believed himself to be one of these people. Maybe you also are one of them. Yes? But it requires you, in some way, to distance yourself severely and psychologically from all of the possibilities of society. It was that inward journey that Rousseau took and that he writes about so powerfully in his Confessions. In the state of nature, we are born free, equal and independent. Only in society do we become weak, dependent, and enslaved. How did this take--how did this change take place, Rousseau asks. What can give these chains or bonds moral legitimacy? He says considerable philosophical abstraction whose leading concepts are abstractions like the social contract, the general will, and so on. The Principles of Political Right suggests that are appropriate to human beings conceived as free agents responsible to themselves alone. assumption that each individual has a deep rooted interest in securing the conditions of their own liberty. Each of us has a desire to preserve his or her own freedom and that social order will be rational or just, that allows us to preserve that freedom. The state of nature quickly becomes a state of war based on conflicting desires and conflicting again means of liberty preservation. So how do we preserve our liberty without lapsing into anarchy, that is how to preserve our freedom without lapses into anarchy?