Nuclear materials is the biggest research field in the department, and yet, it's not talked about in 22.01. The basic mechanism of radiation damage is like you might imagine. The movement in clustering of those defects can be quite strongly influenced by the presence of all those other defects. And that's what we really need to know is what is the full population of every single type of defect in an irradiated material? That's what I mean by damage. It's the stuff that happens here that can tell us will our materials fail in nuclear reactors. curve that we were looking at before we started watching videos of crushing things, to remind you about the different material properties and what they actually mean. The strength of the material is how much stress you can put in until it starts to either plastically deform or it hits its UTS, ultimate tensile strength, where it will just fail. How about ductility? What do we mean by that? Either intuitively or on the curve, yeah? AUDIENCE: How much you can stretch it? MICHAEL SHORT: Exactly. The strain to failure would be a good measure of activity. A DPA measures the number of times that each atom has moved out of its original site. It's a simple measure of how many times has every atom left. The DPA only measure is what we call the ballistic stage of radiation damage. Damage is some of the wrong atoms at the end of the game, and they operate in very different timescales. It can take for these different defects to cluster up, and form these super structures and actually end up causing the damage that can lead to material degradation. So what sort of factors would affect the speed at which these different defects end up finding each other? What could you vary about a material or its environment to change the speed of these atomic diffusion jumps? MICHAEL SHORT: Temperature. Temperature determines diffusivities. It also can change phases or crystal arrangements, like for the case of anything iron-based. The dose rate, the rate at which those neutrons come in can change the rates at which the defects cluster up. And then micro structure. Things that are bigger than on the order of atoms. Nuclear materials data looks something like this. We predict that it stores about 2% of its energy in radiation defense. We did some of these measurements on a piece of steel from the nuclear reactor, and we got a whole bunch of interesting looking peaks for the red curve compared to the blue curve in the other irradiated conditions. So we think there's something there. And to jump through to the whole idea of differential scanning calorimetry, it's like what I drew here, but a lot more legible. When you make something colder, it tends to be more brittle. Normally you'd be able to bend a coin, or if it's a one yen coin, you can bite through it. The best we can do right now is to stick them in a reactor called BOR-60 in Russia. If your reactor is going to go to 500 DPA, you have to know whether or not your materials will survive, and it could take 20 years for the answer to be known. In that case, you could have a sudden pressure wave from steam explosion or whatever. Cluster of vacancies or interstitials is more stable for them to find each other and make larger defects. So there is a thermodynamic driving force bringing them together, and then as those defects build up, then what Jared said could happen. You could crack the material because it could get weaker, less ductile, less tough. Weaker is the opposite of strong, and what's the other one? Toughness-- oh, and harder, actually. So the origins of swelling are the humble vacancy. of vacuum, it could then combine to a bigger pocket, becoming a bigger and bigger void. The other problem too is that most materials generate helium when you irradiate them with neutrons. Did we go over the what's called the N alpha cross-section? Does that sound familiar to anyone? All right, I'm going to pull up Janice like I do pretty much every class. Let me show you what's going on. So among the millions of cross sections that we've gone through, there is this one right here called Z alpha. So what-- Yeah? When you apply radiation to a material, you can just create dislocations. Normally, you would have to deform a material to create and move dislocation. You create what's called this network forest of disLocations that makes things a lot harder to deform. What you want to happen is for dislocated things to move on the easiest planes, or slip plains, or the easiest directions for things to deform, like 45 degree angles. And without going into any of the math or atomistics, I just want to show you some examples pulled out of the fusion reactor. The way you test ductile-brittle transition temperature is what's called a Charpy impact test. It's probably the highest tech, lowest tech test I've seen. You simply hit things with a hammer. A very well calibrated, precise hammer. To measure by actually turning this dial and letting the hammer turn it as it moves through the material, you can see how much energy was absorbed by the material as the hammer comes back up at a certain temperature. By extrapolating, or say, integrating the area under those curves, you get the energy in each type of defect. a crack in the vessel. Boric acid actually ate through a whole chunk of the pressure vessel, leaving the stainless steel intact. The properties of the vessel are highly dependent on, not just its composition, but the heat treatment that went to make it. If you heat the vessel too much, it's no longer a code stamp vessel. Pretty tricky spot that we're in, huh? But we're trying to science our way out of it. But it's a couple minutes after. I'll open on Thursday with a little story. Michael Short: We can take out tiny pieces of the vessel and get the same information as you would from a Charpy test but on the nanoscale. The heating is so fast that the defects don't even have time to find each other, annihilate, and release their stored energy. We're doing this process on nanograms of material and seeing if you can irradiate something and measure its stored energy because if you could, you could take a tiny little razor blade, take out the smallest sliver of the vessels-- smaller than a grain of sand. Michael Short: Snipes are real. They don't exist, right? They actually do. You pretty much have to be British to know it, because they hunt them there for sport, and apparently, they're delicious. That's actually where we get the term snipe because the actual size of the sniper compared to the sniper is about that. If you can shoot that bird with a gun, you are an expert marksman and deserve the delicious and tiny treat that you've then blown apart with your bullet. Researchers used a nano a DSC, or nano differential scanning calorimeter, that can heat about 10,000 times faster than a traditional DSC. DSC induces a lot of artifacts in the signal that we couldn't separate from the noise. We were able to see very clearly, the first time we heated the sample, this extra area corresponds to some sort of energy release. We then heated that same sample a whole bunch of times, and made sure that it was always the same, which meant we had a fully relaxed material. about how mass attenuation coefficients can get you out of apartheid South Africa. And then we'll move into dose and biological effects. I'm serious. I mean it. I really am serious. We're going to talk about this for a while. It's not just a joke. It can be used to help you get out of a bad situation. We'll talk about it for a long time. We've got a long way to go, but it's a start. I'll be in touch.