One banana contains a minuscule but measurable amount of radioactivity. To boost your confidence on any sort of radiation measurement, boost your signal strength or to boost your counting time. If you eat bananas, you're intaking a fair bit of radioactive potassium, which is a positron emitter, and also it does electron capture and all that fun stuff. To measure some count rate in some experiment, we'll put this in units of counts per minute, which would be the number of counts divided by the count time. detector when it's a certain distance away? So I've actually laser-cut out a little Geiger counter jig from a previous class. And you guys can all do this too. Anyone want to guess what the maximum value of the red curve is on the graph? Anyone want a guess on the distance from the source to the detector in meters? MICHAEL SHORT: A centimeter. Luke, do you know what the relationship is between dose and distance or measured activity and distance? formula would break down. What happens as r goes to 0? What happens to our solid angle or our approximation for our solid angles? AUDIENCE: Goes to Infinity. MICHAEL SHORT: It goes to infinity, right? Can a detector actually take up infinity area on, well, anything? Never mind that unit sphere. Never mind the thickness of the plastic. Nevermind the surface area of a unit sphere with radius of 1. Do you know how many of you have heard of solid angle before? Students take home about 50 pounds of bananas or 50 bananas-- I forget which one. The only thing you don't know is the activity of this bag of bananas. You're going to be able to measure the number of potassium 40 counts that the detector picks up. So this is just picking up all the gammas coming out of the bananas and everything else that happens to get through the banana and all on the weekend. So it'll take a while to let this count until Tuesday. Because, why not? And I don't feel like coming in over the weekend to do it. as a motivating example. Michael Short: "There's no better concentrated source of smoking radioactivity than a smoke shop" "How long would you actually have to bring a detector in and count in order to be sure that there's any sort of measurable difference?" "It's still late-stage. It's like town-to-town. Most of the Boston area is 21. But once you leave Boston-- "I don't think it is where I'm-- from Swampscott, I don't Think it's 21" the less certain you can be that the number that you're measuring is actually accurate. By counting for longer you can decrease your standard deviation. The more error you allow, the shorter time you have to count for. Count for more time in the background, and it takes less time to distinguish whatever is your source. So if you want to get to the uncertainty and confidence you want, you need to double your count time in order to get the confidence and the time from your background to get it. If you just add together the two standard deviations, you actually always get an overestimate of the true error. So in this case, that would be your worst case scenario, which is not your most likely scenario. What you actually want is to do what's called uncertainty in quadrature, where you actually add up the sum of the square roots of those errors. With enough statistics, if you count for long enough or you count enough counts, then these things, on average, are going to add in Quadrature. Michael Short: How do you know that we're 95% confident of our count rate plus or minus 5% error? That's the main question for today. We'll spend the rest of today's class taking apart that statement and getting at what it should be. We've got a nice relation now between the count rate and counts per minute, and the required time to get 5% uncertainty. So this is actually how you decide how long you have to sit in the smoke shop to count in order to satisfy what we asked for. radiation detector. How long do you have to be here, looking all weird? You want to have an answer. And so if you get some initial estimate of C g, you can tell him this is my approximate t g. So why don't we just start, divide by 2, right? Divide by 2. We can square both sides. And there's a C n there. Square both sides, and we end up with 0.000625 C n squared equals C b over t b squared plus C g over t g squared. Cobalt 60 gives off two gamma rays per second. Activity is measured in disintegrations, not in number of gamma rays emitted. So you've got to know what material you're looking at in order to know how many gamma or how many betas or more that you're going to get per disintegration. If you just add the errors up, you're probably overestimating the error and selling yourself short. The idea here is that, again, if you've looked at the chart of the nuclides, you can tell that there's all the sort of parameters you would need to calculate. There's not a whole lot to see in there. If you've never seen it, it's worth a look. You can't really see the crystal. The black part is just a carbon fiber window, because you don't want to cut off the low energy gamma. And the 23.9, you've got what the gammas are-- 685, 479. it's got a whole mess of gammas. So you could, knowing how big that peak is, calculate how efficient the detector is for collecting that peak. out the thermal noise. Because you're looking for really tiny little signals here, so you cool everything down. So that way, it's not too noisy. These guys are OK warming up. It doesn't destroy the detector. The old detectors you had to keep cold all the time. And if they warmed up, then they were just paperweights. So this is just the counting lab. I've got an actual sample counting in here right now. We'll take a look at the spectrum in a minute. Guys chemists at any point in your life? You all took some chemistry at some point? OK. So you've run a standard, which means a material that how much tungsten is in it or how much a whole mess of other things are. So I don't actually use the cross sections, or the flux, or any of that other stuff-- all of those parameters disappear. Notably, the detector efficiency disappears out of the equation, because that's the parameter that you usually have the funniest idea about. When you're running NAA, you really want to avoid having all these fast reactions. There's usually an up a valve and let more neutrons in. And when you get to the place where you want to be, you basically close that valve again. So you basically add reactivity and then stop that reactivity addition by bringing the absorbers back to about where they started from. When the rest of you sit down here, we'll guide you through those-- the log book entries that she's making and so forth. NAA has been doing NAAs since the '70s. The environmental side of this has kind of quieted down a lot. But it's still useful for a bunch of things. NAA is really good for rare earth elements, which are hard to measure by other methods. By picking out various rare earths and the ratios, it can help identify where things are from in the world. The full size of a lead brick is about 2 inches by 4 by 8 inches, weighs about 25 pounds. Fish samples that we actually did the fresh fish samples. And we had this kind of titanium blender-- you remember the Bass-O-Matic? We had this titanium blender that we dropped the fish in, and you completely homogenized the fish. And then you took a little sample of it, and freeze dried it and then analyzed it for mercury. And because we did a fairly short of radiation, after a while the activities died down and we gave the samples back. We found that it didn't correlate with the well water or how small it was. This is some soil from Montana next to a mine, so it's nicely contaminated with some metals. This is my IAEA mercury and hair standard. And this is kind of what everybody uses for standards. And you just kind of have a whole collection of them. And depending on what elements you're looking for, you try to mix and match them so you cover what you want without having to run five or six of them in one place. And so that's how I do the comparative method. well-- they say, is there anything dangerous in the reactor? The dangerous thing is dropping lead bricks on your feet. So I've got steel toast. If I miss the toe, I'd probably break my-- I don't want to think about it. Have you toured the reactor yet? AUDIENCE: [INAUDIBLE] MICHAEL AMES: So there's that giant crane there, and they move five-ton pieces a shielding. And that's the other dangerous thing in there, dropping really big things. The experiment is in two parts. The first is raising reactor power using a low worth absorber called a regulating rod. And the second part will be lowering reactor power with a high worth absorbers. To actually do this experiment, we need two licensed people in here, one at least has a senior reactor operator. The only way you can actually do these manipulations is if you're in my training program or in a program that needs you to actually operate the reactor. The experiment we're doing is basically change reactor power by half a megawatt. reactor is on autocontrol. And when we do these manipulations, the reactor operator is going to take manual control. That'll cause an alarm to come in. And this will only happen for the first time. And that should be the only time you hear this alarm, because we'll leave it on manual control until the final participant has done their manipulations. AUDIENCE: All right. I hope to get to 1 megawatt at 17.11 [INAUDIBLE].. FRANK WARMSLEY: OK. period meter, she's at a negative period, and the reactor power is decreasing. She's driving the absorber out again to slow down how quickly the power level is going down. When she's done, the shim blade will end up about at the same point where it started, the 13.42 inches out of the bottom of the core. It might not make it all the way back up to [INAUDIBLE]. It'll be close. Compensate with the reg rod if you need to.