Christine Hayes: Deuteronomy describes God's choice of Israel as the chosen one. She says Israel was chosen by Yahweh in an act of spontaneous love--;it does not imply her perfection. Hayes: Northern Kingdom Israel is going to come in for a very, bad press at the hands of the Deuteronomistic writers. Northern kings are going to be denigrated, she says, because they maintain cults that rival the central sanctuary of Jerusalem, and this is what does them in. Moses warns the Israelites: Don't be tempted to say to yourselves, "My own power and the might of my own hand have won this wealth for me" He emphasizes, it is only because the wickedness of the Canaanites is so great that the Lord has to drive them from his land, and now he is giving you a chance. But it is conditional for you, just as it was for them. Don't fail him or he will, he says. There is one proper response to God's mighty acts on behalf of Israel, and that is resolute observance of the book of the Torah of Moses. imagery, used for God and Israel, but we also have this parent and child imagery that appears. In Deuteronomy 32:10, the image is that of an eagle that bears its young on its wings. It almost seems to play on the idea that when teaching its young to fly, the eagle will push them out of the nest, swoop under them, bear them up for awhile over and over until they get the idea. The use of purity and purity language to inscribe boundaries between Israel and other nations is very characteristic of the post-exilic period. Deuteronomy is not simply the concluding book of the Pentateuch, or the story that began in Genesis. It's also the first part of a much larger, longer literary work, as I mentioned last time. The last dated event that is mentioned in 2 Kings is something that occurred in 562. So the work was probably concluded shortly after that date: so in exile or towards the end of the exilic period. The whole unit, as a whole, was redacted after 622: that's clear. There is a great deal of ideological baggage that is involved in the dating of the sources. The anti-priest, anti-cult sentiment is apparent in the history of biblical scholarship. P espouses a communal ethic, and post-exilic priests are going to turn increasingly to an individual ethic. Many sections of P do not seem to assume a central sanctuary. P contains no universal ban on intermarriage. It does not employ its purity laws or language to mark an inseparable boundary between classes within Israel. The Bible is divided into two parts: the "Former Prophets" and the "Latter Prophets." The Former Prophets include the books of Joshua, Judges, 1 and 2 Samuel. They read as a theologically oriented account of Israel's history from the conquest of Canaan to the destruction of the state by the Babylonians in 587-586 BCE. The Latter Prophets are a collection of books, each of which bears the name of the individual whose prophecies it purports to contain. thought that are evident from Joshua through 2 Kings. There is also a belief in the divine election of David as the king of Israel and his dynasty. In Genesis through Numbers none of the legal materials say: when you have a king this is what he shall do. It is only the book of Deuteronomy that assumes or prepares for a monarchy and contains legislation for a king, and the things that he should do. The other four books of the Pentateuch never mention a king. The formation of the nation state, Israel, was much more complicated than the picture that's presented in Joshua 2 through 12. Scholars have proposed three possible models to explain the formation of Israel. Archaeologists have, indeed, found several sites in the central hill country -- which is pretty exciting-- and they were clearly newly established in the thirteenth, twelfth, eleventh centuries. They extend throughout the land, but mostly the central highlands. And these are thought to be Israelite, especially because they appear in places that the Bible identifies as strongholds. The region was once controlled by Egypt at the purported time of the Exodus. It was also the site of many of the elements that went into the final mix that would emerge as the nation Israel. Archaeology supports this picture of merging of peoples, rather than conquest or even large-scale immigration. Some elements within this group may have brought with them the story of a miraculous escape from Egypt. They may have understood this to be the work of Yahweh, a god known probably from southern regions. Most bloody battles in Israel's history. Then next to that north-south central hill country, you've got also running north to south, what we call the Great Jordan Rift Valley. And the Jordan River runs through this valley. It rises in the Sea of Galilee or the Kinneret in the north, and then it flows about 65 miles, I believe, down to the Dead Sea. At the northern extreme of the Rift Valley, is Mount Hermon, which is the highest point. group that seems to join them. And then 10 and 11 give us two further military campaigns. In Joshua 10:40, we read: "So Joshua defeated the whole land, the hill country and the Negeb" And again, in verse 23, the insistence: "Thus Joshua conquered the whole country, just as the Lord had promised Moses" So Chapters 13 and 21 go on to describe the division of the land among the tribes and then we have some sort of tidying up at the end. In Judges, we read that they had not been captured: they were captured later, after Joshua's death. Archaeological evidence contradicts the picture in Joshua. Excavations at Jericho and Ai indicate that both of these towns were laid waste at least 200 years before the probable time of Joshua. Some of the sites that are said to be destroyed by Joshua and the Israelites weren't even occupied in this period, the late Bronze Age, beginning of the Iron Age. The Iron Age begins around 1200. to have been peasant farmers, like other Canaanites. One interesting difference is the absence of any pig bones, which is kind of interesting. But in any event, this suggests that these settlements were established peacefully, not by a group coming in and conquering. Maybe they emerged from within, rather than being established by peoples immigrating from without. The revolt model proposes that Israel began really as a social revolution within Canaan. Some have suggested that Israelites escaping from Egypt may have joined with these disaffected Canaanites in revolt. perhaps not exclusively, and adopted the national story of the Exodus as its own at some point. The Hebrew tribes, themselves, were likely still in the process of formation. But the tribal structure of Israelite society that would develop would be strengthened by the natural division of the land into these separate geographical areas. And these local tribes probably did assimilate elements of the local population. We've really seen already the ethnic mix of various elements reflected in religious imagery and institutions. We have seen that Yahweh is also represented in terms reminiscent of Baal of the Canaanite pantheon, the God of the settled Canaanite population. practice, which is known as herem or the ban, is not unique to Israel. There is a very important, famous inscription from the ninth century BCE, written by King Mesha of Moab. In the inscription he writes, he boasts: "And the god Chemosh said to me, go, take Nebo from Israel" It is likely that such claims are hyperbolic in Moab, and it is likely they were hyperbolics in Israel. But that does not lessen the shock value for a modern reader, even though war in our time is no less savage. to this when we reach the conclusion of the Deuteronomistic history in 2 Kings. To this we can refer to the end of the book of Deuteronomy as the beginning of the Book of Kings. We can also refer to 2 Kings as the "Book of the Kings" as the start of the "Deuteronomy" book of the Bible. The book is called "2 Kings" and tells the story of the reign of King David and his son, King Solomon.