Sales and watched by taxes is one of three different kinds of tax we're gonna have aggressive so with our regressive tax as people earn more income base they are attacked a smaller amount of smaller percentage of the rounding. So it's not the dollar amount it's gonna be obvious that everyone is must and a larger dollar amount in taxes their income goes up it's nothing down it's the percent of their income that you're spending that's what determines put the tax is regressive and what we see here is taxes. We have these marginal tax rates and say okay look as we earn a dollar from it some amount of that dollar is going to be paid in tax but that percentage that you're paying tax changes so let's assume that we made for $90,000 you're single and we wanted to know how much you pay. The difference here between 86 and 36 has been to thousands with $50,000 we've got 4,000 yes this guy is easy the decimal point four thousand five so 12,500 plus we're going to pay 18,000. want to penalize people for being married does that make sense right I mean society should not encourage people to do just shack up right exactly make sense of maybe that for least generally we've got what we're done matter so we know we don't want this that's not the answer is is that there is no answer you cannot devise but these are just kind of illustrates some of the problems that you have in developing the taxes. When we're looking at fiscal policy Keynes's. We can have for the government the revenue for them the taxes so we can say a budget deficit this is like food stamps. have a deficit the deficit is going to get larger or if you have a surplus what would happen in the surplus it'll get smaller by contraction fiscal policies exact opposite here. We have this new classical view of fiscal policy and we have those called the supply side now. What we'll see on Wednesday and what these guys actually do is change the way we think about fiscal policy. We can engage the fiscal policy that makes these guys change on purpose we can have it's called discretionary fiscal policy where we go out and we after the change times more government spending leather or making them rise Falls.