Jeffrey Grossman: We're going to talk about energy storage. He says the planet is kind of a storage device for that thing over there. Most energy storage needs are going to be around a year or less, he says. Grossman says electricity is more and more important in our lives. We'll go into batteries and then talk about the chemistry of batteries and throw in a couple of, why this matters, he writes..com/jeffrey-grossman/energy-storage-technique. Pumped hydro is extraordinarily limited. You have to do it at very large scales. You can convert energy into some fuel and store it and then combust it. This is what we're going to talk about today, electrochemical. There is an advantage about using electrochemistry, and what is electro-- I should tell you what that is, right, and it's the relationship between electricity and chemical reactions. I love saving time, rxns. Change not going from your computer to your phone but from your car to your house to a grid. Most power plants at best are around 50% efficient in terms of converting the thermal energy into electrical energy. Most of that gasoline's energy is going into waste. So you could do chemical reaction to heat. That's how we power most of our world today. There's a lot of reasons why electrochemical batteries are so appealing. No penalty on the second law is one of them. No pollution at the point of use. Also, the batteries can be charged by renewable technologies like solar wind. They're very highly efficient. a higher entropy? How many of you think it's the one on the right? So the thing is it'sThe thing is that entropy is not about smoothness and it's not about disorder. Entropy is about accessibility to states. It's about how many states you have to be in. A messier room does not have higher entropy, and in this case, it's just simply the rules of the algorithm. I have rules here about the dots being able to touch each other. That means that those dots had fewer possibilities. Little is a transfer of electrons from electrons to electrons, a process known as the electron transfer process. Little is a program that teaches people how to use electricity on a smaller scale. Today's episode of Little is the first in a series on the history of electricity. The second is a look at how electricity works on a grid scale, and how it can be harnessed for the benefit of the public. The third and final episode will be about how electricity can be used on a small scale to power a solar cell. Sun. You just press this and you can read at night, right. That doesn't happen unless you've got electrochemical energy storage, right, and there's some stats up here. $25 billion liters of kerosene are used to meet the basic lighting needs in a lot of these places. That releases tremendous amounts of toxic fumes. But you know, it's sort of the same as cooking. So the challenge is, but you don't cook. If you have a solar cooker, that's great except that most people don't cooking during the day. lots of metals. That's what he did. And he showed that the frog moved with most of them, so it's the metals. So let's take these two classic metals and show what happens. You've got copper and you've got zinc. Now, in this case, I'm just going to have a zinc. This is the zinc piece of metal, and this is a piece of zinc, and I put it in a solution of copper ions. And the copper in the solution plates onto the zinc, plus those 2 electrons goes to copper like that. You can use volt meters to make your own lithium-ion batteries. You can use paper clips and copper wire to connect different metals. You are the salt bridge, so what that means is you are actually plating and taking metals off of these two electrodes right now. Your hands are doing that and you're trading electrons. You're a conduit for that to happen, right. It's pretty cool, and you can play with these. You know, you have volt meters. You have lots of items on the table tomorrow maybe at a dinner. The power isn't coming from you as Galvani thought. No, the power is coming from the difference in potentials of those metals wanting or not wanting electrons. Everybody wants electrons, let's be honest, but who wants its more? It all comes back to the same stuff we talked about. The delta v is all about the chemistry. It's all about all of the things that we've learned, but at the core of all of this is how strongly are electrons bound to an atom, to a metal. The growth in solar and wind has been incredible over the last 10, 20 years. The problem, as I think I've shown you, is the variability. There's no way to use renewables at large scales unless you store it. You can't solve renewables at the scale of the grid without storage. And no option exists today. It might be batteries, but there's nothing that actually does it today at the scales that we need. And I hope you guys have a great Thanksgiving and maybe hook up some different metals.