Ka-Yen: Today, I'll be teaching you guys a little bit about nuclear energy. He'll talk about the functionality and the benefits and the problems associated with nuclear. Ka-yen: Most of this development happened between 1939 and 1945. He says he walked into MIT not knowing a single thing about nuclear power. He gives a brief history of nuclear energy and explains some of the different types of reactors that can be used to produce electricity. He ends the lesson with a list of questions for you to answer. In 1951, the first nuclear reactor to produce electricity was the experimental breeder reactor, the EDR1. The first nuclear powered submarine, the USS Nautilus, was launched in 1954. The real heyday of nuclear was between 1960 to 1975, during the span of 15 or so years, this was the real commercial energy boom. Currently, China, India, and South Korea, they are the main players in this game. The main reason why we're not using more nuclear power is because of safety issues. Nuclear creates 75 times less carbon emission than coal does, and 35 times less than natural gas does. Nuclear power is able to provide a good baseload source of energy. Building reactors takes billions of dollars and tons of time. Nuclear is not nearly as economic of a source of electricity generation as any other of these ones I mentioned, unless you talk to the UK, which thinks it's OK, but everyone else is saying that it's not as money efficient. If you guys have any questions about any of these topics, I recommend going to NRC piqued your interest. Most reactors in the United States are boiling water reactors, or BWRs. They are the cheapest option out there for creating nuclear power. The next kind of reactor that falls under the light water reactor category is the pressurized water reactors. Heavy water reactors use heavy water instead of light water, which has a much lower cross-section of neutrons than light water. It's actually kind of a bad thing because the whole point of nuclear reactors is to create fission to create heat and power. The fuel core is basically just a bunch of rods of uranium, sometimes it's clad in something like zirconium. Neutrons can simulate other fissions, and the control rods are there to make sure that there's not too many fissions happening in the fuel core at a certain time. The heat that gets guys calculated in pset 1 eV is 0.025 eV, which is super low energy. If one of the neutrons-- so imagine-- if you're looking at the little fuel core, there's a lot of neutrons flying around. Deuterium has a chance of absorbing less neutrons as it undergoes its processes, so you're able to use a lower enriched uranium. But deuterium is really expensive. It's about 1,000 or so dollars per kilogram, which is kind of ridiculous because a kilogram of water is really not much at all, you know? So even though you're counteracting the lower fuel costs with higher water cost, you actually have to change out your fuel more often. really bad happens. You'd have to have breaches in both the loops, which is very unlikely to happen. This is a very similar problem, as you can see that in all these instances of the reactor incidents, it's just kind of like the fuel core was misbehaving and we weren't able to get enough coolant water to it. So following the earthquake, these coolant pumps broke. They're like, oh, that's OK. What we can do is we have backup generators to continue running the pumps. Three Mile Island, Chernobyl, Fukushima are some of our biggest nuclear accidents. After a nuclear accident you can see a pretty steep decline in the amount of nuclear reactors that are being commissioned. People think that nuclear reactors are incredibly dangerous, which is why we aren't able to get government funding and government loopholes to jump through. Another issue with nuclear power is nuclear waste, and the main thing in nuclear waste is made out of uranium oxide, which gets transformed into uranium particles after a bunch of fissions. their equipment and their instrumentation wasn't able to detect that. So they continued to operate again but this valve was open, so there was actually water that was getting leaked out of this primary loop. So because the water wasgetting leaked, they noticed that, oh, shoot, the pressure is dropping. Well, what do you do when the pressure's dropping? Apparently you have to make sure that there's not too many vibrations that could damage the reactor. So now there's water leaking out so the core is getting hotter, but then they also took out the water that is usually used to cool the reactor core. So this combination of events led to a core meltdown. So the core melted down. No one really lives near Chernobyl at the moment. It's kind of been deemed unlivable because these radioactive isotopes literally went everywhere in this environment. Luckily we see that there are animals coming back now now. If you look on NationalGeographic.com there's like little deer roaming around Chernobyl. But it's been about-- how long has it been, like 30, 40 years? People aren't advised to live here still. So Chernobyl was terrible. So the you can see, it looks like it's sitting in a parking lot outside the reactor. So this is an OK solution. escaping because water is a really great neutron moderator. It turns out it's actually fairly safe. Apparently you can go swimming on the top of the reactor spent fuel pool and you'll be OK and not be exposed to too much radiation if you want. So yeah. This is the main solution that people have been using for years, but they realize that this isn't super sustainable. We have way too much spent fuel to be able to just continue to store it in these spent fuel pools. So the next solution was something called dry cask storage. Yucca Mountain is the primary push by the U.S. to find a deep geological repository somewhere in the United States. People in Nevada weren't happy about this, they're like, why are we getting tossed on nuclear waste? We don't even have nuclear reactors in Nevada. There was a lot of opposition. And because of the social opposition there was government opposition and many loopholes we had to jump through, and so it was just becoming a huge disaster. It's been abandoned, as you can see from this lovely Google picture, it's permanently closed. can I have a billion dollars to build this nuclear reactor? It's going to take five years to get your profit back. No investor is going to be like, yeah, that's a good idea. That's the main reason why we can't get nuclear up and running. If for some reason something happens, you have to stop building your reactor. Like, there's no turning back, right? If you look at this chart over here, which is breaking up the cost of nuclear energy per kilowatt hour, I believe-- gigawatt hour? Kilowatthour.