JUDY HOYT: Hopefully everybody's recovered from their Thanksgiving feast. What I'm showing up here is the schedule to orient us. This is lecture 22. We'll talk about silicides, device contacts, and I've added in a new material this year on novel gate materials. And then we have one more lecture, which is on strained silicon and silicon germanium growth and processing. Next week we have two class periods scheduled. There'll be four speakers in each. And those will be the oral reports and the student reports. how we make the structures and make good, electrical contacts and the device. This lecture is kind of the first link to the backend technology course. The contact itself is still generally considered part of the frontend because you're contacting the silicon. And then beyond, that everything is in the 6.773, which is the backend technology. So this is the rho Civeiveive lecture. We'll go through it at the beginning and how they compare now and how we do that next time. In the early days, if this was the drain or the source of a transistor, a MOSFET, people simply used aluminum. It's a very stable metal, and it makes good electrical contact to heavily doped silicon. The only other metal of consequence that has a lower resistivity is copper. Copper has a much high melting point. Copper, if it gets into silicon, can be a deep level. Copper oxidizes very readily, even at room temperature. But copper is the material of choice for today's interconnect. Aluminum has a finite solubility for silicon. The silicon actually gets sucked into the aluminum and causes this spiking effect. Today if you do this with any kind of reasonably shallow junction, when you go to heat the thing up to do the final forming gas anneal, you're going to spike the junction. The way people go today is to form what they call a barrier layer. It forms a barrier between this aluminum and the silicon. It still makes a good contact, but it cannot allow the aluminum or the silicon to talk to each other. An ohmic contact, or a tunneling contact, occurs when you can actually tunnel right through this barrier. And it tends to happen, particularly with aluminum and most metals, if you make the surface doping very high. The resistance of a given contact in ohms is just the voltage divided by the current flowing through that contact. And you can calculate it by rho sub C, which typically has units of ohm centimeters squared or ohm micron squared-- so it's got a units of resistance times an area. As I make the area the current goes through smaller, the resistance of that contact goes up. And this is a problem if I'm scaling devices. If I'm packing more and more devices on the chip, it means I want to make the total area occupied by every device smaller. But if I leave the contact resistivity the same, I don't do anything different about how we make the contact, then the area of the contact is going down. That means the resistance is going up as devices are scaled. A Schottky contact is governed by thermionic emission. So it's a thermionic process emitting carriers over this barrier. So if we change that barrier height, we can change rho sub C. So in fact, for a tunneling contact, if you go back to your quantum mechanics, you know that the tunneling current is exponentially dependent on those two quantities. And that happens when you make the doping high. So how do I make the depletion layer in the semiconductor, is very, very small. Rho C is not really scaling because of the doping electrical solubility limit. So the contact passivity doesn't scale as we shrink technology. This first was discussed by Ming and Lynch back in the late 80s. So our spreading is one that generally has to be computed either by a two-dimensional simulator or you have to get it out of test. It's a very two- dimensional problem. You can't calculate it by hand. So this that's called the RSP here in this little diagram. The resistance of the current just to flow through this contact is 100 ohms on the drain side. It's going to be 100 ohm on the source side, as do something to all these other parasitic resistances. So there are three resistances we really want to be able to think about. These back-of-the-envelope calculations are terrific because you can do them in five minutes in class or in 10 minutes in your office or whatever. You'll get three numbers, and you'll get you three numbers. Figures 11-35 show how the N plus diffusion structure is made. The dashed lines represent the metal level. This is going to take at least three masks to powder. And these little square regions with the X's going through them are the contacts. So that's the region where one layer contacts the layer above it or below it. And you get 3.2 times 10 to -7 ohm centimeter squared. It's still about a factor of 2 too high, but it just gives you an idea. same probe points? And the reason you do this is because you don't want to have extra contact resistance, say, of your probes going down. And there's always a voltage drop there. So you just divide the voltage drop divided by the current. And that gives you a resistance number. In fact, that's 32 ohms. And by definition, that’s equal to rho C divided by. the area of the contact, so you can solve for rho. C here. it is oxide. These are 5 by 5 micron holes. These were annealed by rapid thermal processing. And then the aluminum layer was removed just to see what happened. This was aluminum directly in contact with silicon at 10 minutes at 425. You can see it's created all these voids. There's a solubility of silicon in aluminum. Silicon from the substrate has actually gone up into the aluminum. And it leaves behind voids, which end up being filled by the overlying aluminum. When you etch the aluminum off, you see all these holes. The materials, titanium and tungsten, have reasonable contact resistivity. They are still not low enough to meet a lot of the ITRS requirements in the future, but today they're good enough. Slide 26 shows you some of the different uses of silicide in silicon technology. And at the end, I've added a few slides that show you that people are actually using silicides as metal gates. They put it back in the back in RTA and they pop it up to 800 or 900 or 900 to form anneal. a conformal layer of SiO2, say low temperature oxide, and then you etch it back anisotropically. You end up with these little stringers on the edges, which we call sidewalls. So they're going to form sort of a blocking region, which will be critical in the salicide process. We then deposit metal, M, over everything. So you can do some kind of PBD deposition. And here's your titanium layer that goes everywhere, obviously across the whole wafer. that does not etch the silicide itself. We've created a material, a titanium di silicide or a metal disilicide, that because of the virtue of its chemical structure, it now stands up to the etch, which will remove the unreacted metal. Big problem with nickel is you have to be careful of your thermal budget. Nickel is a very fast diffuser, remember, in silicon. Nickel contamination of equipment and of the wafers is an issue. But nickel silicide is becoming more and more prevalent in research and development. it's not that thermally stable. Industry moved a number of years ago primarily from Ti-silicide, although some people may still use it, to cobalt bisilicide. Cobalt has a little less lateral encroachment over the oxide spacer. So cobalt was used and is still used in some processes. The latest silicide that people are exploring in research and development-- and at some point will probably be in production-- is nickel silicide. Nickel silicide has the lowest silicon consumption. Nickel silicide can be used to make a better gate material than Ti-silicide or platinum. It's not as simple as using the old fashioned salicide process where the thickness that you silicide on the gate was the same as the thickness you went in the source and drain. But it's not quite as complicated as completely replacing the gate in the etch-out process. FUSI gates are also interesting, just because it's a little easier to integrate the processing. Poly is an extremely easy material to integrate. People know how to etch it. It's not reactive with SiO2. That's not the case for metals. A metal has 10 to the 23rd.centimeter. So they want to remove the semiconductor from the gate. They would like to replace the poly with a gate, with a metal gate. The problem with poly, as we've mentioned, is it doesn't have enough carries. It tends deplete. So people want to use metals. did, they get a reasonably smooth interface. This is a device that has some advantages, although it's a little tricky to make. It's a double gate device. You end up getting two channels in this thin silicon film. So they may have FinFET and they demonstrated they could make a nickel silicide gate going all the way around that fin. In fact, this is the gate dielectric shown here, this amorphous-looking region with Nickel silicide on the outside.