Jonathon Gruber: What stops people from bingeing on everything? It's their budget constraint. He says budget constraints can help with a lot of kind of decisions in life. Grubers: How do you determine your marginal rate of transformation? He says we're going to answer that question very explicitly in a lecture next week, and then we'll talk about why changes from price changes differ from income changes and what are the underlying mechanisms behind that. He ends the lecture with an example of food stamps. budget has to be divided between pizza, where there's the price per slice of pizza times the number of slices of pizza, or cookies. The budget constraint represents-- the budget constraint, the slope of the budget constraints, is the price ratio. Every extra cookie that you buy, holding your income constant, lowers the amount of pizza you can have by p sub p. The rate at which you can trade off pizza for cookies is minus 1/2, OK? That is every additional cookie would require giving up half goes from $12 up to $18. The more you spend on one, the less you get of another. By having more of one, we're getting less of the other. The marginal benefit to you of another cookie relative to another pizza is higher than what the market will charge you to turn pizza into cookies. Weight Watchers has taken this principle to heart to develop the best method of weight loss in America, which is Weight Watcher's. The rate at which you are willing to give up cookies for pizzas-- I'm sorry, let me say it a better way. Jonathon Gruber: Weight Watchers sets up a budget constraint and asks you to follow it. He says they assign point values to every good you might consume. People like to have choices, and they like to let choice drive things, he says. GrubER: If people knew best to do this, then there'd be no reason to do it. It's paternalistic, but in this case, it might make sense, Grubers says. He ends by saying, "Let's change the label on the y-axis, just a small change" changed, only the other price. So it's a pivot inward. The other thing here, you'll notice we have all these funny dots and stuff, OK? That represents what has happened to what we call your opportunity set. Your opportunity set is the set of choices available to you given your income and market prices. So your chance set initially was the black dots plus the red dots. Now your opportunitySet has shrunk. Your chance set is now just theblack dots. Given your income, you can now get less stuff, same amount of cookies, but less pizza. math in a little bit, and you'll do more math in section on Friday, OK? But, essentially, you can solve-- we'll show you-- you'll drive on Friday how you take this utility function and literally can draw the indifference curves from it. And what we see is that point D is the furthest out indifference curve you can achieve while still meeting your budget. And, therefore, we say that the optimum, graphically, is the tangency between your indifference curve and your budget constraint is the optimal constrained bundle. The marginal utility of pizza is 1 over square root of 10. The marginal rate of substitution is minus 2.5. That is a meaningful concept. Utils are not, but that is that. So we only care about it in ratios. So let's do the marginal Utility of cookies. That's dU dC, which is 0.5 times P oversquare root of P times C, which. is 2. 5 over the squareroot of 10, OK? That's the marginal utility. Jonathon Gruber: You are willing to give up 2.5 slices of pizza to get one cookie. He says the market is saying we'll let you have a cookie for half a slice of pizza. GrubER: Eat less pizza. Eat more cookies. That will unambiguously make you happier, he says. The whole course is fundamentally all about one equation, which is marginal benefits equals marginal costs, Grubers says. "Consumer theory is all about this balancing act," he adds. Jonathan Gruber: Why not just give people cash? Why not give them food stamps? Gruber asks: Why does it make no difference for person y if I give him food stamps or cash? He shows you graphically how we think about the trade-off, and then we'll come to the answer. Gruber says the marginal benefit is the MRS. The marginal cost is theMRT, and we want to set them equal. He says if you get food stamps, you have to spend at least $500 of your money on food. Jonathan Gruber: People always get to the point that makes them happiest. He says if you force them to spend $500 on food, they must be less happy. Gruber says people would rather spend some of that money and find a nicer place to live, but we're not letting them. He asks: Do people understand the graphics here and the conclusions I drew? Do people-- I don't want to-- I just want to know if people understand what I'm talking about. Jonathon Gruber: If the taxpayers' goal is to help poor people, then why shouldn't you make them as happy as possible? He says in developing countries, the answer seems to be just giving people cash makes them better off. Grubers: Evidence is starting to pour in that it might not be worth it because there's starting to be a lot of experiments where we're giving people just cash, especially in Africa in particular, some in the US, he says. women up nine years later. The effect had totally gone away. They're not worse off, but it looks like, at least what in the short run made them better off, well, that effect fades over time. But the bottom line is, at this point, I think the evidence is sort of probably in favor of being less paternalistic and just giving people cash, but that runs into a lot of difficulties in terms of our concerns about how people will spend it. So let me stop there.