The ability to assign thoughts or internal mental states to other people is called theory of mind. This ability has been studied from relatively simple perceptual phenomena to understanding some of the most complex, abstract ideas that we ever encounter. The ability to think about other people as containing internal mental lives, mental representations, is called social cognition. This is the ability to represent what somebody else thinks and separate it from the state that you were doing while you were using your mind. It is a very simple way of encapsulation of the world. FMRI is a way to study the mind in many different ways and contexts. In an experiment, people were asked to make a moral judgment of a character. The more wrong it was, the higher their hand went. The right TPJ is selectively involved in theory of mind, and so selectively depends on all the experiments I didn't show you. It has many important dimensions. This is a story about a parachute, for example, for a faulty parachute. Within that story, there's all kinds of things going on. There's a really important difference between thinking about what you know, what you see, and what you think-- versus states like what you want and how you feel. This problem was set up as kind of a litmus test for our ability to think about other people's minds, starting in the late '70s and coming out of comparative psychology. We and many, many other groups that tried this in many different ways found a whole group of brain regions where metabolism or blood oxygenation is higher if you're thinking about others' thoughts. A three-year-old is asked, "Which sandwich is he going to take?" and he says, "I want my cheese sandwich" The task is called passing the false belief task. The child correctly predicted that Ivan would take Joshua's sandwich. But the knowledge the kid is bringing to bear is a way richer than just his correct prediction and includes him, in fact, trying to stop me in the story to warn me of what's coming. The task became so famous is that not all participants perform the same way. modern techniques in fMRI to try to get further. This is partly because I think it's interesting what we've learned. But it's mainly because you guys might not actually want to know about theory of mind. And so I'm going to focus on three ways to use modern techniques infMRI to study interesting representations in the human mind. I'm hoping that either you'll learn something about Theory of mind or something about how you could use fMRI. to pursue your own interests. words, to know they are words in English, to put them together in sentences, and then to make a response by pushing a button. So we're using everything from your eyes to your fingers and most of the brain in between. And then the question is, the part that required you thinking about thoughts-- is there any sense in which that's special or different from the whole rest of the logical and cognitive capacity of your brain? So to ask that question we designed a control condition in which you similarly read stories that involve something that was true and becomes false. Sally Kohn: People make moral judgments by reading different stories. She says studies have looked at how different stories affect different parts of the brain. Kohn says theories of mind and social cognition don't reveal much about this dimension of mind, she says. The results of these studies can be used to help people make better moral judgments, Kohn writes, but they're not represented in the right TPJ and they vary across people across the country and around the world, she adds. MVPA is a technique for getting more information from fMRI data. It's an analysis of thinking about data, not a way of getting data. MVPA could be used to rediscover all of the things Nancy already discovered using the traditional analyses. If you're not careful, what you will do is just re-go over old territory with new math. I am more interested in these techniques when they let us see things we could never see before. The reason why I think MVPA is giving a new life to fMRI is because many of the most interesting questions about cognition and cognitive science that we wanted to answer are now possible. V1 is called V1 because information goes from your eyes to the LGN of your thalamus. It's the first cortical stop of visual information. One way that we know that it's very involved in vision is that if you're seeing visual stimuli, you get a big response in V1. But that misses pretty much all the interesting contributions that visual cortex makes to vision. We want to know what transformations over the information coming from LGN is V1 implementing-- what computational transformations, what representations. fMRI that V1, for example, has an orientation map, that neurons in V1 have an orientation preference. And the answer in standard analyses is-- no, you can't, because V1 as a whole will activate to big images regardless of the orientation of the content of the image. You need to be able to say there are different subpopulations of neurons inside V1. And it's the relative activity in those two populations that would let you say, is the line like this, or is it like that? MVPA is a brain-computer interface that allows scientists to manipulate the way people think about things. In an experiment, scientists manipulated people's mental states to make them think about different things. They found that when people read different stories about knowing and unknowing harm, their brains reacted differently to the stimuli. The researchers are now trying to find out if this is a real phenomenon or just a result of the way they've done the experiment in the past. They hope to use the technique to help people understand the difference between intentional and accidental harm. Haxby style correlations were the first form of MVPA introduced, and they were introduced by Jim Haxby in 2001. The idea is, take a region you care about and ask this basic question. For some future that I wonder if it's represented, is the correlation across neural responses more similar when the stimuli share that feature? So that it differs across regions. So we could show that this was present in the right TPJ but not present in other regions. And that's a bunch of stuff you would want to know. knowingly murder than to unknowingly murder. But there is variability in how much worse. Some people think that basically what you thought you were doing is all that matters in these stories, whereas other people think both of those things matter. So there's individual variability. And one thing that we can look at is, how does the individual. variability in the behavior relate to the individual variability in. the representation of knowing harm compared to unknowing harm? And then relate that to, while you were reading that story, how different were the patterns in your brain. gives you a pretty robust measurement, because you're using all the voxels in the region to get one number out. In this case, it can be sensitive to pretty minimal stimulus variations. As I showed you, this is a two- to four-word variation on an 80-word story. So it's sensitive to small distinctions in the stimuli. Here we showed that it generalizes. So we used totally independent stories in the train and test set. It gave us a measure that was stable within a participant in the sense that the measure in each individual related to that individual's behavior. something compared to one set of stories about hearing something. The stimulus set had another distinction in it, which is whether the thing is good or bad that's happening to you. And so in the right TPJ, what we found is that stories about seeing are more similar to other stories aboutSeeing. And stories about Hearing are more like other stories when you cross that feature. And we've actually found this a whole bunch of times. The rightTPJ doesn't care about valence. Other regions do.