"Between the Folds" is on PBS Tuesday at 8 p.m. ET. Professor: Today we're going to talk about a variation of generic rigidity. He says the idea is we think about rigidity-- does a linkage move or not-- to the first order. "I just wanted to say goodbye to Eric Joisel, who died on Sunday, sadly," he says. "Between theFolds" will be on PBS at 9 p.M. ET on Tuesday. In the book, we take the derivatives. We work out all the details. But I'll just tell you what the condition is, because ultimately all we need is this condition. What we care about is the nullity. This is the space of motions-- infinitesimal motions. And this thing is the number of freedom. And it turns out these will always be equal to d times n in summation. And what this is telling us is the rank of a matrix. In two dimensions, there's three rigid motions. Those we're getting rid of. vertex v and vertex w on the graph. This is a vector C of v minus C of w. The right part has no real intuitive meaning, but it involves this thing-- some velocity vector for w-- and the velocity vectors for v. So this is a linear equation. The fancy way to write this is as a matrix equation, if you want. So we have a whole bunch of these constraints, one for every edge. And whenever you have a bunch of linear constraints, you can write them as R-- some big matrix-- times the velocity. The set of all infinitesimal motions is the null space of that matrix, also known as the kernel of the matrix. If you have a matrix, you take its rank-- which is another quantity-- and you add them together, it will be the number of columns in your matrix. In two dimensions, that is 2n minus 3. So this is telling us something we already knew, but essentially for free, which is kind of fun, if you know all this linear algebra. of generic, which was that you forbid all non-trivial polynomial or algebraic rational equations on your points, which is very messy and infinite and hard to think about. OK, for this definition we need the notion of a minor. So there's a whole bunch of minors, but it's only finitely many. It's exponential. You take all the minors of your rigidity matrix. And here I'm imagining the complete graph, so there's tons of edges. There's n choose two edges. So this'll be independent linkage. Tensegrity is a generalization of a linkage and where we allow three kinds of edges. We can have cables, which can decrease, but it can't increase, and there are struts, which are the reverse. All these struts are preventing is compression. They don't prevent expansion. So that's the thing we want to model. This is a tensegrity. It's a geometric condition, if you will, that each vertices is stationary. That is the notion of being in equilibrium. This is a tensegrity. What I want to prove is that this is flexible. If I can prove that it's always flexible, well, until everybody's straight or convex-- all the outermost are-- then I have proved this. So we're going to prove this theorem in, like, five minutes-- easy. It even gives you an algorithm for doing that, which we'll talk about next. We use just, is this thing rigid or flexible at all? And that's the power of all that's just telling whether something can move. dot product, and I claim this is really measuring-- it's a number, and it's measuring the sign's change in length of that edge. So if C of v minus C of w dot product with d of v plus d of w is greater than or equal to 0, that's the property I want for struts. That says it gets longer or stays the same to the first order. Now of course, in reality it might get slightly shorter, but not in the first derivative. All you need to know is it there are fast algorithms to solve this, also. The equilibrium condition is that if I take the sum over all vertices w, where v w is an edge, the weighted vector C of v minus C of w-- so I forgot to mention we're assuming we have some configuration of our tensegrity.bar, I don't care-- could be positive, or negative, or zero. Let me draw a picture. I'll draw a real example, how's that? Here's a rigid linkage. I'm not going to say yet which edges are struts and cables. In some sense, I can do that later. A spiderweb is something where every edge is basically a cable. All of the edges can have a positive stress, and it will be in equilibrium. In spiderwebs, in fact, this is the same-- these two-- rigidity and positive stresses are the same thing. Here's a little example of an origami tessellation, this fold by Jenny [? Ramsier ?], just the one I had hanging around in my office. Let me hold it up to the light. It looks pretty cool. origami tesselations since the mid '90s. Chris Palmer revitalized them, and then tons of people are looking at them. And there's this cool algorithm for building them. So you take some tessellation like these squares, and triangles, and hexagons. You shrink all of them a little bit, but all by the same amount. And then you just connect the dots. And that's your crease pattern. Now the question is, when does this work? This algorithm has been around forever. Professor: I can define what's called a polyhedral lifting. Polyhedral lifting is going to be an assignment of z-coordinates to the vertices. Because I forbid crossings, I end up decomposing space, and this only works in two dimensions. All I need to prove is that every polyhedron lifting is flat, so we're going to prove this theorem by contradiction. Student: What if you have one of those diagonals and switch it to be in relation to each other [INAUDIBLE] thing you can do-- there's some freedom here. If you have any lifting or, for example, you could not lift them at all. Set all the z-coordinates to zero. That's fine. You could also just lift everything onto some other plane, and generally have a rigid motion of freedom. Now, this is a lot like stresses-- in fact, it's identical to stresses. It's not a big connection, but it turns out they really are the same thing for non-crossing configurations. A linkage is locked if its configuration space is disconnected. If I have some configuration here, I can move to any other configuration here. But there's no way to get from this configuration to that configuration. They're disconnected from each other. So this would be kind of sad news if you're looking for motions. It means you cannot get from everywhere to everywhere. There are some locked configurations that cannot get back to start. The Carpenter's Rule Theorem is about one case of that. It says that if we have a linkage, and say we take a configuration of that linkage, then there's a motion of the linkage that straightens out. For convex cycles, it's a little less obvious, but it's also true. There's one catch which I didn't say here. I need to add outermost. When you have nesting like this, you're in trouble. This guy is not going to get straightened out. It could be super long. It may not have room to straighten out inside that convex chamber. So these guys will come along for the ride, but they won't actually getting straightened. The outermost guys will get straightening and convexified. why is it called the Carpenter's Rule Theorem? Because this is a carpenter's rule. So if you've never played with one, this is what people used before flexible measuring tape. They still use them a lot in Europe, but not so much in the US, but you can still buy them at the hardware store. That's it. So there you go. It's just like a carpenters rule. But as far as we know that doesn't make this theorem any easier to prove.