Al shalot is the CEO of GT Sports. He is also a member of the Olympic commission the international Olympic Comm. He has been involved in the conception and Advising the I on what's not public the Olympic sports games. He says it's a huge moment because we now know there is going to be an official OlympicsEsports event. He also says there's room for new events in addition to the current Olympic events. He believes there's a clear opening for mobas games like League of Legend. There might have been some people who were quite hard to persuade I did nothing the they they came to us with the intent with the the decision with the motivation to do something special for gaming and orts. It's part of the agenda strategic agenda 2020 plus 5 to connect with the audience the youth audience where they are and to leverage gaming and Esports to do that so it was strategically cited and we're just part of a discussion about how to implement it. For me it's a very satisfying solution to believe that now Esports will be at the same level as winter and summer olympics. The Asian Games officially added League of Legend and other games on their list. The local authorities in in Saudi are very passionate and very supportive for eorts. PC always brought the idea to bring a property and events to a country to create some bridges. There's been a lot of criticism about Saudi Arabia as a host. Some LGBT players uh women saying that they don't feel like they'd be welcome. Are you expecting to have those kind of conversations with some of the national Olympic committees and at the very least is that something that came up? Competition and as you can as you probably know poetry is no longer on the official program so I think uh it's totally possible that in the future uh finding the balance as always between popularity relevancy and a certain fit with the values that the Olympic Committee wants to project this kind of game will be futureed but it we we have we have advanced so fast in the last few years to come to there's no way Sports would be ever with Olympics to we're GNA have a dedicated competition. far we have 50% of the players globally that happens to be women when they play video games and then when you go to the pro stage and the high level of competition and World Cup and things like that less than 0.00001% happen to be wound so we failed them maybe because we we didn't do all job in terms of education and they have a lot of like like toxicity. Maybe because we don't give them enough chances at G2 we created teams we provide them the same support from a staff point of view. Olympic opening ceremony will be similar to the summer and winter games. There will be something you know with a flag ceremony probably at the beginning. I think it's going to make a huge difference of like touching emotionally people that have not been touched so far by easts. I'm French so I I will cheer for the the national team. I don't know the kind of details of what opening ceremony there's Going to be um but if it's like the summer games there'll be something like that. of League of Legend uh potentially with one of my players on representing my country uh playing against the Spanish team we have been dreaming of this like France against Spain with the best player of the World for years. I think you know to see some of the players that we selected when they were underage that we help become the best version of them themselves as athletes being selected to represent their country wherever the country. We've got lots of events in Esports already what makes this one different I think the main thing is this idea of national teams like it's in the DNA of Olympic games. "Everybody wants to see what a dennish team will do against Corin I I would love to see it too you know so um I've seen a lot of players making the the guess or what the team could look like so his aspiration to be part of is is clearly part of the discussion," he says. "You follow a bit like the conversation about but uh rocket league and OverWatch back in the days at the at the World Cup for for their game and and and League of Legend also often have this conversation about creating the Euro Cup or World Cup"