As a nurse we will transfuse a patient who is low on red blood cells with new blood cells via a venous access of some type. Red blood cells are very vital for our survival and how our body works so in other words our body can't function very well without them. Most hospitals require that you're a registered nurse in order to transfuse the blood so again follow your Hospital protocol with that. You can access the free quiz that will test you on this procedure so let's get started. past and if they have how many because if they're at risk for febrile nan hemolytic transfusion reaction where their body has just built up these antibodies from all those previous transfusions and they can start running a fever. A lot of times physicians like to pre medicate them and you'll want to let the physician know if they do have a history of that. Sometimes they're pre-medicated with benadryl or Tylenol acetaminophen before hand orally or when about 30 minutes before you start the transfusion and that will help prevent that. transfuse blood you use special tubing which is called Y tubing with an inline filter which helps filter some of those substances out of the blood before it actually goes to the patient. A lot of protocols say only one set of Y tubing per unit that you transfuse so you'll have to you're going to transfuse the patient with more than one unit multiple sets or some hospitals say it's only good for four hours so keep that in mind when you need to change your filter your tubing next you'll want to grab a bag of normal saline 0.9% normal saline. like that you want to use a special device if need be next before you even start the transfusion you're gonna be doing this verification process. If there's a discrepancy you'll need to notify the blood bank immediately and just from personal experience this has happened with one of my patients I was doing the whole verification process with another nurse and we were looking at the blood bag. There was one letter that they had did a clerical error on so I had to send the blood and we had to go through the whole process again. breath headache backache or nausea and vomiting and if this happens you'll immediately want to stop the transfusion okay now it's actually time to start the transfusions so you're gonna have your blood ready hung and it's going to be controlled by an infusion pump which will deliver it to the patient. You want to start  slowly about two milliliters per minute for those first 15 minutes in addition you want to stay with that patient at their bedside looking at them monitoring them. A 418 is your patient saying I have a backache all of a sudden or I'm having chest pain or my head is hurting that's a red flag c-4 chills t4 tachycardia especially if it's really increased from baseline I for increased respirations same thing with that increase from baseline oh for all glory. You really want to be looking at your patients urinary output during this blood transfusion and after are they putting out low or are they just putting out no urine at all are they an Urich. graft-versus-host disease and again like I said this is rare but it's deadly and it tends to occur days to weeks after the transfusion. This is where the donors T lymphocytes cause an immune response in the recipient but actually in grasping in the marrow of the recipient and attacking the recipients tissue. Other complications that can arise that really aren't immune related it's like septicemia where the blood is contaminated so these T lymphocyte are usually killed by the recipients body but however maybe the patient has a suppressed immune system. diuretics also some labs are going to be ordered they want to look at those claudine levels because remember if this is hemolytic type. You'll be collecting urine urine on them looking for the free hemoglobin that's came from those red blood cells I have lysis and whenever you are disconnecting your tubing over here do not throw it away don't throw any of it away because you'll be sending that one with the leftover blood and any other documentation to the blood bank who's going to test it. the patient is currently doing okay so that wraps up this review over blood transfusion. thank you so much for watching don't forget to take the free quiz and to subscribe to our channel for more videos. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from. Click here to read the full transcript of the blood transfusions video. Back To the pageyou came from, click here to watch the full video. CLICK HERE to see the full Transcript of the Blood transfusion Video.