Professor: In almost all cases when you address atoms, you do two photon courses because a photon is scattered. Professor: If you have any doubts about some subtleties about how is light absorbed and emitted, the correct answer is always obtained from the two-photon picture. He says 99% of the research in our field is actually in the form of Raman processes, but pedagogical reasons for having a single photon are actually in our favor. The course is part of MIT OpenCourseWare, a free online education program. Professor: How many terms do you get if you write down the Hamiltonian? No approximation without. How many do we get? Professor: Four. We have four terms because we have combinations of omega 1 and omega 2. Professor: We have only one term, which dominates out of those four. It's one term-- the near-resonant term-- which dominates, he says. The only difference is that instead of having a coupling between one photon and another, we have one photon going up and down. be written as the sine squared divided by this, and it turns into a delta function times t. And when we divide the probability, the amplitude squared by t, we get a rate. And this is Fermi's Golden Rule. It is exactly the same you have seen probably more than 100 times. So therefore, we have now a transition rate. This is the delta function. I called it the function f because I want to discuss the spectral profile a minute. Any questions? Yes. because we have arranged our two levels a and b in such a way that the near-resonant process is that one. If you use a fully quantized picture with a and a degas, the a for the quantized description becomes an e to the i omega t. In the semi-classical description of the a dega has a minus sign. So therefore, if you look at all the combinations between plus and minus, for this Raman process we want to select e. In general, I would say if you have more than one process, there is no interesting interference term. You just get two different rates. One is the two-photon Raman rate and the other one is two- photon absorption rate. And you just have both simultaneously. They're not leading to the same final state. And this may have some detrimental effect, depending what you want to do. But we'll discuss some of those things in our next chapter on coherence. The energy of this state is where the dashed line is. It's not the energy of the real state k. The stepping stone is created with the first photon. What is its character? Spatial bay function and such? Well, it is exactly the intermediateState k. And what is the population? If you had a two-level system, we sort of start with 100% amplitude in state 1. But here, our population is diminished by the probability at which we have it admixed the state. The first form of coherence I want to discuss is the coherence involved in exciting atoms and the atom emitting light. It's related to the spontaneous emission and scattering problem. There is a certain randomness in spontaneous emission when we go to the laboratory and look at the spontaneously emitted photons. This is what is really the information-- the phase information-- which we have in a photon, which has been spontaneously emitted. There may be situations where we have a laser beam which has a well-defined phase and we just cannot retrieve the laser beam by looking at the photons. This kind of spontaneous Raman process-- has been very important historically. Before the advent of lasers, all you had is light bulbs, strong light bulbs. You couldn't really resonantly, you know, stack up two light bulbs and have enough spectral power to excite to a certain state. But look here-- you could still, with a strong light bulb, create an admixture of the excited state. This virtual line was terribly broad because of the width of the light bulb-- spectral width-- but then this spontaneous photon was just compensating for it. atom which has no motion. We are now saying, OK, now we allow the atom to move. And we can deal with that by simply saying when the atom has a velocity v, we can transform-- we can The momentum transfers are the same. And if we arrange for the two photons to be absorbed from opposite directions, we reach the situation where the Doppler shift is really zero. So this is the way where we do two-photon spectroscopy. This is one of the handful of methods of practical importance for eliminating the first order Dopple shift. just use the Galilean transformation and say OK, the physics is the same. However, the atom, due to its velocity, sees a slightly different frequency. But now, we calculate our Lorentzian by using the frequencies perceived by the atom. The different signs-- plus minus-- are, of course, distinguishing whether we have two-photon absorption or Raman process. And the frequency shift, going into the frame of the atoms, gives us Doppler ts k1v and k2v.  helium has not replaced hydrogen. It's still hydrogen. But this sort of tells you what the choices if you want to test fundamental physics or determine fundamental constants. In all atoms other than helium and hydrogen, you would be limited by the infeasibility of many electron calculations. And the one thing we have to discuss on Wednesday is the whole of the phase phi. Phi-- we started out by phi being the phase of the laser. And if the laser is in a coherent state, we can measure phi to any accuracy you want. you had the second spontaneous emission, I just want to clarify. So in the past, all this time when you were talking about off-resonant single photon scattering, was this actually, really, the more descriptive picture or was there actually a different physical-- PROFESSOR: No, this is off resonance scattering. And if you ask me, when do you have a situation where you first absorb the photon and then emit it, I would say, I'd like to know that. Coherence exists if there is a well-defined phase between two or more amplitudes, but we can only observe it if those amplitudes interfere. Coherence is important because coherence photons can't come out of a unitary time evolution. What is the randomness or this loss of phase of spontaneously emitted photons? Is it due to performing sort of a partial trace ever-reaching over certain states? So if you're interested in the photon, maybe tracing out the states of the atom. Or ever-reach over modes of the electromagnetic field. And question C is both is both. atomic wave function is this. The excited state-- let's just assume the photons are in resonance. We know how to deal with off resonant lasers. So therefore, the phase evolution is e to the i omega naught t. But now, and this is what coherence is about, there is a very specific phase. And this phase phi comes from the laser. If you excite the atom with a laser beam but it has a phase shift, then the atomic wavefunction is phase shifted. over, the photonic part of the wave function is a vacuum. We have no photon in our cavity. And now we wait and we allow spontaneous emission. And spontaneous emission is nothing else than the time evolution with the operator I just discussed with you. So after spontaneous emission, well, one is we know for sure the atom is in the ground state. And so we have now our knowledge from the vacuum Rabi oscillation that this part ofthe wave function does nothing. And the excited state with zero photon will actually do Rabiscillation. it appears mapped into a two-level system for the photons. But if we are now doing a measurement either on the atomic system or on the photonic system, we are limited in the accuracy at which we can retrieve phi. This is what I referred to as the fundamental limit of spontaneous emission because we have not lost any coherence here. It's just if the phase is only imprinted in one particle-- one particle quantum physics sets us a limitation. OK. Any question? To be continued on Monday.