Professor: We're going to look at this unitary time evolution and calculate this operator u, given the Hamiltonian. Then we will look at the Heisenberg picture of quantum mechanics. Professor: The way we think there is a Schrodinger picture that we developed in which we have operators like x, p, spin, Hamiltonians and wave functions. And then we are going to define a new way of thinking about this, which is called the He Eisenberg picture. And we'll discuss that. We'll find the Heosenberg equations of motion and solve them. So our goal today is to find U given H, because as we mentioned last time, for physics it is typically more easy to invent a quantum system by postulating a Hamiltonian. So the first thing I'm going to do is multiply this equation by u. This operator is unitary, so u dagger u is one. So we have plus U dagger Hs dU dt, so U. Well, that's bad. It's actually quite nice. And then the last term, which I have very little to say, this is a dependent operator. Partial respect to time, it would be 0 if it depends, just say, on X, or Sx, or any of those things. The Schrodinger equation is there. OK so now let's solve this. We'll go through three cases. Case one, h is time independent. So H of t is really H like that. No explicit time dependence there. So what do we have? ih bar d dt. Let's write dU dt is equal H times U. And we tried to write a solution of the form U use equal to e to the minus iHt over h bar times U0. Does that work? A little time dependence is an idea, the sign to make it possible for you to solve the equation, even though it has some time dependence. So you could have Hamiltonians that are time dependent, but still have a simplifying virtue. So if you have a magnetic field that is fixed in one direction but change in time, you can have a situation where your Hamiltonian is time dependent but still at different times it commutes. But later on as we do nuclear magnetic resonance, we will have the more interesting case. If the Hamiltonian were to be time independent, you could take it out. That brings you back to this case, so this looks reasonable. But here is the claim R dot commutes with R. Claim R dot and R commute. Well, R dot depends on H. And R is an integral of H as well, but the H at different times commute anyway. So this must be true. There's no place where you can get a contribution, because R dot is like an H. on the other side, because it commutes with R, but it's better here. And therefore you've got this very nice solution. So the solution is not that bad. Now finally, I want to discuss for a second the general case. So that's case-- there was a 1, a 2, a 3 H of t general. What can you do? Well, there's not too much you can do. But it's interesting anyway that there's a way to write something that makes sense. So here it is. When t is equal to 0, U of t-- of 0 0 is the operator that propagates no state, so it's equal to the identity. If you have the unit operator in the Schrodinger picture, what is the unit operators in the Heisenberg picture? Well, it would be U t 0 dagger 1 U t0. U dagger with U is 1, and therefore it's the same operator. The unit operator is the same. It just doesn't change whatsoever. So there's a nice correspondence between those operators. Heisenberg operators are supposed to be given by this formula, but we've seen that calculating U can be difficult. So what we try to do in order to simplify that is find an equation that is satisfied by the Heisenberg operator, a time derivative equation. One last comment on these operators. How about conserved operators? What are those things? A time independent As is set to be conserved if it commutes with a Schrodinger Hamiltonian. And therefore by point 1, by 1, you have dAh, which is equal to 0. Professor: X and P are time independent Schrodinger operators, so that equation that I boxed holds. X Heisenberg, as you remember, just commutes with P Heisenburg. So instead of the Hamiltonian, you can put this. This is X He Eisenberg P Eisenberg squared over 2m. It better be the same, but it will be clearer if we now write what it should be in general. Have a U dagger and a U from the right. They come here, and they turn this into P heisenberg. get the operator still, but we got an equation. So how about P dP dt. So ih dP Heisenberg dt would be P Heisen Berg with H Heisenburg. And this time only the potential term in here matters. So what do we? We get 1/2 m omega squared. Then we get again a factor of 2, then we get one left over Xh. And then a P with Xh, which is a minus ih bar. So the ih bars cancel, and we get dPh dt is equal to. m omega squared cosine squared omega t X squared. And the cross term. Plus 1/2 m omega squared over m omega times cosine omega. t sine omega t XP plus PX. Schrodinger Hamiltonian. So you confirm that this theoretical expectation is absolutely correct. All right, so that's all for today. I hope to see in office hours in the coming days. Be here Wednesday 12:30, maybe 12:25 would be better, and we'll see you then.