Professor: "The games that we'll end up playing today are games from last year" "I want you to keep in mind that you're not constrained to building games that look exactly like those" "It's possible that in the entire game, maybe you don't get that many meaningful decisions. That doesn't necessarily make it not a game" "For kids or adults, making it fun and doing something that makes it fun is more important than making it meaningful" "If you look at the copyright on the cards, it actually still talks about the psychology of winning" Lecturer: "Who's the most important person when it comes to actually playing figure it out on their own" "There's a long term consequences, so a lot of immediate consequences" "If you expect players to pick it up and play it three times in their life and then move on, then it probably won't help them that much" "You have to be careful that it doesn't have too much complexity or some sort of unanticipated change that there's too steep of a learning curve to actually enjoy it" Norman Brathwaite says games are a series of interesting decisions, not necessarily meaningful but interesting-- the decisions. A decision in a game can be meaningful-- what does it mean? What does it means to be meaningful? Couple hands? When you make that decision, the game's status changes or code that meanders the change. You have to react on the fly. You can't just plan out all of your moves. This-- reactive play. If they can see the game state changing and know that they're effective but don't know how they're affecting it, that would frustrate you. In games like Yahtzee, the die roll is like something not Monopoly. It's not really a decision. You have to do it every turn. If you don't let the player know what changed the game state, even though the gameState might have changed, is it that meaningful a decision anymore? You did something. Some numbers changed inside the system. But you don’t actually know what happened. It just means that these things aren't games. And-- AUDIENCE: It's seems okay actually from three identical dice. I believe Candy Land was invented to keep kids from getting polio from each other. That might be urban legend. With polio, you can't do much of anything. There's a huge inversion from the get out and get some exercise. It's a serious game. It has health benefits. Let's play in the land of Candy. I would like to go back a little bit to this idea about changing the game state, right? You make a decision in a game, and you've changed a game state. There are many games where you can do very poorly or very well. And it takes a while to understand exactly why you're doing very poorly. In a digital game, usually people have to take their turns and have to play out more slowly. Charades and Pictionary-- usually your teammates are the ones who are guessing. In Scotland Yard, the player positions is almost never known, so you get some feedback about what he's doing, sort of what he'm doing. There is a computer battleship. It's not as fun. often enough, you will always be successful. And that's an interesting strategy that game designers use. In a digital game, save some random number seed at the time when the save is made so that outcome's always the same. It makes a lot of sense to people who are game designers or computer scientists but may not make a lotof sense to a lot-of-players. So this brings me to the second reading, which is Don Norman's first chapter in the design of everyday things. Mapping, instead of the actual operations of the system, actually has to do it for what you can see. So there are affordances and there are constraints. I think affordances is introduced in this reading. What's an example of an affordance? What does a handle on a door allow you to do? What are the affordances of cards? I'm sure it's already in the syllabus. How many people are playing Carcassonne? We should be able to get a chance to play this game this semester. the Edison plug. It's actually-- the design with the ground on the bottom is a bad idea because if something starts falling out that are too exposed to it, it will not be the ground one. So it would be better to flip it. British plugs, actually, have the pin usually on top and-- AUDIENCE: The British just have the eyes [INAUDIBLE] pin. There's a little bit smaller than it needs to be in order for you to hold it comfortably. Pit is one of those games where exchange is a real time thing. It's easy to have a deck and then draw from it. You don't know what tile you're going to draw. The title of the game suggests things. It isn't like a commodity trading game. On the side, it says, "Corner the Market." And it's got a bell. This is like, this game back in the time when stock market are run with bells. I'd love to see Pit done on some sort of updated 21st century thing. might make it appropriate. The rounded corners actually make it much easier for you to do things like this. If it wasn't around the corner, it's actually pretty uncomfortable to do a fan. It's really, really hard to do it consistently when using your hands, by the way. So it could take away the whole information hiding things. But oh, the one that was badly punched, that's the joker. Let's see what else I talk about? So mapping, so back to the idea of mapping. fact base, I guess. They look like little people. There's probably enough in that for everyone to grab one or two. And then you can just take a look. I want them all back, but you can take aLook at them. Whoops, and a bunch of tiles that I will also hand out. I'll hand out half to that table. AUDIENCE: Something you can look at. [INAUDIBLE]. Terrain? PROFESSOR: Terrain, all right, something to do with land. What else? that are low when you're feeling depressed. And you can't pick yourself off the ground, making you sad or bad. A lot of these metaphors are actually arbitrary. But that means that these might be things that you can play off. And we're going to do a little bit more detail. I'll give you a couple of more examples in about two weeks when we revisit the idea of user design. He talks about things like single control, single function where if you've got something that does something, you might not want to make it do yet another thing on top of it because that starts to get really, really confusing. is this game plays. When it comes to Carcassonne, there is actually a deep, deep problem with this game despite how popular it is. And that scoring is actually pretty difficult to do. It's a math intensive problem. It does largely map on to how many of the meeples that you have of your own color on large patches of things. But how much those things are worth, those patches of thing is worth, requires a lot of counting, a much of counting. That's why you need a scoring track. Pit feedback is the feedback that you get when you hit the bell, right? There's a huge ding sound. And there's a couple of board games where you have to put pieces together, and that gives you an idea of maybe those two pieces don't go together. In Catan, you can see if somebody has massive roads or a lot of settlements or cities. In Monopoly, if you look at the board, whoever has the most houses can usually tell that they're doing pretty well. Designer explains why it can take five or six times to get a product right. If it's not good by the second time, people just won't buy it. Market forces push you to add things, to do additive design in order to distinguish yourself from the competition. And that naturally leads to complexity in interface, he says. He says design starts off as being very clunky. But it can eventually become something that works well, communicates well, or something that people can learn and maybe even enjoy. what he's talking about only, I doubt that actually imagined that this was something to be possible at the time when he wrote it. That was 1980. And cell phones obviously have gone through a lot of criticism. But it is it has been successful through a number of different reasons. Don't discount marketing as being something that the does sell. But what I want you to think about now is actually the process of prototyping. It will probably make more sense once I've actually got the prototyping materials out.