Charles Brockden Brown's new book, Edgar Huntly, is a critique of The Enlightenment. Brown argues that The Enlightenment is parasitic on negative types of thinking. He argues that reason itself may not be as powerful as we think. The book may be a book that would seem at first to take many of these things for granted, he says. It's turning the rock to see what's in the shadows that are cast by this light, Brown says. And if you look back at the back of your writing, it's even a possibility that you might do what Brown is trying to do as a philosopher or professor. We called him also a kind of pre-romantic because he makes use of images that are drawn from nature. The soul of a true Christian appears like such a little white flower that we see. It's a literal process of enlightenment right? It opens itself up to the light of the sun, and we've talked I think over the past couple of days about the ways in which the poems and writing that have to do with The Enlightenment often use light itself as a trope. This is a very good passage for thinking about that. David Frum: Is it possible that The Enlightenment underestimates the power of passion? He says the book, the back of the book tells you it's set in Philadelphia in 1787, all right? The same time as the Constitution is being framed a hop, skip, and a jump away, he says. He says this is also if not a critique, then a cautionary tale you might say about take God out of that equation, and you say this is all you know we're gonna rest it all on human beings. The Power of Sympathy is thought to be the first American novel published. The novel is a meditation on what the dangers to the new nation might be. Charles Brockden Brown is one of the first US writers to try to take advantage of first American copyright law which was passed in 1790. The copyright law does something interesting; it makes a profession of authorship possible, because it suggests that writing is property, and if you can write and copyright what you write then you can sell what you writing. In Edgar Huntly there's another kind of scientific fact that is played with right? Sleepwalking. Take a look on the next page, Chapter 12, The Box. I surveyed it with the utmost intention. All its parts appeared equally solid and smooth. It could not be doubted that one of its sides served the purpose of a lid and was possible to be raised. But there was no projecture which might be firmly held by it. Mere strength could. not be applied to raise it. Brown is writing in order to transform the novel into a higher form than it's thought to be. He's writing something that is not within the main line of novelistic writing. Brown is writing for an emerging market. The Power of Sympathy is, but it addressed to young women. So there's something feminized about the form of the novel in this period which is part of why it is, you know regarded as a kind of lower form of writing, not really literary. some sense of the way novels were regarded in this period, this is a quote from the New England Quarterly in 1802. Without the poison instilled by novels into the blood, females in ordinary life would never have been so much the slaves of vice. So this conflation of this kind of carnal house, you know disgusting flesh, morbidity, is part of this stream of the Gothic in which as I suggested the supernatural as real. The sublime is kind of like the romantic emotion par excellence. It's what they are try, they are striving to recreate. was published in 1764 on Christmas Eve and subtitled, A Gothic Story. Gothic, you know is a form of architecture I suppose, first and foremost. It's a kind of you know the pointy churches after the Romanesque arches that are more rounded. Gothic is more pointy. But it becomes a pejorative term by this time that is, that takes on the medieval association. Romantic writers are gonna mobilize the medieval and Gothic and dark over against The Enlightenment to show you what's wrong with The Enlightenment. Classic Scooby-Doo is Ann Radcliffe. The ghosts are never real. It's always Mr. [inaudible] in the blah blah blah. But there's another tradition of Gothic that happens at the same time. Matthew Gregory &quot;Monk&quot.; Lewis who got this nickname because he wrote a very famous book called, The Monk. The Monk you might say is really horrific Gothic. In it the ghosts are real, It is blasphemous. The story goes something like this, again Elvira who is a noble lady. it's Italian right so you can see there's almost always in English Gothic a kind of political anti-Catholic, anti-Italian sort of strain and you know anti-French I guess as well. So Juan Ambrosio is the abbot of the capechins [assumed spelling] He's soon readily corrupted by a satanic woman named Matilda who gains access to his cell by disguising herself as a young nun. They become lovers, naughty, naughty. But he soon gets tired of her and of course she's promoting this, and he dreams of possessing a 15 year old girl. Edgar Huntly wrote a letter to his friend Waldegrave after he was murdered. Huntly was supposed to transcribe the letters for posterity. But he changed his mind when he realized he might have misinterpreted the letters. He now wants to find the killer and find out what he knows. The letter is written in the style that Wordsworth would later write about the way poetry springs, from emotion recollected in tranquility. In the letter Huntly says that he was not insensible at that moment of the impulses of vengeance. But they were transient. Gothic castles and chimaeras are the materials usually employed for this end right? If you're not writing seduction obviously you're writing Gothic. But here in the United States we have an opportunity. The incidents of Indian hostility and the perils of the western take it up again on Wednesday, the experience of the woods. I want you to look for the motif of light in the panther scene, and also track one particular word, and that word is savage. All right we'll leave it there. Thanks a lot. Edgar's reasoning seems reasonable at first but, is curiosity, like virtue its own reward? Virtue never killed the cat, right? Curiosity may not be as valuable or as you might say free from danger. Is knowledge a value for its own sake? And is it true that it's valuable, but it's even more valuable when you have a personal stake in it? There's something odd about Edgar's reasoning here, and the text is, youmight say that this is again one of these texts where the way which Brown has put it down seemingly through the words of Edgar should be allowing us to open up space between what Edgar is ostensibly realizing about himself and what we are realizing about Edgar. to emulate a father's clemency and restore this unhappy man to purity and peace. That you might say is the ultimate statement of enlightenment principles and also of enlightenment hubris. Edgar will fulfill the role of a father confessor. He will dispense the healing balm of rationality and reason, right? How does that work out? Chapter 4, page 34. The bottom of the page, Clithero abrades him. The inference with to have drawn with regard to my designs and my conduct are a tissue of destructive errors. the hand and by which force could be exerted. Some spring therefore secretly existed which might forever elude the senses, but on which the hand by being moved over in all the directions might accidentally light. So look at that. He says physical force isn't gonna work, but he can use his reason to come up with a mechanism. But interestingly that mechanism has to make use of accident. The process was effectual. A touch, casually applied at an angle drove back a bolt and a spring at the same time was sent in action by which the lid was raised above half an inch. a box that can't be closed. Chapter 13, the chapter that follows cements our understanding of the perils between Clithero and Edgar. It give us an account of Edgar's relationship with Waldegrave. The opening of Chapter 13 suggests that Edgar may be feeling guilty too because you might say he's torn by conflicting allegiances. Take a look on page 124 where Edgar tells us that he isn't sleeping very well. But it isn't Clit Hero that appears in his dream. What however was nearly banished from my life. shouldn't have been thinking about. Bottom of the page, and again this is maybe a critique of The Enlightenment. Waldegrave like other men early devoted to mediation and books had adopted a different [inaudible] different systems of opinions on topics collected with religion and morals. His earliest creeds tended to efface the impressions of his education to deify necessity and universalize matter. But when Edgar looks for these letters, on page 128, he finds that they're missing.