sinus tells us that we're dealing with a heart rhythm that originates in the sa node. The sa node is located in the upper part of the right atrium. If this process is occurring like it should it should cause this heart to beat at about 60 to 100 beats per minute. If the sa nodes is not firing rapidly it's called sinus bradycardia. The sympathetic nervous system is really causing this to just fire electrical signals fast because maybe you're exercising or you're really stressed out you're in a fearful event. With sinus hack the atrial rate is going to be greater than 100 beats per minute. The p wave represents atrial depolarization so with that you want to make sure that you count your p waves. The qrs complex represents the ventricular rate so just like with the p wave you're going to count your qrs complexes and that's going to give you the rate. With sinus pack the qrs Complex isn't too wide or too narrow so it should be less than 0.12 seconds so it measures about 0.08 boxes. to confirm that measurement throughout by just going down throughout the strip and measuring that complex then i want to check out that pr interval. We want to make sure that it falls within normal limits about 0.12 to 0.20 seconds. Lastly we want to look at the qt interval which is found at the beginning of the qrs complex to check that that is presenting like how it should upright and here in this rhythm it is presenting the way it should. We have a pr interval of 0. 12 seconds and then i'm just going to go down through the strip to confirm that it is like that.  sinus tachycardia is not always a bad thing like whenever we're exercising we want to heart is just literally failing so you'll get the backup of blood blood will start backing up into the lungs. sinus attack may be the only symptom for some of these patients so if no other cause is causing this it may be their thyroid y is for yelp. giving them some pain medication can sometimes decrease the heart rate and get them back to normal h is for hemorrhage or hypovolemic shock e for emotional stress slash fear a for anemia r for respiratory conditions like pulmonary embolism chronic lung diseases. Let's say you're patient develop sinus tachycardia well you'd want to be thinking okay possible pulmonary embolism and be looking for those other signs related to that. Ekg to analyze the rhythm making sure that nothing underlines going on cardiac stress tests can be done an echocardiogram the patient can wear a halter monitor if they're at home having this and this will monitor their rhythm and then it'll go back to the cardiologist who will read that and see what's possibly going on. that wraps up this review over sonos tachycardia. If you'd like to watch more videos on this topic you can access the link in the youtube description below. You can also click on the link below to go to the next video in the series. Back to the page you came from. Share your thoughts on this article. Send us your photos and videos of your sonos experience on our Facebook page and our Twitter account. Visit our social media accounts to share your photos, videos and more.