CASEY RODRIGUEZ: We proved the simple and squeeze theorems last time. We're now moving on to the topic of limsup and liminf of a sequence. What's the underlying question we're going to try to answer? Roddiguez: The first analysis is to look at examples that you just don't quite understand, but you don't have to understand all of them to understand them, just start writing down some actual things that you know. but same proof works with absolute values. So let's use this to do a few more special limits if you like. If p is positive, then limit as n goes to infinity of p clear, because then I just get 1 for the whole sequence. Now let me do p bigger than 1. And since this is equal to its absolute value, that means that n to 1/n minus 1 is bigger than or equal to 0. And so my goal is to show that n is limit as x as x goes to n. to the 1 over n equals 1. And the third is-- it's just that a certain limit exists-- limit as n goes to infinity of n to the 1over n. OK? Let me make a small comment here. So far in our discussion of the real numbers, we've only defined what it means to take a real number to an integer power, but-- and n-th roots. So using that, we can then define how to take an integer number to a rational power. So 0 must be less than that real-- positive real number. Bolzano-Weierstrass theorem says that every bounded sequence does have a convergent subsequence. We're going to prove it by introducing limsup and liminf, because these are also two important objects that arise in analysis. We define limsup x sub n. And sometimes I'll write n goes to infinity underneath. Sometimes I'll just write limsup. And that's also a general fact that will prove, that for any bounded sequence, there exists some sequences converging to the lim Sup and the liminf. An n underneath it. This is supposed to be a number, and this is equal to the limit as n goes to infinity of a new sequence obtained from the old sequence x sub n. What are the entries of this new sequence? This is sup of x of k, k bigger than or equal to n. And the liminf is similar, except it's now with infs. OK? So for each natural number n, I take the supremum of the set of elements x sub k. So this is a bounded set because the sequence is bounded. as n goes to infinity of a sub n exists, and the limit as n went to infinity. of b sub n also exists. So in particular, since we know that, if we have a monotone sequence which is bounded, it has to converge, that means these two limits exist. And then the second part of this term is the simple statement that the liminf of x sub n is less than or equal to the limsup [INAUDIBLE] x Sub n. subsets of real numbers, such that [INAUDIBLE] bounded and A is a subset of B. The inf of B is less than or equal to the inf of A. And this is always less than, equal to, or greater than the sup of A, OK? So what this says is that, if I take a subset. of B, then that increases the inf and decreases the sup. And that inequality reverses for infs. All right? And this just follows immediately from the definition of sup and inf, so I'll just prove the sup statement. the n. Then, if I am looking at this set x sub n, n bigger than or equal to k, and writing-- instead of x sub N, let me just write what it is, minus 1 to the n. So what is this set? This is just a set consisting of two elements, 1 and minus 1. And therefore, the sup of this set is just 1. This is equal to the limit as n goes to infinity of 1 equals 1. So I want to show that there's something converging to the limits of the a sub n's. 1. The liminf is minus 1 for this set. That's just supposed to be a squiggly line, not necessarily looking like sigma. OK, so there's one sequence. How about our next favorite sequence, x sub n equals 1/n? So we're looking at now the set 1 over k, where n is-- where k is bigger than or equal to n. So as I move to the next entry, things are getting smaller and smaller. And in fact, this sequence just here now, written as a new-- so this is not a sequence-- this is a set. If the limsup equals the liminf, then the original sequence converges. The original sequence, which we know-- or shown last time-- doesn't converge. So that's another way of thinking about limsups and liminfs is that they also somehow measure just how divergent your sequence is, or at least the difference between them. If that difference is 0, then your original sequence is convergent, OK? All right. All right, so I think we'll stop there. The limit as k goes to infinity of xm sub k produces the liminf. OK. And so before I prove this, this immediately gives the Bolzano-Weierstrass theorem, which is that every bounded sequence has a convergence subsequence. In fact, we have something stronger, in that we have at least two subsequences which converge to these two numbers, which may or may not be the same. OK? So the reason this is so powerful and so strong is that it doesn't require you to show something as strong as showing there is a sequence converging to that. is a general nonsense that you stick into your machine or function that spits out output. And these outputs are approaching the maximum or approaching the minimum. And what you'd like to say is that there does, in fact, exist an element that you can stick in your machine and produce the maximum amount of output. But you don't have to work that hard is what this theorem says. It says that what you really need to do, and which is much more straightforward, or simpler, or impossible really, is to show that that sequence of inputs is a bounded sequence. sandwiched between things converging to the limsup, and use the squeeze theorem. All right? OK, so since this is the supremum of this set that-- and because this thing is not an upper bound for this set, there exists something from the set. So some element k bigger than or equal to n sub 1 plus 1, which I'm going to call n sub 2. And then I just keep doing this. Since a sub 2 plus 1 equals the supremUM of the x of k, such that k isbigger than orequal to nSub2 plus 1.