Fluorescence is the absorption of light energy by a molecule. Luminescence is the general term. There are different types of luminescence. Fluorescence is a key point. So what is fluorescence? It's the absorption. of light. And I'm going to redefine all these properly in a moment, Professor Lambda. Lambda Lambda: Fluorescence, F-L-U-O-R-E-S. What are you guys whispering about? Audience: [INAUDIBLE]. Luminescence is the interaction of a chemical with another chemical to give luminescence. In bioluminescent marine organisms, ATP is combined with another molecule through the action of an enzyme that ends up kicking out light energy. Fluorescence is a more specific term, and you may wonder why I'm putting this in capital letters. The first thing to learn about fluorescence is how to spell fluorescence. And these things are going to come up. And it's not the last time you're going to see them. a particular wavelength so it's called its Lambda of excitation. Once it's excited, it just drops its energy back out and goes back to the ground state. And the most important thing that you want to remember is the wavelength, which is given in nanometers. This wavelength is higher energy. Lower energy are longer wavelengths. And that is a rule for fluorescence. When you excite a molecule, in this region. And we would see emission in wavelengths in this area. But a cardinal rule is that we excite with a shorter, higher energy wavelength and observe emission at a longer, lower energy wavelength. When you mix ethidium bromide with DNA, it will intercalate into the DNA. And it will light up as a bright orange dye. Now, there's a big problem here, because you can't use DNA ethidiumbromide. It's pretty toxic. And so these are toxic dyes that can only be used in fixed cells to do observations of cells. So there's been quite a revolution in the work done with DNA binding agents that bind a little differently and are way less toxic. DNA microarrays can be used for profiling genetic material or for profiling not just DNA, but RNA. Fluorophores are great, but you've got to worry about them. We'll see how at the beginning of the next class, in order to probe for particular stretches of DNA that might be disease related and have single nucleotide polymorphisms. And the DNA microarray experiments show you how you can use fluorophores attached to DNA sequences, OK. And I'll see you in the nextclass. cyan blue. So that's at a shorter wavelength from the ethidium bromide. We know intercalation is perpendicular to the axis of the DNA. So where, looking at this, do you think these bind? A while ago when I was talking about the structure of DNA, I like to think of DNA as having two grooves, two places where things combine to it. And so these compounds would be known to bind in the minor groove. And in fact, they bind in particular regions of DNA where there's AT, not GC. them. So nucleic acids seem to be something that we can definitely pinpoint with fluorescence. We can see where it is. We could follow cell division. For example, upon adding things to a cell, can you see-- remember very, very early on, we showed you movies of cells dividing. You could do that with this kind of dye because it's a non-toxic dye. So, great, so far, so good. So the key thing, though, about biology is we have so many other entities within a cell that we want to be able to track and monitor. Professor Martin: I'm going to focus completely on the technological side of antibodies and how they are useful reagents to study biology. Now, what you will learn from Professor Martin in two or three lectures time is much more about the nuts and bolts of the immune cells. And how it mounts a response to disease and other features. But for the time being, I'm just going to talk about B cells, which are cells that produce antibodies. And I'mgoing to talk to you about how they recognize their targets. There are hundreds of thousands of different antibodies in the human system. If we had a gene for every single different light chain and every heavy chain, you know, our DNA would be completely swamped by being dedicated to the genetic material for antibodies. Instead there is a particular system which provides little portions of the DNA structure that are in little pieces of variable components that can get zipped together through transcription and slicing events. And this is what's known as the BDJ system. And you'll hear more about that from Professor Martin. mouse. If you want to study rabbit cells, you could produce it in different organisms. You're not going to produce the antibodies in the same host. There's a lot of work being done now with antibodies from different organisms, in fact, you'll see them from camels. But then you collect the antibodies through an affinity method that's directed just at antibodies. Then you've got your population. And you can throw a fluorophore dye at it and chemically label it. So it's a good point there. Antibodies can't float into cells. They're too large. So you have to fix the cells on a glass side and permeabilize them, for example, with methanol so that the antibodies can gain. What do you think? Can they cross the plasma membrane to get into the cell to label a target? Who say yes? Who says no? Good. OK. You guys don't say much, but I know you know the answer here. But I know what the answer is.