In this video I'm going to be going over lung oscilation specifically the sites of where you osculate. We're going to go over normal breath sounds versus abnormal breath sounds. You can access the quiz and the notes over here or in the description below. In the next video I'll be performing an assessment on a patient and show you how to listen with your stethoscope to these sides. We'll go over some audio clips ofnormal breath sounds and where you should hear them at. osculation sides so first let's cover the right lung your right lung is made up of three loes very important so you have your right upper lobe, right middle lobe and right here here you have the horizontal Fisher and then the oblique Fisher and this just separates the middle loow from your upper and your lower. We're going to start from top to bottom and compare sides and work our way down below the scapula right where the Apex is and then go over to the side and compare and listen. remember to get the best sound quality so you can hear so you're not listening over the shoulder blades because that will muffle your sound and you won't be able to hear. Have your patient put their arms in their lap or just separate those shoulder blades from each other then what we're going to do we want to assess first your upper loes so from C7 to T3 your cervical and thoracic spine that is where your Upper loes are. That will allow us to assess our lower loes and we'll start around T3.  abnormal breath sounds that you could hear that may be thrown in with those normal breath sounds are separated into continuous pitch monophonic wi sounds [Music] like stri spider. Strider is a high pitch whistling or gasp with a very harsh quality to it and patients like pediatric patients if they get the cro or cute epiglottis or you have a patient who has an airway struction you will hear this sound. This is an extra sound that you're hearing that is La lasting less than2 seconds okay first type um is coarse crackles crackles for nor Al has been known as rails. and discontinuous now first let's go over continuous what does continuous mean this is a extra sound that you're hearing that is lasting more than 2 seconds with a full respiration okay the first type is called a high pitch polyphonic whe let the name help you okay so what is it it is mainly heard in expiration so when the patient's breathing out but it can be in Inspiration as well. The second type of discontinuous abnormal sound is called Fine crackles this is heard on inspiration and it is a high Pitch crackling sound compared to the coarse crackle this is like low pitch like a bubbling noise this fine crackles is high pitch.