Expectations play a huge role in economics, says Ricardo Caballero. He says they play a big role in the decision of all economic actors. The IS-LM model really overweights the present, he says. Future wealth is affected not by current income, but future real interest rate, CaballERO says. "There is a lot that says that there is also suspected value that enters into the consumption and investment decisions that we care about," Caballeros says. 'I hope you'll get the gist of what expectations can do in economics,' he adds. future into the IS-LM model. And by then, you would have seen-- you will have seen all that I wanted to communicate, at least, in this set of lectures. So let's think about, first, consumption. And up to now, we assume that consumption depended only on disposable income, on current disposable income. But that's not really the way it works. One of the first in formulating, more or less, formally how consumption decisions are really made is Milton Friedman. fund the consumption, which is above your current income just because you have more financial wealth. The very rich seldom sell assets. They borrow against those assets to fund consumption. That's the way it works. And the very rich often have no income, [CHUCKLES] at least labor income. All the income comes from returns on assets. And again, they mostly borrow against that. But in any event, the point there is that what really brings out your consumption is your wealth, not the current flow of income. on expected profits. And when you think about expected profits, you need to think about interest rate as well. In that environment, investments that give you a return, a quick return, are worth more than things that have a pay-off in the very long run. The higher the expected present discounted value of buying a machine, the higher the investment is. But many firms, especially smaller firms, have the opportunity to buy things that are in distress, especially if they have larger deposits. In the case of Apple, it's not something to do with financial constraints, although it's a good idea to relax them. a price. The first thing you need to know is, well, how long will this machine last? And a reasonable assumption is, for most machines, is some sort of geometric depreciation. So as a machine depreciates, the probability of the machine breaking down over a year is 5%, then 1 minus delta is 0.95, say. What is the probability that the machine is still producing two years from now? Well, 1 minusDelta squared and so on and so forth. Central banks play with your minds. They want to influence aggregate demand. They need to convince you that this stuff will last for some time. One of the problems they're having now, actually, when the Fed is trying to cool the economy, is that they keep hiking rates, but the loan rates have begun to decline already. If the Fed cuts the interest rate but doesn't persuade anyone that this rate will remain low in the future, then it is going to get very small effect on output. to determine current output. If taxes go up today, this IS will shift to the left. Do you think it will shift more or less than it did in lecture 3 or 4? So suppose we increase taxes by 10%. Will that reduce output more orLess than when we had the static IS-LM model? Yeah? AUDIENCE: Depends on the expectation. RICARDO CABALLERO: OK, but I haven't moved. These are parameters from my curve. So I don't get the right to move them. Most of the time when you have episodes of fiscal consolidation in environments that are not of very high distress, financial crisis, and so on, it typically sort of-- how successful that is depends a lot on whether people expect to be a sort of implicit deal between the central bank and the Treasury. If people expect that that fiscal contraction will come with much looser monetary policy conditions, then the fiscal contraction is not as contractionary as could be otherwise. So most of the fiscal contractions are contractionary. But there are some famous episodes of what are called expansionary fiscalcontractions.