Professor Donald Kagan: Sparta is the most important, I think, of the early poleis. In Sparta, the only decisions they made were questions of whether to go to war, whether to make peace. The only people who spoke at those assemblies were the kings, the gerousia, or a group of people I haven't mentioned to you yet, the ephors, the five ephor. The idea was to have a representation of the ordinary Spartan to carry on the Spartan way. The ephors were given the responsibility of seeing that the kings were in line. They had various techniques or various policies and processes which had them make judgments. They could go to Delphi and ask the god, if they were right in thinking something was wrong. If they came back the kings would be put on trial. Kings were brought to trial in this way frequently in the history of Sparta and very often they were convicted, and often exiled, and in other ways punished. The Spartans have done something that is similar to what the Romans would do centuries later. The gerousia was, by far, the most significant council in the state, most able to have the necessary prestige and yet to be small enough truly to discuss what needed to be done. So, if the ephors wanted to do something, it would be damn foolish not to clear it with the Gerousia first; although if they wished to be reckless, they could do otherwise. It's important though to realize that in these early days of the polis they probably had very different leaders. Around 570 B.C. the Spartans started taking on other Greek states trying to establish their domination. They defeated the powerful and important state of Argos. In the process they took away a piece of land that is between the area ofArgos and Sparta, the name of it is Cynuria and they took it away, next to their own state. That's interesting, because the Argives never forgave that and never gave up on the idea of getting it back. The Spartans normally will like to see other states oligarchically governed. Sparta was the first state to be in command, or in control, or to be the leaders of a coalition of states. Ancient Greeks referred to the Spartans and their allies as the Peloponnesian League. How did it come to exist? The beginnings are shrouded in legend and are not absolutely clear. If you want your allies to come and fight with you it's better to have them to do so willingly than under orders, says Thucydides, the ancient Greek historian. Sparta's strategic importance is very great. They gained control of Tegea where they claimed to have discovered the bones of the great Homeric hero, Orestes. Also, there was a legend that maybe they propagated that showed up in some poetry we have, that Agamemnon had moved from his home base in Mycenae to Sparta. To that is added the permanent enmity of Argos, which never gives up the idea of returning to the great days of Pheidon with Argos as the dominant state in the Peloponnesus. rather than reality question. Scholars bat it around both ways; my prejudices are that the leagues' constitution, whatever it may have been, was less important than reality. That is to say, not all states in the Spartan Alliance were equal. The closer you were to Sparta the smaller you were, the weaker you were and the more you did what the Spartans told you. And vice versa. The stronger, the more distant, the wealthier you were,. the more independent you were of the Spartans. the Helots. It's not just that the Helots were so numerous compared to the Spartans, but I want to remind you again of their tremendous dissatisfaction with their situation, their backs may have been broken, but their spirits were not. They always were hoping to have a rebellion in which they could undue this extraordinarily heavy burden that they carried, and somehow in spite of the hundreds of years in which this has been going on, they did not lose sight of their nationality, of the fact that they were Mycenaeans. Their feelings towards the Spartans were as you might expect. no exercises of the arts, such as existed before this system was created. No luxuries legally in Sparta. There are few creature comforts. Why? Because in a way, necessity becomes a virtue. They said, of course, we gave that up, because that's what makes us the great people we are. That's what the Spartans did. Their way of life was imposed upon them by the decision to maintain their command of the Helots, after that it all makes perfect sense. Athens is located in the southeastern portion of the Greek peninsula. The city is Athens; the region in which they live is Attica. The people are Athenians and that's an important point I think I made too. Some of the most important and most aristocratic Athenians traced their ancestry not to the Athenians who were there before the moon was created, but to people who had come in this flight sometime after the end of the Bronze Age. The Athenians will be looking very carefully over the shoulders of aristocratic archons whenever they are in power. Attica contained silver mines in the south of the peninsula, and that gave the state a source of income that was very, very unusual among the Greek city states. One reason why the soil wasn't so great for agriculture was that a lot of it is red clay, but that turns out to be wonderful for making pottery. Another natural resource of great value and great blessing to those of us who can still see the remains of the Athenian experience is the marble that comes from Mount Penteli. There is no set of local rebellions against the major city, no need to go to war. But in neighboring Boeotia, the chief city of Thebes, traditionally was at war trying to subdue the other major cities. So, Boeotian is torn, to some degree, by this internal conflict, which makes it harder for Thebes to achieve the kind of power in its own home territory that the Athenians are able to achieve. Thebes is now the most powerful city in the world. Aristocratic means ruled by the best, and best in that time means simply best by birth. Nobody in Athens holds an office at this time, or as far as I can tell, at any time. The only thing in town that has continuity, that can develop power and influence over a period of time is the council of the Areopagus. They are very nervous about individuals who acquire too much power, popularity, influence which begins to engage in commerce to a greater degree than before. tribes contained, according to this tradition, three subdivisions that were called phratres. An easy way to translate phr atres is brotherhood. Notice it's again about family and birth. You are in phratre; you're in that phratrs, because so is your father and you inherit it. These phratmes were very important. I should have mentioned that the tribes had important religious functions that also the army consisted of four regimens, one for each tribe. These tribes had great reality for the Spartans. Little to decide and very little to do. Most of the real life of the state in the earliest days would have been out in the countryside where the overwhelming majority of the people lived. These noblemen would typically have held a lot of land and have been well to do, have had all the powers I've described, and were looked up to and were listened to. They would have led the military units into battle when that was necessary. One of the things that they did was to serve as the source of justice in the state. archon who was actually the most important archon, the one who gave his name to the year. So, if you wanted to know when did a thing happen, somebody would say it was in the archonship of so and so. A third archon was known as the King archon,. the archon basileus. His responsibilities were mainly religious, but I should point out that every one of them also did justice, that is, they had courts to which people could come to get their quarrels settled. will threaten the character of the aristocracy. Aristocracies love equality; equality among aristocrats, and then tremendous inequality between them and everybody else. An aristocratic republic is what we have, not a monarchy, but a republic. Yalies are very nervous about anybody sticking his head up above the crowd, because the question is always why not me? You have high expectations of yourself and so sometimes unless you're invaded by later religious ideas that the Greeks didn't have, you're not humble. Zeugitai means 'yoke fellows' or 'hoplite fellows' in Greek. They were well off enough to own a team of oxen who were yoked together to pull the plow. This new class of independent family farmer has arrived in Athens, says Stavrias. He says they are not satisfied with their position in the state, as his own importance to the state becomes greater and greater. We will find out more about this new breed of Greek farmer in our next episode. A young big shot of extraordinary character named, Cylon, attempted a coup d'état trying to establish a tyranny in Athens. He couldn't, he was resisted by enough of his to be attached to the family, and as we get to the last end of the last third of the fifth century and the Peloponnesian War is about to break out, the enemies of Pericles will pull out the curse of the Alcmaeonidae to use against him. Here's the first sign that we see of trouble in paradise. Nice, calm, happy synoecisized Athens has got trouble right here in River City. opponents that he was defeated. The leader of the resistance was the family known as the Alcmaeonidae. They went up there, locked up Cylon and his supporters in the Acropolis, in a temple. You couldn't go into the temple for the purpose of killing somebody, that would be sacrilegious. Still if you're inside that temple and trying to avoid being killed, you still need food and drink. So, how could they manage it? Well, they took a cord, tied it to the temple, held onto the cord, and went down to the well and got their water.