Lipids are molecules that are mostly hydrophobic, which can also be referred to as lipophilic. Some of the lipids are what are known as amphipathic. Some amino acids may actually have polar groups in them, such as tyrosine. The next set of amino acids are those that are polar and charged, and I've shown you the most common state of them. This quanine group is likely to be charged. This amidinium group's likely to. be charged, but the word for it is arginine. The phospholipid structure is a very important semi-permeable membranes. They are made up through the non-covalent, supramolecular association of monomer units. Many of these bonds show that there's restricted rotation in that bond that's unique in the polymeric structure. We will see later on how proteins provide the opportunities to cargo things into cells the structures are cool. Now, let's talk about the structure of a peptide, or peptide amide. or out of cells, even very large entities, and there are certain mechanisms whereby that happens through a semi-permeable membrane, OK? I want to show you the other feature of membranes. They are self-healing. What this means is if you poke them, you poke a hole in a cellular membrane, You? Basically push apart those non-covalent forces. Once you take the thing away, be it a needle or a very fine glass capillary, they seal right back up. you comprise 50% of all of the macromolecules. amino acids are called amino acids because they have an amine, the carboxylic acid. The amino acids that are encoded in our proteins are all what are known as alpha amino acids. Proline is a little odd because its side chain is kind of in a cyclic structure, and towards the end of the class, I'll talk to you about collagen, whose structure is totally dependent on the involvement of proline. Life is made of 20 simple building blocks with functional groups. The building blocks are not functional themselves. It is the polymers that are made up of amino acids, and I'll always call them AAs because it's easier for me. All the functions of proteins are dictated by the order of the amino acids. These are the ordered elements of secondary structure. You don't have to be able to figure them out, but you have to. pick them out in order to understand the structure. When the proteins are smaller, they are not capable of adopting too much ordered structure, and we mostly call them peptides. When I condense three amino acids, I spit out two molecules of water, and I put in place two amide or peptide bonds. If I go down this backbone, every third bond is going to be fixed, fairly fixed. There's not freedom of rotation around it. The folded structure is called protein folding. It's not simple because what you're doing is you're solving a massive energy diagram. about the hierarchical structure of proteins as put in place. And that primary sequence is kind of a cool thing because it's very specific. It defines-- it's got encoded into its structure, the three-dimensional fold of the protein, OK? All the information for the folded, compact, globular structure that's functional is encoded in thatPrimary sequence. It's a cryptic code. We may not be able to tell by looking at it what it really looks like, but all the information is there in order to program the folding. to have the capacity to be involved in hydrogen bonding interactions, as I've suggested here, all right? What else is there here? When I write the MIT peptide, I write M first, I second, T third. If I wrote TIM, it would be a completely different chemical structure with different chemical properties. So the directionality is important to understand, and there you have it. So now you can go home and practice your name in amino acids and draw them out. If you drew them out fairly sort of sharply, then you'll never get confused about what end's what and where the substitutes are. reinforce to you, the primary sequence is established by covalent bonds. tertiary structure is enabled by all these other interactions, electrostatic, hydrogen bonding, hydrophobic forces. When the secondary structure is in place, a lot of the side chains are near each other, and they can engage in long-distance contacts. And so for example, I'm going to walk you through this, so you can sort of get a sense of how these three-dimensional puzzles work on a very small scale. The video is a simulation of a protein that holds reversibly under appropriate conditions. The protein, GB1, is trying to find its thermodynamic minimum, and it's actually failing pretty badly. You see that nascent helix, in the background, the red and the blue, is starting to form strands that are a little bit aligned. The video is about 30-- 60 seconds of the simulations, so I made a point to myself to take you to about minute one, where things start to get fairly interesting. A single amino acid change in the primary sequence of collagen can destabilize the structure, so it is no longer viable. The disease type I'm going to talk to you about is a set of diseases known as collagenopathies. A lot of babies with this defect can't even be born through the birth canal because it would crush the bones, and many of them don't survive very long at all. So I think that's a good place to stop and I'll pick up next time with hemoglobin. will propagate through every single strand. If this is one strand made up of three polypeptide chains, it propagates all the way through the structure. There's a set of magenta residues in the middle, which come from a defect in the sequence where a glycine has been changed to an alanine. That defect is caused by the change of a hydrogen to a methyl group on three residues that come together, and that bulges out that fibrillous structure and makes it not as compact and beautiful as it should be.