Alberto Riva: Most important resources for finding and using biomedical information, especially information connected with the study of the human genome. Most of them will be websites, where you can find information, and to talk about how this information is stored and represented, how it's accessible, and what it can be used for. In the following, we are to see examples of all of these different ways to look at the gene. And finally, we get to the phenotype then, we could put a very long list of things here, but could talk about population genetics. Protein is ultimately what is responsible for essentially all the external manifestations, all the observable properties of our biology. So we have names, of course, for the extremes of the spectrum. We call genotype-- this information is encoded in the DNA. And on the other hand, we call phenotype whatever is at the other extreme of the Spectrum, anything we can observe, we can measure, from the outside. So how is all this information represented? What are the different ways that we can store and describe this information? Where does it come from, where is it stored, how do we find and use it? of DNA dates back to 1952. The Human Genome Project, that was officially declared a success last year, brought us to the point where we now know the exact base pair sequence of our genome. But even if we're all human beings, there are no two human beings that are exactly the same. These differences are due to polymorphisms, like single nucleotide polymorphisms. And it's going to be very interesting to the human genome because it's essentially identical to other organisms, including a chimp. bioinformatics and molecular biology, because now we finally have the tools of looking at our genome with this level of detail. We're going to need different methods to manipulate this data, according to what the purpose of our work is. SNPs are locations where different individuals don't have the exact same nucleotide. At a level of RNA, it might be interesting to look at alternative splicing transcription rearrangements-- these are all things the potential consequences of SNPs. And finally, SNPper is a resource that tries to integrate information from all the places that I sited so far. Finding genes in a DNA sequence is not trivial. It's still something that's very hard to do computationally. The ways that people have been using to do this are usually based on pattern matching. This is one of the things we are working on in our lab. And it's going to take a lot of work but the rewards are potentially very interesting because this is something that will then allow you to build the networks that describe how genes regulate each other. And that's something that, of course, has a lot to potential interest. Association studies are studies that try to correlate the presence of a certain genotype with an observed phenotype. SNPs are the most common form of variation in our genome. They're important because for example, they can be used as genomic markers. For example, if you have a SNP in the coding. subsequence of a protein, you're going to get a protein that has an abnormal sequence. And that can be a change that doesn't cause any consequence, or it might be a very dramatic change. GenBank. And GenBank is at the basis of the NCBI cluster. So the National Center for Biotechnology Information, is a branch of the NIH, that has the task of assembling the largest possible number of databases of biomedical information. So in GenBank, you just have sequences by themselves that can be very short, very long, but they're just independent sequences that were put of all these sequences. And you can probably tell that the number-- we're sequencing longer and longer sequences, because the blue graph grows more rapidly than the red one. LocusLink is a repository of information about genes, and it collects everything that is known about the genes. Golden Path was the first site to provide something like this. It gives you the absolute position of all the known elements of our genome. It provides arbitrary DNA sequences, so you can ask for any region of any human chromosome, you'll get back the exact DNA sequence for that region. It's very easy to find all the information you need about a certain region of the chromosome. Most SNPs are deleterious. But in some cases, the SNP can also provide an advantage, if it generates something that was not present before, and that works better than the original. So if you have a SNP that introduces a change is beneficial, then you will see that the frequency of the SNPs increases in the population. If a SNP is neutral, then there is no selective pressure, and it will either go away by chance, or will stay at a certain basic level of frequency. a second population that is affected by a disease, and you find that in that second population, the alternative allele occurs with a frequency of 40% instead of 20, then that might be an indication that the SNP has something to do with the disease. But in order to be able to do this, you have to know what is the baseline frequency. If a SNP arises in a population, then it tends to be limited to that population. You're not going to find it in a different population, unless there is some genetic interchange between the two. SNPper provides a way of exporting this data in different formats to make it easier to process later. It tells you that this gene is in the coding sequence of the gene, and it actually causes an amino acid change at position 319. It affects protein domains-- this is the list of protein domains that are affected by the SNP. This is a list of some [? matters ?] of the investigators who have observed this SNP-- and it's a long list, so it means that this is definitely a true SNP. that these domains can be overlapping, just because the Swiss people, they annotate the protein sequence saying OK, from here to here, we know that this happens. So it doesn't necessarily mean that the SNP affects all of them in some meaningful way. This one is probably the only one that could be affected by the presence of a SNP. So don't get confused by this place. Just a list of Swiss [INAUDIBLE] domains that include that location. Now, the next step I'm going to talk about genes again. LocusLink provides a nomenclature of genes. No LocusLink assigns a name to each gene, and if you stick to that name, then you're sure that everybody knows what you're talking about. In many, many cases, genes have lots of different names, even if it's the same gene, people have been calling them with different names. UniGene is another resource at NCBI that takes a slightly different approach. It's an attempt at collecting all the GenBank sequences that refer to a region of the genome where a gene is known to be. least in a set of organisms. And if they find a good match between the two sequences, then this pair is added to the HomoloGene database. Right now it encompasses 25 organisms. In these 25 organisms, they have 470,000 ortholog pairs-- so pairs of genes from different organisms that are highly similar to each other. All these are put into the database. And then if you find there are three organisms that share a similarity relationship, this is marked, because it means that you're finding a match that has an even higher quality. is a consequence of the fact that there is a very complex machinery behind it that determines which genes are active or not, and how much, in different conditions. We're slowly working to try to understand how it works. The first thing you need to do is need to be able to reliably identify which transcription factors bind to a given gene. And that, in turn, will determine the spatial, temporal, dependent expression of the target gene. So what we-- OK, sorry. So the first step, again, we're moving the first steps. pattern matching, there is lots of things that you can try. Most of the information in TransFIC is experimentally validated. So you can actually trust the fact that particular piece of sequence they give you is the binding site for the transcription factor in question. And this is one of the things that we're currently working on at CHB-- there are various ways of doing this. And again, it's a rather difficult problem, from a computational point of view, because these patterns that you have to look for are not very very large. GEO is a database of gene expression and hybridization array data. The Stanford microarray database is a repository of all the-- of a large number of micro experiments performed at Stanford. NCI60, again, from Stanford, is a famous data set that includes gene expression profiles for 60 human cancer cell lines. Cardio genomics provide microarray data on mouse models of cardiac development and signal transduction. And finally, human gene expression index-- these are just some of the most important most useful public resources of microarrayData. is OMIM-- OMIM is a catalog of human genes and genetic disorders. It's basically a collection of text articles that talk either about a gene or about a disorder, and they're linked with each other. And finally, PubMed is, a database of citations from the biomedical literature. It contains 12 million entries starting from the mid-'60s, and it's one of the most used resources in the world. It is not very up to date, but you can imagine that it's been growing at least at this speed or faster since '98. I think it's just repeating what we're saying so far that we are drowning in data and converting this data into knowledge is not easy. We need automated tools to access this data, to make sense of it, to convert into formats that we can use. And of course, this is a challenging task, because as we saw, biomedical data covers the whole spectrum of knowledge representation and management techniques that we know about. It's a very, very exciting time for the field of biomedical data.