The universe is rotationally invariant. In any direction if I measure the angular momentum of the electron along that direction, I will discover that it takes one of two values. This is also true of the L equals 1 states. The only sensible angular momentum, here-- is the two state tower, which can't be represented in terms of rotations on a sphere. And this is the energy when when an electron is in a state corresponding to one of those particular values, regardless of whether it's Lx, Ly or Lz. in a tower, with either one state-- corresponding to little l equals 0-- or two states -- with l equals 1/2-- or three states-- with little l equal 1-- or four states--with l equals 3/2 -- and so on, and so forth. We quickly deduced that it is impossible to represent the half integer states with a wave function which represents a probability distribution on a sphere. We observed that that was impossible. If you did so, then when you take that wave function, if you rotate by 2pi, the wave function comes back to minus itself. But the wavefunction has to be equal to itself at that same point. So, this is strange. There's nothing special about the origin. of said, well, look, these are some other beasts. But the question is, these furnish perfectly reasonable towers of states respecting these commutation relations. So, are they just wrong? Are they just meaningless? And what we're going to discover is the following-- and this is really gonna go back to the very first lecture, and so, we'll do this in more detail, but I'm going to quickly tell you-- imagine take a magnet, a little, tiny bar magnet. If you have a gradient of a magnetic field, then one end a dipole-- one end of your magnet-- can feel a stronger effective torque then the other guy. An electron just has it.momentum. If you send an electron through a Stern Gerlach Apparatus, it always hits one of two spots. And the legacy of these little L equals 1/2 states, is that they represent an internal form of angular momentum that only exists quantum mechanically. That was a very long answer to what was initially a simple question. But we'll come back and do this in more detail, this was just a quick intro. Yeah? AUDIENCE: So, for L equals 3/2, does that mean that there's 4 values of spins? we're gonna talk about real, physical systems in three dimensions. And as we'll discover, it's basically the same as in one dimension, we just have to write down more symbols. But the content is all the same. So, anytime we have a system which is rotationally invariant, we can write the energy operator in the energy fashion. And now, you have to answer the question, well, can we back to the trick I was referring to earlier? Because that's going to be a lot easier if we work in eigenfunctions of L. let's ask how they act on function. 1 over r dr squared r, acting on f of r, well, these derivatives can hit either the r of the f. There's going to be a term where both derivatives hit f, in which case the rs cancel, and I get f prime prime. So, why is this a particularly useful form? We'll see that in just a minute. If you see this, declare in your mind a brief moment of triumph, because you know what technique to use. Can we find functions which are eigenfunctions of E and of L, simultaneously? And so, the answer to that question is, well, compute the commutator. L squared trivially commutes with itself and, again, r doesn't matter. And ditto, r and L squared commute. These commute. So, we can find common eigenbasis. We can find a basis of functions which. are eigenefunctions both of E or of L squared. The potential, V effective of r, does the following two things-- whoops, don't want to draw it that way-- suppose we have a potential which is the Coulomb potential. V on phi is equal to-- well, V doesn't have any r derivatives, it's just a function-- so, V ofphi is just 1 over r V on u. Plugging that together, gives us this energy eigenvalue equation for u, the effective wave function, which is 1d problem. is a little u. OK, this is my little u and so, now I'm gonna have to-- oh jeez, this. is horrible, sorry-- this is the potential, capital U with a bar underneath it. Oh, for the love of OK. So, let's do some examples of using these central potentials. The first example is gonna be-- actually, I'm going to skip this spherical example-- because it's just not that interesting, but it's in notes, and you need to look at it. if there were nothing else, equals zero. If there were no other terms here, then this would say, ddr plus c over r is phi. But if phi goes like r to the minus c, that's not the exact solution to the equation, but I can write phi is equal to r to minus c times u. And then this equation becomes ddr, dot, dot u equals zero, OK? Very useful little trick-- not really a trick, It's just observation-- and this is the second order version of the same thing. term? Well, what this is telling you is that if you have some angular momentum-- if little l is not equal to 0--- then as you get closer and closer to the origin, the potential energy is getting very, very large. If you're spinning, and you pull in your arms, you have to do work, right? You have to pull those guys in. You speed up. You're increasing your kinetic energy due to conservation of angular momentum. Well, you should have done this in classical mechanics as well. classically that system decays, right? Irradiates away energy. Does the angular momentum barrier save us from decaying? Is that why hydrogen is stable? No one wants to stake a claim here? Is hydrogen stable because of conversation of angular momentum? AUDIENCE: No. PROFESSOR: No, absolutely not. All of those things are false that I just said. But if all those things were true, in that imaginary universe, this would be the salient problem to solve. So, what should be true of u? Can u diverge? Is that physical? Does u have to vanish? Can it take a constant value? So, I've given you a hint by telling you that I want to exactly the way you need to get the delta function. OK, which is pretty awesome. So, what that tells us is that if we have a wave function that goes like 1 over r, then the energy contribution-- energy acting on this wave function-- gives us a delta function at the origin. the potential is going to be this, so, here's r equals 0. And if it's a spherical infinite well, then I'm gonna say, the potential is infinite outside of some distance, l. OK? And it's 0 inside. So, what does this give us? Well, in order to solve the system, we know that the first thing we do is we separate out with yLms, and then we re-scale by 1 over r to get the function of u. This is an energy times a length. Also known as p squared l, momentum squared over 2m, 2 times the mass times the length. And if you actually take mu e to the 4th over h bar squared, this is off by, unfortunately, a factor of 4. This is equal to 4 times the binding energy, which is also called the Rydberg constant. And this is observed binding energy of hydrogen. It's probably something like the expectation most don't have a simple solution like a Gaussian or a power large. Solving a differential equation is a sort of involved undertaking. Most differential equations of some, maybe if you're lucky, it's a special function that people have studied in detail. We first did, we did asymptotic analysis. Then we did a series approximation. Now, do most differential equations have a simple closed form expression? A solution? No, most differential equation of some are not simple, but they can be solved in some way, if you know how to do it. As rho goes to 0, asymptotic analysis is gonna tell us that u goes like rho. Two derivatives, we pulled down a rho squared, and so two derivatives in this guy,. We pulled down an l, then an l plus 1. So, this should go like. rho to the lplus 1. But that is also badly diversion at the origin, it goes like 1 over 0 to the. l. That's bad. On the other hand, if l is equal to 0,. then this is the only term that survives, so we'd better make sure that that behaves gracefully. calculations, this is a sweet little calculation to take this expression. Plug it in and derive this recursion relation, which is root-- or 2 root-- epsilon times j plus l plus 1 minus 1 over j plus 1 j plus 2 l plus 2 aj. And in order for this terminate, we must have that some aj max plus 1 is equal to 0. So, one of these guys must eventually vanish. And the only thing's that's changing is little j.