In the second half, we'll talk about multisequence alignment. We'll look at how to get an empirical substitution matrix from distantly related protein sequences. And we will say that this is the optimal multiple alignment. The second half of the MIT OpenCourseWare course is available on the Web. For more information about the course, visit ocw.mit.edu or follow us on Twitter @MITOpenCourseWare and @CerebralCereb. The course is free and open-source. The time complexity is have to do 2 to the k comparisons per node. And the larger k is, the more you can explore. It's like doing a huge mutagenesis experiment and exploring viable mutants. The two that we'll illustrate in the next couple of slides is a tree alignment, as illustrated by ClustalW. And we'll show a star alignment. And then when we get, later on into the transcriptome part of the course, we will talk about the Gibbs algorithm. The final branching closest to the trunk of the tree or the roots of tree is called the dendrogram. The next step is aligning each of the sequences, which you already had to have done in order to calculate the similarity matrix. The common ancestor for all the sequences would be the common ancestor of the common ancestors of the first two clusters. And you could imagine keeping doing this hierarchical process. If there were additional sequences which are even more distant related, let's say S5, you would take this alignment of S1, S2, S3, S4 and align it with a single sequence S5. the sequences. And so we'll use S1 as the focus of the star geometry. And we'll get to the Gibbs sampling later. In general when you have a hard problem, where you can't comprehensively go through the entire space, what you do is sample it. You say, let's try a few things, and try to randomly sample it, and maybe even develop locally. If, after randomly sampling in certain places look better, then look near there, and find other solutions, and keep optimizing. Underrepresented in general invertebrate genomes, and over-represented in promoter regions upstream from genes. Promoters and CG islands are sort of degenerate. They're weak sequence signatures. There's a high variety, and they're used in combinations. We need a lot of codons in a row to see a preference over random sequences. Random sequences will also contain some of the same codons. If you need longer ones, then you'll miss tiny proteins. And we'll talk about this in just a moment, specific examples. George Church: Proteins in annotated genomes drop off at 100 amino acids. Church: Why are there so few proteins that are short? And there are slightly more short proteins in Mycoplasma? Church: There are more but we can't find them. When we get to proteomics, we'll talk about ways that you can empirically, by mass spectrometry and so forth, find those small proteins, and genetically, of course, you can find them, he says. be A, C, G, or T. These are four different sequences, real start sites, that we've aligned, either manually or by computer. This is dead easy to do the alignment, but the interpretation here is the position upstream of the start codon doesn't matter. The T and the G position at the 3-prime end of the codons are, in this small sample, invariant. And so they get a count of 4 for the correct base and count of 0 for all the alternatives. Bayes' theorem: Probability of a sequence given a model is equal to the probability of the model times the sequence given the model divided by the sequence. In a database search, we would go through. all sequences in [INAUDIBLE] that look like a serine protease. This would be asking for recognition multiple times, over and over. In the next slide, we'll see what all this Bayesian stuff is useful for. We're going to be doing-- of the various applications, we had recognition discrimination and database search. In a Markov model, you can have nonrandomness at every order of a chain, meaning every length of sequence. You might have a bias where C would be rare because the Cs mutate into Us. In organisms that lack a uracil glycosylase, Cs will change into Us because it's a common chemical reaction. CGs are underrepresented in the genome as a whole, and they're over-represented in promoters. And in the oceans where they're lost, you expect the CG, this particular transition from C to G, to be low. island on the right, in bold and capital letters. You're given this as a learning set. Somebody has, by hand, decided that the boundary occurs at this first CG dinucleotide. And here it's unobserved in this little toy example that I gave you, so it's a 0. So 43% in this actual example. Now we're going to plug these numbers-- basically, I've cut off the transition tables, which are off to the right. Now let's use them to actually do an HMM. That's a pretty extreme case. But this is actually using the numbers from the previous slide, which were taken from real oceans and islands.