The goal of this course is to give you the tools to interpret complicated phenomena. We have electronic structure and the hydrogen atom as a way of understanding what electronic structure is. When we go to molecular orbital theory, we take what we know about atoms, and build a minimally-complex interpretive picture, which is sort of a framework for understanding complicated molecular interactions. The relationship between the effective quantum number and the ionization energy of a state then provides a hydrogen-atom-based structural model for everything you can observe. A rigorously good quantum number corresponds to a eigenvalue of an operator that commutes with the Hamiltonian. The main obstacle to being more than two electrons in an orbital is that we're protecting you from unnecessary knowledge. The goal is to be able to do the algebra in a way that maybe you can't describe to your friends because it's too complicated. But it is something that you can learn, and you can ask a computer to do it, and there are all sorts of intuitive shortcuts where you can look at a problem. able to evaluate these matrix elements is the permutation requirement. And it turns out that there is a really simple way of dealing with the requirements for electron permutation, and that is to write the wave function as a determinant of one-electron orbitals. If you have two identical columns or rows, it's 0. And that is the Pauli exclusion principle-- not what you learned in high school. What you learned is a small consequence of that. So if we can build anti-symmetric wave functions, we have aufbau. you the things you have to think about and understand. And a fit model also tells you what are the import the actors. And maybe they're in costume,Maybe they're not, but we can deal with them. But the truth is really very complicated. And as I said many times, when you go from hydrogen to helium, you can't solve the Schrodinger equation exactly. This was perhaps a little bit of a surprise, but I think it was only a surprise in newspapers. can reduce it simply by, instead of writing psi every time, just writing the state. And so for the ground state of helium 1s squared, and we would do this. And we use this notation, J tilde minus K tilde. So for every two-electron thing, we're going to get this kind of-- now these are simple integrals, and some of them are any Slater determinant. And the sign comes from switching the order of the orbitals. That's how the determinants work. Tilde notation says, well, this is what we start with, and we have to convert it into things that really matter. When we do 1s squared, we have an alpha with an alpha for the J term, and analpha with the beta for the K term. And alpha with beta is 0, because the operator cannot change the alpha into beta. So this tilde notation is a convenient thing, because you can use allowed to say which one is the lowest. And it's the one with the maximum L. So we have orbital angular momentum. And we can add the orbital angular momenta of the electrons following certain rules. And so what ends up happening is you get z effective, which is dependent on distance from the nucleus. And it goes from the integer value that you know, from the atomic number, down to 1, because you've taken one electron away from a neutral atom, and taken it outside. And now we have this wonderful thing called the centrifugal barrier. So if we have a non-zero l, it can't get in so far. And the larger the l is, the less it can see this extra charge. Hund's rules is all about, of all of the states that belong to a particular configuration, which one is the lowest? One-- which one, not the second lowest. And all you care about, all you're when N is equal to 3, the lowest state is usually an S state. So Hund'srules tell you how to identify, without knowing beans, what is the low energy state. Well, maybe sometimes wrong, but that's because of one of my things where you have a perturbation between states belonging to two configurations.