Professor: We're approaching the end of our fundamental section, but we still have a few important lectures to get through. After we get through the fundamentals, we'll be in a good position to understand the different technologies and finally the cross-cutting themes. The goal is to, at least for system efficiency in blue is somewhere, depending on the plant, somewhere around 1%, maybe as high as 7% or 8%, depending on very specialized plants that are experts at converting sunlight into usable chemical energy. Solar cell conversion efficiency is the ratio of output to input energy. For most solar cells, this breaks down to the following progression, from the solar spectrum to charge collection. The efficiency of the solar cell can be broken down to this little pie chart up here. The total are a bunch of two-letter or three-letter acronyms with some subscripts here that we'll get to know and we'll become very familiar with over the next few lectures. We're going to be focusing on charge separation, incorporating elements of either side. The energy band diagram shows the chemical potential, also called the Fermi energy, throughout the entire device. To transfer this into what we've seen so far with the solar cell devices facing up toward the sun, you'd have to rotate this by 90 degrees. As the barrier height decreases, we have a decrease of the built-in electric field. And that's why we have this diffusion current dominating in the dark, and a current flowing from right to left. In the illuminated case, we'll have all of our carriers traveling from left to right. In a reverse bias condition, electrons will be able to tunnel through the p-type into the n-type right here. The drift current is larger because of the larger electric field. That will be under reverse bias, and that could present problems if the solar cell can't withstand the reverse bias. If you have a strong enough p-junction, you could have a solar cell that is not low enough, in other words, if the pjunction is not enough, the current at reverse bias begins dropping. dark, this is the only case in which we have carriers traveling from right to left. And it's happening because we're using that battery in the dark to change the chemical potential on either side, which, in effect, reduces this barrier height and allows carriers to diffuse from the n-type into p-type. So you can think about it as forcing carriers up the junction. And this is a very useful technique because in a real device, the current will travel through the weakest point of that pn-junction. Professor: What does forward and reverse bias mean when there's no battery? This is a very interesting question. So let's make an estimate of what we think should happen, and then I'll confer some notes. And then we'll measure what actually does happen under illumination. And we, through superposition, shift this entire curve down, we'd be operating somewhere in this quadrant right there, right? So this we call IV quadrant, typically I, II, III, IV, IVquadrant. This is where power is coming out of the solar cell device. illuminated case is the only case in which power is coming, usable power coming out of our solar cell that we can use. The illuminated IV curve is, to the first order, is just your dark IV curve with a superposition, which we call the illumination current, I sub L. Now we can take the product of the voltage and the current to determine the power, and we obtain a curve that looks very much like this blue curve right here that you can see. That is the maximum power point of the solar cell device. The light itself is biasing that particular solar cell device. But that solar cell might be connected in series with a bunch of other solar cells in a module. Other solar cells might be biased that one solar cell. The biasing is because you have a shift in the chemical potential of this side up relative to the n-type side. That's a bias. Whether that's generated by light, whether it's generated. by a battery, right? Whether it's the energy input to create that bias is coming from the sun. or if it's coming from an external battery, that's a matter of detail. The lecture will be focused on the broader general topics, but if somebody is interested in learning more, I'm happy to kind of dive into there. I have interacted with several of you. Joe has interacted with probably 3n, n being the number of people I've interacted with so far, and really tried to impart the wisdom of pn-junctions. Please, please, please come to us if still things are going over your head. You should be able to explain to your roommates exactly what is going on. There's no power flowing through that external circuit because there's no potential to be dropped across the external resistor. The opposite happens over here at this point called Voc, which we'll call open-circuit voltage. This is the point at which the solar cell is producing the maximum amount of power output. The voltage at the maximum power point is almost the Voc, in a good device. And the current at the Maximum Power Point is almost Jsc, but not quite, all right? and Vmp, which is the voltage at the maximum power point. So, so far, we've learned essentially four variables here. We have our Jsc, our Voc, and our Jmp. And our Vmp at that data point right there. So the two need to be matched to each other. And that's where some of the power electronics come into play. Yeah? AUDIENCE: So in the last problem set, where [INAUDIBLE], we assumed that output voltage would be [INAudIBLE] volts. corner of my box is going to end at the maximum power point. And that box looks like this blue one right here. The area of that box is Jmp times Vmp. And notice I have another box around here. I have this clear box that starts at the Voc point and the Jsc point. The bigger one has an area of Jsc times Voc. And I'm going to define a parameter called fill factor, which will be the ratio of these two areas. but something that you could buy from a supplier, you'd need five times that area. Whereas if you had a 10% efficiency module, which is more approaching the area of some relatively inexpensive solar cells, you would need 10 times that. So if you say, OK, I'm willing to pay more for a high-efficiency cell because I'm using less area, you can use this type of calculation to get to the answer quickly. This is a really back-of-the-envelope envelope engineering approach to estimating costs of a solar system.