Last week we looked at the we first saw our first magic formula which you've probably forgotten because it was a wonderful weekend so I'll remind you. Then from there we will uh resolve the spider problem and then uh we're going to look at uh something called the super magic formula. The magic formula is simply a compaction of a lot of math that's it okay so I'm this time d by DT of u. A1 Plus v. A2 plus L dob1 plus Theta do L B2 that's why we Tak. to solve pretty much any kinematics problem because it's based purely on Geometry angular velocity is a kind of a madeup concept that just simplifies the math and it's kind of intuitive stuff is rotating Theta Dot multiplied by you know the Le lever arm right gives you a velocity. If a frame's rotating some point different points will have different velocities so yeah a frame can have a velocity but doesn't really mean much and you tell me which point in the frame you're referring to right look this thing is a frame what's the velocity at any given point in time of the frame. The simple thing is angles don't add up but infinite decimal angles do add up. If I rotate about one axis a certain amount 30째 and then rotate about another axis 30째 right if I reverse the sequence they don'tadd up. But if I rotate one axis like a tenth of a degree and then rotated about anotheraxis a 10째 then the sequence actually comes pretty close all right. Infini dismal rotations do and because angle of velocity is D Theta by DT right and it's a vector if because it is about some direction and there's a d Theta. Kinematics is called the can's method of kinematics Kane K an is a professor at Stanford he I think he's still there retired. Kane K's method is used to analyze the Dynamics of robots complex robots and Space Systems so anyone who works in complex Aero Astro space system things like space shuttles with robots moving around Etc they use this method they use the symbology a b and all that right very few undergraduate courses on the planet uh learn teach the mechanisms that you've learned and understood right. we'll do let's prove it let's consider a frame a by the way you notice I will always show frames with this little circle a saying that it's a frame and with a little wiggly line pointing to it. Let's assume that you have a vector written in terms of frame B's unit basis vectors let's let's assume n is equal to sum U1 which is not a constant time B1 + U2 * B2 now what I'm trying to prove is this formula how would I go about doing it. here so will you please expand it for me what does that come out to be this is the left hand side of that formula right and we'll do the right hand side separately and show that the two are the same. I will never ask you to prove something like this in an exam right this is almost like a solved example I want you to understand that it all works out that's it. If you're confused that is fantastic because that's a symptom of something else and I'd like to surface it and help you figure it out. The room the world the Earth is a frame the basketball is another frame the kind of the U you know you guys need to be like Neo in Matrix have you seen that movie right it's very very important if you understand Matrix algebra you need to see Matrix all right so go see Matrix and you know how Neil kind of you know he when he's totally you know after Lawrence fishburns you know kind of trained him Etc he goes down and he can see he stops seeing buildings and he sees these characters you know flowing instead of the building. some other point right get it so look if I do this if I'm spinning it you know the center is staying stationary so that is the instantaneous Center of rotation but this Frame there's no kind of special point because with respect to someone who's flying overhead with a constant velocity the instantaneous cental rotation is going to be some other point the frame has an angular of velocity it's not an angular velocity about a point get it. There might be a point which is instantaneously not in motion and that's the instantaneous Central rotation but that's just a special thing. look this is just in formal okay I'll formalize this ston right uh actually that's right we're using four thank you we're use four. We need to capture the location of the spider but we also need to figure out where the frisbee is so that we can do the math with respect to the Frisbee Etc right so we're capturing it in terms of these parameters I just want to say this leave it for the time being we'll come back and I'll you know in the context of Dynamics it'll become more clear when we talk about degrees of freedom and parameters and things like that. can kind of do it that way but the simple way to do it is to simp well you know it doesn't matter we can just write this as B take the whole term d by DT of lb1 plus what quick hm I'm hearing a hesitant murmur not the yeah I was mumbling something a moment ago I'll tell you what I was trying to say uh cross lb1 what is a Omega B so we can rewrite a Omega b as Theta dot B3 and so this whole thing comes down to I'm going to write the answer here to save a Blackboard. start with the um Med go round and then the other one right so this is it I'll tell you when to start uh which on this one right okay. If you as I said if one of you invents a new term we'll name it after you okay and so far I've used these words coris and all that I kind of called them out without telling you a lot more about them right so what we're going to do now is take a break in the following way I'm going. The Coriolis effect is a phenomenon that occurs when objects are deflected by the Earth's rotation. An observer on the rotating Earth the path of an object appears to be deflected. This exemplifies the Corola Force and what happens with things like hurricanes and we'll show you I'll show some videos later if we have time is so now you're you're on the North Pole right you're sitting in the North pole and this is the Earth this is North Pole okay you're looking down a particle when it's low pressure. Coriolis effect is when something is moving that is translating with respect to frame which is itself rotating then there is a deflection in the B2 Direction in the way we've written it now I'll give you the general formula and you know B2 what it is ETC it become more clear any questions about coris by the way in the last class I told you this anecdote I said that artilleries artillery guns right in the 1700s 1800s um they would have to compensate for directionality because of the coris effect it turns out that that is true but I made one mistake. it turns out that when the Coro effect was discovered or when someone formulated it coris right the range of guns wasn't high enough for that that to have been you know really valid so it is true that in artillery you need to correct for the coris effect but that wasn't the reason the corus Effect was discovered so I take it back right. In the in World War I when the British when a British Fleet near Faulkland ran into a German Fleet they spend they shot 1,000 shells uh taking the Coriolis effect of the northern hemisphere well they were in the Southern Hemisphere and missed. What is the force that the astronaut feels you know or what force must the astronaut exert in order to move in a straight line with respect to a spaceship or a space shuttle or something? That's the question we seek to answer. What we're going to do is basically generalize the Frisbee problem. We will Define as usual and you'll find this all repetitive because really it's all the same stuff over and over again just getting more and more compacted with more insights kind of teased out of it. yeah sorry and plus this thing okay we'll end now because Professor Socrates needs to take over this is it this is correct acceleration of P acceleration of Q with respect to B Oiler coris centripedal and you know why it doesn't go to zero because I'm not taking a Omega B cross a omeg B. I'm taking a omega B cross this whole term which is at 90째 to a OmegaB got it got it? Yeah sorry and Plus this thingOkay we'llend now because professor Socrates need to takeover.