Marketing is about four things creating communicating delivering and exchanging value so marketing is about creating communicating delivering and exchanging value that's in chapter one so who can tell me what marketing is somebody good what's your name genius chingus go ahead tell us what is marketing. Write this down marketing marketing that's capital n a you guys do it okay come on stay with me here no sleeping no facebooking who's facebooking now anybody no text messaging all right no periscoping. The new high definition monitor that's on the market is 4k so you're going to get 4k technology and 3d capability and smart capability so it's going to be a smart tv. Value does not mean low price so that's a good example anybody have another example of where something might be very expensive but not the lowest price yes go ahead tell us your name theresa bad um i mean would you consider that clothing yes go Ahead like so like i find people saying like buying a pair of jeans and zara is expensive because there's like 65 but they last longer than buying these at all. Cars provide the same generic functionality transportation what makes one car different from another is the brand. The brand is what distinguishes one product from another we could look at that through market research to understand the perceptions that consumers have for our brand importantly relative to other brands so not just where we are on the perceptual map the value of perceptual mapping is that we could see where we're positioned in the market based on certain dimensions quality price innovation relative to our competitors so remember it's the perception it's not a question of whether or not our product is expensive or whether it's a high quality. and those that are 40 to 49 does that make sense so you want to have a commercial for example that's going to resonate with your target audience usually you're not going to be able to have one that resonates with everybody in your audience. So when you're showing a commercial do you think that those men that are seeing the commercial between the ages of 18 and 29 want to see somebody in the commercial who's 60 or 65? That's probably not something that's gonna resonate with them right unless maybe if it's coach. do is get a representative random sample from that population so it doesn't need to be 350 million. A thousand can be statistically significant a thousand to fifteen hundred but in most categories in the united in the United States that number is about a thousand people. i think it has to be a balance sample like from every type of person that we take somebody up out of this group and from different states maybe and let me do this research with these people absolutely so we have to have males and females people of different age groups peoples in their 20s 30s 40s 50s 60s.