Professor: We don't need to invoke any notion of rationality in evolutionary game theory. Instead, you simply have mutations that sample different strategies, and then you have differences in fitness that just lead to evolution towards the same solutions of the game. Professor: All the selection that we've been talking about in the last few weeks, that all is consistent with game theory in the sense that the fitness of individuals depends upon the rest of the population. The more fit individuals spread in the population, you evolve to the same or similar solutions. Professor: In a population with a constant population size N equal to, in this case, we'll say 1,000, mutation rate is 10 to the minus 6. Each time that an individual divides, it has a 1 in a million probability of mutating. In practice, it doesn't actually matter, because all these mutations are non-neutral, once you fix this state or this one, you can't go back. Professor: If anything, in some ways, this actually provides a bias going towards the 0, 1 state. Professor: We're going to start in the 0, 0 state with 1,000 isogenic individuals. He asks: What's going to happen eventually? And in particular, what path will be taken on this landscape here? Professor: You can start thinking about it while I write out some possibilities that we can vote for, and I'll give you a minute to think about it. The population will get there, and the 1, 1 genotype will fix in the population, he says. In some ways a very simple problem. But in another way, you have to keep track of lots of different things, and which regime we're in. If you understand what's going on, you can answer it in a minute. But if you don't understand it, it'll take you an hour. OK, so we do have a fair range of answers. I'd say it might be kind of something like 50-50. And that's great. It means that there should be something to talk about. So turn to a neighbor. You should be able to find somebody that disagrees with you. that are present maybe in one copy. In order for this individual to fix, he has to survive stochastic extinction, which happens with the probability of 2%. And the 1, 0 individual has to go extinct, which happening 90% of the time. So this is, indeed, answering the question that if you had one copy of each of these two mutant individuals in the population, that's the answer. But that's a slightly different question than if we ask, we're going to start with an entire population at 0, 0. The population is dividing. Every now and then, a mutation occurs in the population. It could be either the 0, 1 or the 1, 0. But in either case, the fate of that mutation is resolved before the next mutation occurs. So you don't need to worry about them competing. Instead, just at some constant rate they're appearing. And given that they appear, there's some probability that they're going to fix. So that leads to effective rates going to each fix. And it's tiny. In the Prisoner's Dilemma, the defector fitness is always above the cooperator fitness. So for any population composition, defectors have higher fitness than cooperators. So evolution brings you to the pure defecting state, where you have fitness 1. If the population is A, that means that the A here is at 5. But then it goes down to 0. Whereas over here, B here is 3. And then it go to 1. Because these two lines cross, does that mean that you have bi-stability? 10 to the 8. So it's not this. But it's tiny, right? AUDIENCE: Yes, [INAUDIBLE]. PROFESSOR: Yeah, because this didn't make sense. Because this was of the same order as-- well, this would be larger than 1 over N, so it's totally nonsensical. This is a deleterious mutation. It's not even nearly neutral. So this whole thing is 10 to the minus 10, or something like that? In a Nash equilibrium, everybody's interacting with everybody else with equal probability. If A follows strategy one, B follows strategyOne, then individual A gets little a fitness. If both players had followed this strategy C for cooperate, D for defect, then both individuals would be getting fitness 3, or payout 3. But the problem is that that's not evolutionarily stable, or in the context of game theory, that is cheatable in some ways. The question is whether you as an individual would have the incentive to switch to the other strategy? And the answer is no. in this regime where everything's linear. And the probably best well-known of these is this Prisoner's Dilemma, which is the standard model of cooperation in the field of game theory. So the idea of the prisoner's dilemma is that if you set up these jail sentences in the right way, then it could be the case that each individual has the incentive to confess. And we'll call this-- so this is for individual one, say and individual two. So there are different strategies you can follow. what happens if we're a population of cooperators. Now everybody has high fitness-- fitness 3. Question is, what happens if there's a mutation that leads to one individual following the D strategy? Is he selected four or not? AUDIENCE: Yes. PROFESSOR: Yes, so the point here is that you always will have higher fitness, regardless of what your opponent does in the context of a game theory situation, or regardless of the distribution of cooperation and defection in the population. In a population, if you have genetic A's and genetic B's that are each giving birth to their own type, then you evolve to some coexistence of genotypes. So long as you have some members of both A and B in the population, you'll always evolve to the same equilibrium. Whereas in this situation over here, we have coexistence. Does not matter where you start. So that's a molecular mechanism for how you might get heterogeneity. Another question to have a variety of different strategies to cope with that uncertainty. is, what is the evolution explanation for why that behavior might have evolved? Now in general, we cannot prove why something evolved, but we can make educated guesses that make experimentally testable hypotheses. In the coming weeks, we'll talk about this idea of bet hedging-- that given uncertain or fluctuating environments, it may be advantageous for clonal populations to hedge their bets on the outcome of a game. It may be implementing the solution of some game that is a result of such frequency dependence. There are other possible explanations to this. unilaterally increase your fitness by switching. PROFESSOR: Right, it's an equality, which means it is a Nash equilibrium. Because it's saying that you don't have the incentive to change strategy. It's true that you're not dis-incentivized. So it's not a strict Nash equilibrium, but this thing is true. And this other thing that's interesting is that-- so this tells us that it's actually one of these ESS's. And if you have questions about this, I'm happy to answer it.