Professor Steven Smith: I want to talk today about Aristotle's discovery of America. Smith: For Aristotle, as it is for every student of politics, the most serious issue one confronts is the problem of faction. He says the best regime is one where the best men rule, he says, a kind of aristocracy or an aristocratic republic. Smith says Aristotle's proposal for a mixture of oligarchy and democracy seems, in many ways, to anticipate, 2,000 years before the not and cannot deliver. Aristotle's Politics is a book about the kind of knowledge requisite for that kind of skill. Aristotle understands the mixed constitution as a balance of classes--the one, the few, and the many. He doesn't so much insist, as you will see in your reading, on the actual separation of functions of government. It is the skill possessed by the greatest statesmen, you might say, the fathers of the constitutions, as it were, who create the permanent framework in which allows later and lesser figures to handle change. Aristotle understood the importance of the separation of powers doctrine and the balance of factions, he says. He clearly understands, in many ways, the virtues of private property and of commerce, he writes. But the aim of the city is not wealth, is not the production of wealth, he tells us.that is the highest priority. Individual freedom may be, at best, a desirable byproduct of the Aristotelian mixed regime, but individual freedom is not its defining or principle goal. people par excellence--the Phoenicians would be the best regime. Aristotle could never endorse the view stated by a famous American president that the business of America is business. The political partnership, he says, must be regarded for the sake of noble acts performed well. These political clubs or parties use their influence to incense the populous, using their power to whip up dangerous passions that tend to make American politicians closer to demagogues than to statesmen. He would also regard the peculiar American practice of elections, rather than the Greek practice of appointing political offices by lot. Aristotle offers a serious challenge to existing Greek traditions and patterns of political education, says Berlin. Berlin: The core of political science is the concept of the regime, of the politea. The regime, for him, is not one branch of human activity among others, it is the fundamental principle or ordering principle that makes all the others even possible, he says. Berlin mentions Bismark, Disraeli, Franklin Roosevelt, Pericles, Lincoln, and Churchill. They provide a virtual education in statecraft, he writes. The great-souled person is the ideal recipient of a liberal education, says David Frum. He says the gentleman is not a philosopher in the strict sense, but a person of inherited wealth. Frum: The gentleman lacks the speculative intelligence of a Socrates, but he has practical rationality. He calls this kind of knowledge, of practical judgment, by the term phronimos, that he has on the blackboard.. The quality that I'm going to quote is that which distinguishes successful statesmen from others, Frum says. animal means first to possess speech or reason that allows us to participate in a community or a way of life governed by shared standards of justice and injustice. To be a political animal, for him, is to engage or to be engaged in this ongoing conversation and debate over the very nature of justice. To refuse to participate is either to be below humanity or above it, he says. is not a theoretical subject in the matter of physics or metaphysics or mathematics. Its purpose is not knowledge for its own sake. Clarity within the limits of its subject. How much precision does the subject allow? How do we know? There will always, he suggests, appear to be something ad hoc about the methods used in the study of politics. We will have to let the method fit the subject, rather than demanding the subject matter fit a kind of apriori method. To insist on that kind of methodological purity, he implies, would be to impose a false sense of unity, afalse sense of certainty or absoluteness. the regime, to be objective and disinterested, as if it were viewing human affairs from a distant planet. Aristotle takes his stand from within politics and the regime of which he is a part. But we all know, do we not, that most contemporary political scientists tend to be liberals. Their values are liberal values. This raises a question. Whether the relation between contemporary political science and liberalism is merely accidental or whether there is some intrinsic, some necessary connection between them. One might do well to ponder which political science is really more scientific--Aristotle's, which is explicitly and necessarily evaluative. the back door. On Friday, let me just remind you, Il Principe. We'll study Machiavelli. On this very partisan note I conclude. On Thursday, we'll study the life of the Italian statesman and play a game of chess with him. We're going to see how well he can play the game of poker. I'm looking forward to it. I hope you'll join us for the game on Friday night at 8 p.m. ET on CNN.