Bogdan Fedeles: Today we're going to be discussing in detail the mechanism of HMG-CoA synthase. The enzyme is a key enzyme in central metabolism responsible for making the five carbon building blocks from which all sterols, such as cholesterol and steroid hormones are made. To help us understand the mechanism, a crystal structure of the enzyme is provided in this problem. Your support will help MIT OpenCourseWare continue to offer high-quality, educational resources for free. To make a donation or view additional materials from hundreds of MIT courses, visit MIT Open courseWare at ocw.mit.edu. structure, H233. But if you look at this histidine, it's quite far from our cysteine here. And it's only with collecting many different kinds of experimental evidence that we can put together a more definitive mechanism. Once acetyl-CoA has reacted with the enzyme, hence, formed the thioester with the cy Steine 111, we're now ready to proceed with the reaction and form a carbon-carbon bond. Let's try to write the mechanism for that part. of the problem. Second question of this problem is asking about the stabilization of the tetrahedral intermediate, which actually we have just discussed. Question 3 is asking us to review the mechanisms by which enzymes can achieve their amazing rate acceleration, which is on the order of 10 to the 6 to 10 to 15 times over the uncatalyzed reaction. Part 4 of the problem is asks us to look up the structure of coenzyme A, or CoA and then contrast the reactivity of say, acetyl-CoA, the thioester with CoA. with the reactivity of a thioester with a much smaller thiol group. The resonance that we observe in oxygen esters is almost completely absent in thioesters. And this fact makes the Thioesters less stable and therefore, more reactive. Let's take a look at the structure of coenzyme A, which is a huge dalton complex. The advantage of having such a long arm is that it provides a way to insert the substrate, which will attach here, to say, acetyl-CoA. a look. Here is an oxygen ester that shows a proton in alpha position. And as you know, the lone pairs on this oxygen can conjugate with the carbonyl group. So the electrons can move like this, and then we're going to have a negative charge here and a positive charge here. And this is possible because the electrons on both oxygens are found in orbitals of comparable energies. By contrast, in the case of a thioester, we have a sulfur.