The two-level problem is one that's exactly solved. It's one of our favorite exactly solved problems, although it doesn't seem to have any physical relevance. So we can take a two by two Hamiltonian and exactly diagonalize it. And that's done using a unitary-- or actually, in the case that we looked at, orthogonal-- transformation. And so we're going to talk about that for a two-mode molecule. And we've got to do some work on this perturbation theory in H12-- and we weren't even going to do that here. Learn how to use the t matrices, or the t dagger matrix. These things enable you to solve basically any problem in time independent quantum mechanics. Non-degenerate perturbation theory is really powerful because it's also incredibly ugly. This is a whole new way of looking at spectroscopy, which is about understanding how things things transition and how things are affected by quantum fluctuations in the environment. It's a way of taking the totality of observations that you're going to make and saying, yes, I have looked inside this molecule. And I've determined everything that I'm allowed to determine. Perturbation theory is a tool that you can use to solve any problem involving molecules. We're not allowed to determine the wave function by any experiment. But we are able to observe the energy levels and properties of the Hamiltonian. And today's lecture is mostly going to be on the interactions between normal modes of a polyatomic molecule. It's a small number of energy levels that we're sampling in an experiment. And it tells you how to get rid of the wave functions that is just contaminates the other stuff. put parentheses around things. So this is now what we were calling h tilde, and this is c tilde. This is now an equation that says, OK, we can transform the Hamiltonian into diagonal form-- E1, En, zeros. For any eigenvalue, we have an eigen vector. Now what we'd really like to know is, well, how do we get these eigenvectors from the unitary transformation that diagonalizes H. We don't calculate this unitary-- yes? to know how it's evolving. But often that initial state is an eigenstate of one of the exactly solved problems. And so you want to be able to re-express that in terms of the eigenstates of the real problem. So here we have non-degenerate perturbation theory. And it is a mind numbing, formal derivation. So we start out with this rotary equation. And we say, well, let us expand the Hamiltonian. And let's put a little thing here. first-order correction to the energy. And we can continue. The algebra isn't beautiful, but we end up getting the following equations. We have E n 1 is H 1 nm. And then we get the second-order corrections to theenergy, which is m not equal to n h n m 1 H m n 1 over En 0. That's all we need. Now it does say non-degenerate perturbation theory. And so it's subject to the requirement that H1 n m over E n minus E m. than quadratic terms. The quartic terms are 100 times smaller than the cubic terms. And so you don't need to go much further. So these are the couplings between modes 1 and 2 that are cubic. And then we have 1/4 k 112 Q 1 squared Q 2 squared. There's also a Q1 Q2 cubed, and those terms usually are not important because they mostly are dealt with under here. And you could have Q1 cubed. But we already deal with that in the single-mode problem. So we won't worry about that. discovered and understood by Fermi. And it has to do with CO2. Omega 1 in CO2 is approximately twice omega 2. The symmetric stretch and the bend are in FermI resonance. So what happens then? Suppose we have a level that involves V1, V2, V3. And nearby there is a level V1 minus 1 V2 plus 2 V3, which are nearly degenerate. So the levels repel because they're interacting and they're out of position. names that any educated physical chemist will know to say, oh, that's the Bixon-Jortner. And they're still alive. They're still doing beautiful stuff. But anyway, that is all I want to say today. I will do details on one mode and Morse oscillator in other sorts of things next time. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from. Back To the pageyou came from, Back to thepage you came From. Back into the page.