William Wordsworth was a very famous individual along with the next person we talked about Samuel Samuel Taylor Coleridge probably the two of the most influential of this particular era. He defied the conventions of his time by insisting that poetry should be should express deep feelings about everyday experiences and that's important because if you can recall back to the introduction of this unit and the big ideas and such you know it's about that emotional feelings and that powerful feelings. He was one that really was pushing pushing and pushing for those to be in his writings and that why he stands out that's why you've such a visionary of the time and the building background on the next page gives a little bit more insight. This is probably one of the most difficult readings that we have throughout the semester I don't think it's impossible but you're going to have to you're gonna have to work a little bit ok so just kind of grab onto those moments those moments of nature and such but also as this is kind of like a monologue where he's going on all of a sudden we find out at the end that he's actually talking to somebody and based on his history can we guess who that might be and why this moment is interesting. different than the typical every line it's kind of its own little thing and so when it's read in a different way it's it might see a little Jill at times button jamming is something very easy to visually identify a once you understand oh that's in JAMA it's a piece of cake okay. It might give you a little bit of reservation here and there but it shouldn't okay what I want to talk about first is a 786 lines composed a few miles above Tintern Abbey on Abbey you know a religious building. he talks a lot I mean just describing you know leaning against the tree and looking out amongst the field on looking at the orchard with the unripe fruits are clad in one green hue. He almost has kind of a teleportation back to some degree of when he was a child okay he goes into great details about when I found through around the river like a like a row like a deer and I would play and when I was little I was having a great time but when you're a kid playing outside you really appreciate how beautiful it is. This is the place one of my earliest memories was I was like two or three and I went to Disneyland on California I remembered nothing throughout my life except I remember visually what it looked like. I remember standing there in the front of Disneyland in California and watch the train go across and was like this is the same spot I stood when I was three you know and so it's kind of a nice little Wow think about how I've changed in my life think aboutHow I've grown up things that I've experienced. "It's a lot more difficult than reading those pulpme to expect you to get out of this because this is one I probably say the top three or four most difficult pieces," he says. "It's not that it's crazy hard but it's just it's a much more difficult to read than it looks," he adds. "I don't know what you're going to do with your life after you get through this," he admits. "This is one of the most difficult things I've ever done"