in this module of tools and equipment we're going to explore cookware and storage wear there are five basic metals that are used in cookware aluminum copper stainless steel cast iron and carbon steel aluminum pots and pans are the ubiquitous pans that you'll find in most every kitchen. There are various different kinds of specialty pans including crepe pans which are shallow and thin and flat and used to make a crepe using the method of smoothing out the batter across the bottom roasting pans are used for roasting meats and vegetables. A saute pan or satwa is one with the straight sides and has a larger surface area which makes it ideal for tasks like searing meat or reducing a pan sauce. A sawtooth or skillet has a slope side and is used mainly in sauteing the slope sides providing the ample and perfect angle for flipping your food or as it's referred to as saute or to jump a rondeau is a favorite staple in a chef's arsenal and should be in any home cooks as well. These polycarbonate and stainless steel containers called hotel pans are designed to be used to store small amounts of ingredients on a refrigerated make table such as a sandwich station. They come in sizes ranging from full size hotel pans two-thirds pans half pans third pans fourth pans six pans and ninth pans and various other sizes each size is available in six six inch four inch and two inch deep models. sip top bags often referred by their trade name ziploc are an indispensable storage device for kitchens they allow the storage of dry goods and other small quantity items. If you want to get a job in a professional kitchen as a prep cook which is where all cooks and eventually chefs start off at you have to first understand the basic terminology of some equipment in the kitchen. This will also help you if you're a home cook you just want to pick up some stuff at your local restaurant supply store so here we have our basic hotel pan and hotel pans are defined by their depth. There are also half hotel pans which are simply just half the size of a hotel pan still coming in a two inch four inch and six inch depth. however it's not an exhaustive list for more information i suggest ktom.com which can be accessed at the link on the screen. It's a good place to start if you want to find out more about your local football team. It can also be used as a starting point for a discussion about the game. For more information on the game go to www.nhs.org.uk/sport/football/index.html. For a list of all the football teams in the UK, go to http://www.sportstats.co.uk/. For more football news, visit Sportsmail's football page.