okay folks let's get started how's everybody doing pretty good Santa Claus has come to town and you know Santa does with naughty kids Hees them finals he gives them finals. He gives them very evil finals is what he does okay so look out for Santa Claus he's really a really a bad guy uh let's see let's think about a couple of things in terms of announcements. We have a couple surprises today one of which is standing in front of you with all this on and there's more surprises as well. have an extra credit question I see well nodding yes doesn't do it it's got to be no that's okay I'm not. I think you know what I like to to have when it comes to extra credit right so we'll we'll see how that plays out there might be some music today I don't know so that's that's possible okay um let's see so that'm basically it uh the the format as I said is the same as before the point changes are different. There are 25 questions in section one that tells you anything. Glycogen phosphor ASE a as the more active form is that usually in the cell when it's present it's in the r State because only when glucose is present will it get converted to the t-state if glucose is not present or glucose is is present in very very low quantities then there will be no gluc glycogen phosph or as a in the T State. glycogenosphor B on the other hand is much more likely to be found in the R State. Def phosphorilation on theOther hand favors the breakdown of glycogen. things all come together now again I'm not going to ask you to rank them or do complex scenarios with these that's not the point of telling you all that information but it is important that you understand all those different types of Regulation. The phosphorilation of proteins is favoring the breakdown of glycogen. The r&t involve allosteric affectors okay all right okay so that's uh where we start now um there's a couple things about regulation that we haven't talked about and you say my God it's already you know murderous right well. scheme that exists in muscle all right well what does this tell us it tells us first of all that pp1 is bound to another protein and the unfortunate name is this protein is called G subm in this case and we'll call it g subm that's not a g protein it's just holding on to phosphoprotein phosphatase phosph protein phosphat enzyme okay now what happens well this phosphotase has to be regulated okay when thisosphatase is in linked to GM as you see it here it is the most active okay it is most active so we're going to follow from left to right what happens when epinephrine gets. Liver is the only tissue in the body that produces glucose glucose. When I stop exercising my tissues don't need it. When my blood glucose levels go up what starts happen happening to my liver's ability to push out glucose. glucose is a poison we're avoiding the poison with this very very Rapid Control that we've got here it's a very very important Point okay everybody understand what I've just told you so being able to carry around its own off switch allows this guy to merily go along its the most efficient way that it can turn itself off really quick. There are a variety of what are called glycogen storage diseases and these diseases arise as a result of efficiency of certain enzymes either in that pathway or related to that pathway. There are several of these voner disease uh this one lacks a glucose 6 phosphatase and affects liver and kidney and what happens to the glycogen. I will autograph these for you you can sell them on eBay I you know you don't know how much you might make from your knowledge here okay so knowledge is power knowledge may be money so you might meet some exciting people from having these things too. thing if we look at what happens with the thing here's here's a a plot of the concentration of ADP. The person with McArdle disease sees ADP levels go high and then it falls meaning that the cells are catching up and making ATP now for that last chance at a CD my question to you is what's making this possible. It's something we learn during the term something we learned a very important process that allows these people who have this disease to lead a fairly normal life. that's really odd you know there's all these things out there that relate to music that involve the letter B okay so the Beatles I mean they were wow what awesome things and you guys aren't old enough but what succeeded The Beatles was this group called The Beggs anybody hear the bgs oh you heard the BS okay Night Fever Night Fever right okay so anyway and what succeeded the bGS was a really important group known as right the back street boy what a group huh and of course what succeeded them we know of course was um yeah low moment in music I think but if you thought you've seen low moments in music You Ain't Seen Nothing Yet let me introduce the next bees that are going to turn the music world upside down. hard okay it goes how you doing uh they're back in my office come back and see me my office there now uh I'm going there in a minute yeah I got to take everything down but [Music] yeah e e e. hard okay it went how youdoing uh they were back in his office. Come back andsee me myoffice there now.hardOkay it goesHow you doing? How you doing.hard? How are you doing?""I'm fine. I'm fine," he says. "I'm going over to my office. I've got to get everything down"