We have in essence three different views of fiscal policy and how well it works orHow well it doesn't work. Keynes says we can change aggregate demand in such a way that we can make. Classical view says that people are rational. Supply-side view says we know eventually the short-run aggregate supply curve will increase and we go to the full employment level of output if you guys engage in policy where you're in essence borrowing money to create a deficit and the today means that at some point in time in the future you're going to have to increase taxes. Atas: We have a problem where we've got say real GDP, our price level, aggregate demand, and our short-run aggregate supply. Atas: Eventually what's going to happen here is an irate demand it's what's changing the short- run aggregate supply right eventually this recession. We're at some full employment level of output YF and here we are initially we're in some recession right. We know that eventually SRA s increases to S aureus - output equals YF price level equals po2. change the demand for loanable funds so you have this market right if you're gonna have the government go out and borrow money which is what they're going to do on this expansionary fiscal policy. When they borrow money they got to go into the loanable Funds market so when the government says give us money for the savings bond you can give it to your kid. There's only one way for them to get this additional money when the bonds come due and that's to raise taxes. Thanks to interest it won't be 20 that you have to borrow or in raise taxes for it'll actually be like say 30. and we say okay go out and borrow 500 billion dollars or spend an extra four hundred billion dollars. The G causes aggregate demand to go up but the change in interest rates causes consumption and investment to come back down. Shortland implication is is that you can't just plug in the number from here and get to where you want to be if this guy's going down what does that mean for the long-run do what well of investments decreasing what else is decreasing investment goes down? The quantity and quality of resources and the level of technology are what determines this guy right. could be anything now you have this deficit here of 20 all right and then next year things get fixed so here they are maybe even revenues go back up to a hundred and they also say basically once you start spending that money it's hard for people to stop spending the money they want their money right. If you don't you still have the deficit all you to do is just move the bonds down right and so that maybe now you're back down here to 100 and now you've back down to 100 all right. revenue will we collect how many guys are going to work later today okay what's what's your name again Paige okay what do you do again okay. So here the supply-side view this is called the Laffer curve. It's the rate it's the marginal tax rates that are important right it's not what you spend it's how much you take. If tax rates are 20% if the government takes 20% of my pay they are in essence taking all of my labor every Monday. doesn't make any sense I'm not gonna do that I'm gonna goof off. I don't want it because they're facing a marginal tax rate that's really really high so which view is Keynesian new classical supply? I'll write the paper and win the Nobel Prize and I can go to Sweden and get the nice little bitty gold medallion that I couldn't wear around my neck for the rest of life at such a such recession. alright this is the end of test three material I will.