Bolek Wyslouch: How do you convert a given physical system with all the forces, et cetera, into some sort of fixed form, fixed type of notation? Bolek: Once we understand two, we will then generalize to infinite number of oscillators, which is actually-- so this model, which consists of weights hanging under the influence of gravity plus the springs will be then used for many applications of the concepts later in this course. Boleslaw: We can come back to that initial conditions and impose some initial conditions. BolesLAW WYSLOUCH: The coordinate system is this. When we start talking about the system in principle in the case of somewhat larger angles, you have to worry about vertical positions as well. So let's look at what are the forces acting, for example, on this mass, the mass, which is-- if it's displaced from a vertical position. Temporarily, let's introduce an angle here to characterize this displacement from vertical. And then we just plug in-- also the angle can be converted into position by realizing that the distance times the angle is equal to displacement, the usual geometry. me do everything. Let's write down everything in the matrix form, because it turns out that linear matrices are very useful for that. We will use them very, very-- in a very simple way. So instead of repeating writing, all the x1s, x2, et cetera, instead I just stick them into one or two element objects. I use matrices to multiply things, and if I want to know x1 and X2, I can always go, OK, the top component of vector x, lower component of vectors x gives me the solution. Right? BOLESLAW WYSLOUCH: The physics answer is to find fixed frequency modes us such that the system, the complete system, oscillates at one frequency. This is so-called normal mode. It turns out that every of the system will have a certain number of frequencies, normal modes, that would-- the whole system would oscillate at the same frequency. So I propose that-- so of course, we use the usual trick that anytime we have a solution in complex variables, we can always get back to real things by taking a real part. Mathematically, the way to find out the oscillating frequency is you take a determinant of m minus 1 K minus i omega squared must be equal to 0. So let's try to see how to calculate things. So this is the matrix that contains all the information about our system, the mass, the gravitational acceleration, the length, the spring strength, et cetera. And we assumed they oscillate with a fixed frequency. But if I find them, this would correspond to the normal frequencies. is basically equivalent to the following equation g over l plus k over m minus omega squared. So there is one solution, one oscillation, that does not depend on the spring constant. And there's a second solution which corresponds to minus, where omega squared is equal to g overl plus 2k over m. And this is interesting. This is a normal mode. And it can go forever at this particular frequency. The spring is completely irrelevant for this motion. If I cut it off, the motion will not change. It just happens that two identical pendula are going at their own natural frequency. so it's stretch from both sides. And the whole system oscillates at the same frequency, and because of this additional force of spring, the frequency is actually higher, it's larger. All right, so that's the first step in understanding the system. We now know that there are two oscillations and two normal frequencies. The next step to finish our understanding of the system in a mathematical way, to describe it fully, I have to know what is the shape of oscillations. So in principle, at the end of the day, I still want to know how much 1 moves, how much 2 moves. The shape, 1 and 1, and 1 minus 1 is fixed, because these are the shape of normal modes, which corresponds to those frequencies. And the superposition of x1 plus x2 gives you the most general combination of possible motion. So if I write this down now in terms of position of number 1 and number 2, so I have a position of X1 as a function of time. In general, it will look like this. It will be some sort of constant alpha, cosine omega 1 t plus phi. The magenta is normal mode number 2. And blue and the red are the actual pendula. And the motion of blue and red is simply a linear sum of the two. And this is exactly what-- this is the computer simulation that shows you that one of them is going up, the other one down, et cetera. This is for the certain combination of initial conditions. I could go change initial conditions in my program and have a different behavior. But whatever happens, I would be able to-- it will always be a combination of thetwo motions. BolesLAW WYSLOUCH: You can have all kinds of motions by simply adjusting initial conditions. So do you know-- so this is how we can have different shape of motion, depending on the initial condition. So let's say, in fact, do I have it in this one here? Yes. So now, let's take it to, for example, Jupiter. Jupiter, g, is much larger. So the frequency would be larger. Things will be faster, right? That's the higher frequency. But also the difference between two frequencies will be smaller. like this. OK? So there are in fact two-- when you look at this picture, you can see two frequencies. One which is clear the oscillation of the-- high-frequency oscillation. But there's also this kind of overarching frequency of much smaller frequency, and this is what corresponds to a difference of two things. So we see this here. We see it on the pendula. But now what we are going to do is we're going to try to hear it, right? So this is a demonstration which maybe it works, maybe not. sort of early on, to instead of, so far, when we talked about pendula, we describe their motion in terms of motion of number 1, motion of Number 2. It turns out we can rewrite the equation into some sort of new variables, where, so-called normal coordinates, where you'll simultaneously describe both of them and then kind of mix them together to have a new formula. So instead of keeping track of x1 and x2 independently, you define something which I called u1, which is simply x1 plus x2. The determinants needed no matrices, no nothing. We just added and subtracted the two equations, and things magically separated. So you can always have a linear combination of parameters for arbitrary size coupled oscillators system where you combine different coordinates, and you basically force the system to behave in a way in which it induces the single oscillation, single frequency. So this is, again, a very powerful trick, but usually for most cases, you can do that only after you have solved it, after you've found out normal modes, et cetera.