HONG LIU: This is a key relation between the bulk and the boundary theories. The more you go to the interior of the space time, then corresponding to the lower energy process when viewed form the field theory. So the duality is that once you realize there's such relation, since the two sides are completely different objects, so the game is that you really have to do lots of guess work. Essentially, you have two sides if you want to relate things on two sides. HONG LIU: We have N equals 4 super Yang-Mills theory. And then here, you have type IIB string in Ads5 times ds5. Here on this side, there is a conformal symmetry which we explained before because this is a four dimensional theory. But being the right hand side, we still have some SO 5, S5. So this is more like a space time symmetry. And the isometry of S5 precisely gives you SO6. And we will not be explicit. You can also map the supersymmetry between them. For each global symmetry in the field theory side, there's a corresponding local symmetry on the gravity side. The isometry is important for the following reason. Even though this is a subgroup, when we talk about quantum gravity, the AdS5 times S5 specifies the asymptotic geometry of the space time. So-called large transformations is that they don't go to the Identity at infinity. These large gauge transformations can be considered as the global part of the diffeomorphism. The gauge symmetry is just redundant freedom. You never see it on the other side. The classical gravity limit is the same as QFT, Quantum Field Theory in curved space time. So gravity does not fluctuate. But your matter field can fluctuate, h bar equal to 1. And then alpha prime goes to zero. So this is what we expect. If you still remember what we did before in the large N gauge theory, in theLarge N limit, the fluctuations become very small, et cetera. So that means that we can actually use classical gravity to, in principle, solve problems which are strongly coupled. In principle, the corrections beyond this limit can again be studied on the gravity side. So this is the classical limit. In the classical string limit, still you can see the N go to infinity, which corresponds to GN. But here, the alpha prime can be arbitrary. So let me just say alpha prime finite no longer zero. And then this is just corresponding to Lambda finite, which is no longer infinite. So any questions? Yes? AUDIENCE: Doesn't small alpha over R squared mean large GS? essentially the semi classical gravity limit because we still treat the matter fields essentially as quantum. HONG LIU: Yang-Mills theory lives on Minkowski space. And then you say you can imagine that this is the boundary, this relation is related to the bulk and the boundary. And this is a postulate based on that fact. Yes? AUDIENCE: I thought one of the motivations for thinking about the holographic duality was to try to escape [INAUDIBLE] And all of a sudden, it strikes me, so we're trying to get on the boundary of AdS. Then they will also exist in the massless particles. HONG LIU: Given this mapping, any operator is due to a bulk field. So for local operator on the field theory side, we can immediately ask questions related to operators on this side, and try to ask what's the counterpart on the other side. And ask the story about the field on the gravity side. We can start developing the relations. So do you have any questions regarding this? So now I'll try to answer this question. As I said before, in establishing such dictionary you often have to do lots of guesswork, and then you check. HONG LIU: Phi in principle can fluctuate. And its expectation may also be able to fluctuate in the space time. So expectation value essentially can be associated with the boundary value of the field. With this relation, we have established a connection. between the Yang-Mills theory coupling with the value of phi at the boundary of AdS. With the relation, the operator corresponding to the dilaton must be the N equal to 4 super Yang-mills Lagrangian. phi 0 O in the boundary theory must be related-- now I'm generalizing this story. The bulk field phi due to O has a boundary value phi 0. If you want to preserve the symmetry of the original Lagrangian, then you can choose a certain O. But in principle, you can choosing any O. You can break the symmetry if you want. Impose this kind of boundary conditions. Then you may break AdS symmetry too. So in the end, what we will describe is a self consistent story. I will not contradict myself in my later discussion. J mu. For simplicity, let me just take it to be u(1). Then I can deform the boundary theory by adding a source for this J mu. And a mu is the source. And then according to this identification, the A mu must be A mu-- we should be able to identify it as the boundary value of some bulk field. So this is a bulk vector field. But now we can argue why this should be a gauge field. And to see this is very easy because since J mu is conserved, then this coupling-- so let me call this star star star. T mu mu to the boundary Lagrangian. And this is the source to the stress tensor. This is when h is very small. When we consider the information, we always consider the source is small. But now, we can argue this thing, mass corresponding to boundary value of the metric in the gravity side. So this is a very general statement valid for any correspondence between the gravity and the AdS metric. And now, from your knowledge of quantum field theory, when I add such a term to the field theory,. it's the same. and the field theory. And that also tells you that if you have a theory which due into a higher dimensional theory, and then that theory has a stress tensor, then this bulk theory must have gravity. So you can say, if any field theory is due to a theory of one higher dimension, that theory must involve gravity-- nothing about quantum gravity. Let's stop here. We're not going to get into quantum gravity right now, we're just going to talk about the theory of gravity.