The coherent state has a simple definition, simple but subtle. It's an eigenstate of the annihilation operator, and it has a complex eigenvalue alpha. The person who popularized those states was Glauber, and he got amply rewarded for that. Your support will help MIT OpenCourseWare continue to offer high quality educational resources for free. To make a donation or view additional materials from hundreds of MIT courses, visit MIT Open courseWare at ocw.mit.edu. today is that the coherent state is a complex number. The coherent state has a time evolution. It moves in a circle. And this is really the phasor of the electric field associated with it. So coherent state, the alpha value is directly related to an electric field. That's why this state is closely related to the classical limit of the electromagnetic field. We are now using the coherent states to look at any other quantum state of the. electromagnetic field, any statistical operator which describes photons by. forming the diagram matrix element of the statistical operator with alpha. In quantum mechanics, you cannot measure x and p simultaneously. The three different ways are Q, P, and W. Q of alpha is a real probability, it's always positive. The other guys, P of alpha, can be positive or negative. And also, W of alpha can be negative or positive. All three have their advantages and disadvantages. So they all have pluses and minuses. But the reason why I picked for the course Q ofalpha is that it's a real. probability, and this has to be positive. the coherent state is now not this Gaussian. It doesn't have thisGaussian distribution as a course of probability. It's what you want-- what maybe some of you wanted to see-- oh, by the way, it's a delta function. The probability of the coherent state alpha has a delta. function peak at alpha, which is sort of nice. And the number state is not a ring of a finite radius. You would naively expect the energy is sharp. The square root of the energy's electric field, shouldn't it be sharp? And indeed, it issharp. Professor: "If you want to really appreciate the quantum character, you have to know the classic description first" "So the fluctuations of the intensity are usually expressed by the second order temporal coherence function" "Quantum mechanically, we will see that the g2 function is not necessarily larger than 1, it can be smaller than 1" "It's only possible if you have a truly non-classical state. That's actually an interesting-- you can see-- litmus test for the quantumness" number state, the number of photons is an eigenvalue. Therefore, n squared average is n average squared. The Fano factor is minus 1. Sub-Poissonian distribution. And the g2 function, which classically cannot go below 1, is now n minus 1 over n. It is smaller than 1. And you see immediately that the biggest violation for g2 is to go to minus 1 for the case of a single photon state. Any questions? AUDIENCE: Shouldn't it be 0 for [INAUDIBLE]?? PROFESSOR: The g2function? No, if you put in-- wait. Gosh. I'll double-check. me first address one misconception. You can say, Well, let's just use a coherent state. Coherent states, as I've just shown you, are very classical. They've always a g2 function of 1. And attenuation is not changing it. Attenuation is preserving that. So you can now say that you take your coherent state and you attenuate it down that there is only one photon left. Is that a single photon state? The answer is no. It is an attenuated incoherent state. The creation of single photons has been sort of a small cottage industry over the last 10 or 15 years. Single photons are often needed for protocols in quantum computation. One of the leaders in this field is Professor Vladan Vuletic here at MIT. The equation of single photon is essential for studying non-classical light, but also since it's a very active frontier of our field. It's a little bit a way that we cannot control the bullets which are fired. But we can control the guns and we make sure that each gun can emit exactly one bullet. it's about-- it involves single atoms. But it's a little bit more demanding like that. So you want to take 1 atom home or 1 ion. But the problem is if the atom or ion emits a light, it can emit the light into all directions. And therefore, you have a single photon afterwards. But you have many, many different spacial modes. And in any given mode, it will not have a. single photon. So therefore, what you have to add to the single atom or single ion is-- you. have to put it in a cavity. The Hanbury Brown Twiss experiment was the first experiment which really looked at g2 functions correlations. It was the beginning of quantum optics and modern experiments with light. The classical limit is always a limit of high intensity, so at any given time, you have a ton of photons. If you put a light bulb into a cavity or couple the light from a light bulbs into a fiber, the light becomes spatially a single mode. That's the only way how you can distinguish a lightbulb from a laser beam. course practically, if you take a thermal source and filter it down to a single mode, you will be left with only a few photons. You cannot create an intense enough single mode light source unless you use stimulated emission. And that's a laser. So anyway, what Colin says is there are actually more different light sources that just the laser and the thermal light source. There are LEDs or semiconductor devices, which provide photons with interesting statistical properties. OK. We have to stop. I'll see you on Wednesday.