The famous example was posed by Comte de Buffon back in the 18th century. It marks the beginning of a subject that is known as the subject of geometric probability. The problem is pretty simple. We take a needle that has a certain length-- l-- and we throw it at random on the plane. So the needle might fall this way, so that it doesn't cross any line, or it might. end up crossing one of the lines. If the needle is long enough, it might actually even end up crossed two lines. Theta is defined as the acute angle that the direction of the needle is making with the lines, so that theta will vary over a range from 0 to pi over 2. The needle makes two angles with the part of the line. It's this angle, and the complimentary one, which one do we take? Well, we use a convention that thetas are defined as angles that the needle makes with the parts of the lines. This angle is equal to 2 over l over 2, so this is also the angle here. is this 4 with this 2 give us a 2. We have 2l over pi d. And then the integral from 0 to pi over 2 of sine theta. Now the integral of sin theta is minus cosine theTA. And we need to evaluate this at 0 andpi over 2. This turns out to be equal to 1. And this is the final answer to the problem that we have been considering. And now, a curious thought. How can you figure out the number pi? Take your needle, throw it at random a million times, and count the frequency with which the needle ends up crossing the line. So it gives you a good estimate of this particular number. unit cube. So you throw points. Some fault inside. Some fall outside. You count the frequency with which the points happen to be inside your set. And as long as you're throwing the points uniformly over the cube, then the probability of your complicated set is going to be the volume of that set. You estimate the probability by counting the frequencies with which you get points in that set, and so, by using these observed frequencies, you can estimate the volume. It turns out that these days, physicists and many engineers use methods of this kind quite often and in many important applications.