Professor Amy Hungerford: Today it is my very great privilege and pleasure to introduce Andrew Goldstone, a TF in this course. Andrew is a fourth-year student in the Ph.D. program in English, and he is writing a dissertation on the autonomy of the work of art in modernism. In preparation for that, for next week I'd like you to finish the novel and then read his essay, "On a Novel Entitled Lolita" It should be bound at the back of your book. T.S. Eliot's "Gerontion" is a spoof of Nabokov's "Humbert" Eliot says poems should be autotelic, that means they should be an end unto themselves. Eliot in some ways comes very close to the kind of ideas about art that Nabokovsky holds. Eight of the eight features of literary modernism that are all important to Nabokova are: obsession with art's autonomy, the idea that art is its own law, that it has no other purpose than its own. sense that civilization itself is being overturned. The idea that culture itself is the saving, most important activity that people can engage in. Fourth--and this goes along with that--a rejection of convention, especially sexual convention, sexual morality. Fifth, spatial form, the idea that in place of a linear narrative you have a system of cross-references and repeated motifs that give the structure of works. Sixth, this is a term from the critic Joseph Frank: spatial form. And then, this anticipates my last points: Modernism is self-consciously international. The strategy of the knight's move is to frustrate your expectations, to leap over the apparently important events into something else characterized by a kind of aesthetic play. Nabokov, in 1966 he said this: "The greatest masterpieces of twentieth-century prose" are, in this order: Joyce's Ulysses, Kafka's Transformation"--that is, "Kafka's Transformation," "Ulysses" and "Lolita" The parentheses are a real icon of that. A critic has counted 450 sets of them in this novel. Proust is himself gay. One of his big subjects is homosexuality, and Nabokov's reaction to this is really homophobic. It's about a relationship to predecessors who are seen as too similar. And it should just make you wonder whether pedophilia is in itself a kind of knight's move from homosexuality. In other words, is there another form of perverted desire hiding behind the one that's in front of us? Just a suggestion: look on page 20, still in Humbert's early life, near the bottom. Nabokov's relationship to this modernist past is not just the burlesque that he visits on Eliot. An element of admiration is also present, and that's really part of his relationship to Joyce. I'm just going to name for you four features of Joyce's style that are important to Nabokov: stylistic virtuosity, the ability to imitate any style; at the same time, a scrupulous attention to the banality of everyday life and all its detail. Third characteristic, the constant use of a superimposed structure. A list of names leads up to this aesthetic sensation, the revelation of a poem. The ordinary materials of life become the basis for a kind of artistic achievement. Even the ordinary names are kind of plants, because almost every name on this list comes back elsewhere in the book. McFate is the icon of the difference between the realistic world of Joyce and the already artificial, already aestheticized world of this novel. No one was ever really named McFate. McFates are a parody of real. The artificial has taken the place of the real here, and this novel really reminds you of that all the time. The thing that stands for randomness in this book, the thing that looks like ordinary detail, has already been arranged to give you artistic pleasure. So, this is the, kind of, hand of Nabokov, taking a narrative of real events and twisting it into something that makes a kind of sense, taking fate and making it McFate. And I want to show you one more example of that, in the scene where Humbert and Lolita have reached the hotel, the Enchanted Hunter. Nabokov's novel is a response in particular to exile. An exile, living in a foreign country, lives in a kind of denaturalized world. Nothing is initially known to make sense; everything has to be figured out and reinvented. In that afterword to this book, Nabokov says he had to invent America. That's because he didn't know it already; it wasn't given to him. But it has a payoff, kind of, a payoff which is the possibility precisely of inventing. because Humbert is a foreigner--into something you can laugh at, something you Can enjoy, something that you can apply the knight's move to. The foreigner's love for this kind of move is a response to this denaturalized world of the exile. Even as it's the prototype for originality, it's also something very disturbing and harmful. And that conjunction has to do with the traumatic event of having had to emigrate, having to take up another language. It's important, in this connection, to remember that the knight’s move as a way of avoiding obstacles, in particular, keeps skipping over forms of violence. the fear that it's too like what he wants to do. But the main point here to think about is that feeling of damage. On page 152, evocation of the landscape: By a paradox of pictorial thought, the average lowland North American countryside had at first seemed to me something I accepted with a shock of amused recognition. "Inutile loveliness" is kind of the key word of Nabokov's novel, and it's the source of the most appealing writing. technique, and he says the novel has as its only purpose to provide aesthetic bliss. So, a European artist actually appears again there, with Claude Lorrain, but kind of made strange: given that knight's move, given a new twist. So--instead of familiar, incorporated into this profoundly strange, vast landscape that gets Humbert's most appealing rhetoric--the rhetoric of an exile. But, I don't want you to think that this just means everything's okay. Of course, everything is not okay. Nabokov tried to become an American writer, as Nabokov says he's doing: trying to invent America, trying to bridge the gap between Russian and English. He translated Lolita back in to Russian later on, and he added a second afterword where he said: That wondrous Russian tongue that, it seemed to me, was waiting for me somewhere, was flowering like a faithful springtime behind a tightly locked gate whose key I had held in safekeeping for so many years, proved to be nonexistent.