Chef Todd Moore shares with you the seven basic skills that I think everyone should have to cook food consistently in the kitchen and be proud of the results. If you already have all seven of these skills and cooking techniques great you can work for me on the other hand if you only have one or two of these Skills that's still fantastic why because I know you'll want to add other skills and learn to cook basic methods know the methods behind all written recipes then you'll be making your cooking a winner every single time. like to cut things up you'll be using fresh vegetables uh anyway uh second in my chef test to anticipate when oil is about to smoke now the skill here is understanding the convective cooking process. When the chef notices the oil starting to change from being perfectly smooth to beginning a convection process then adds the protein product to the pan just before there's visible smoke this is where you get the splattering reaction in the pan. If you give me a chicken breast with a beautiful brown plate appeal that shows your ability to control heat so that the item develops color but doesn't lose moisture or burn you fail this test. one that's lost moisture one that's burned one that shows the lack of involvement in the preliminary steps of the sauté process Chef test number four here's the answer thicken a liquid to make a sauce. Chef should have an understanding of the difference between boil simmer and poach a common mistake of Home cooks and chefs alike for that matter is always boiling items boiling is not a cooking method once you understand how to control the reaction of liquid in a pan you'll be able to perform a poach of a very delicate item like eggs. a chicken most people can put a piece of meat in for a while and I don't have 3 hours to wait on the chef test anyway but roasting something delicate like fish now this shows the ability to show to control dry convective heat dry versus Mo moist in controlling dry heat. There's a very fine line between the coagulation of proteins the stiffening and shrinking of what you're cooking at 165° F and the 212° fah when moisture starts evaporating the key to cooking with dry heat is being able to live in this temperature zone between 165 and 212 where the food Cooks for drying out. a cook that uses a thermometer and this is a cook that passes this test not one that is obviously more cooked than the other to be well done they all look similar on the outside and they're different internal temperatures on the inside if you can Master this you are a master griller most people just burn stuff you fail this test. If you can't tell which steak is rare medium well done if you're taking them off the grill guest atam the chef that can that can't control direct to Source conductive heat would create waste in my restaurant.