Professor: Can you explain the physical significance of the crystal momentum? Professor: The information about the momentum can be encoded in these spatial variation of the phase of the wave function. Professor: A central property from the Schrodinger equation is at the time variation d dt of p is equal to the expectation value of minus d the potential of x d x. The momentum expectation value is time independent, so it can be written in the form of e cubed, equal to e to the minus i upon h bar p l. Glossing over in the entire story here. Which of the following. So, is u of x a real function? Well, so when we started out asking what are the eigenfunctions of the transit by l operator, all we showed was that, and I'm going to do this on a separate board just to make it clearer. Tell me if this turns off, because it kept bumping. OK. So we've determined is that if we take q l is equal to alpha, then Phi sub q if eigenvalue label by its eigen value, q, can be written in the form e to the i q x u sub q of x. In a new way of thinking about the wave function, we have a potential in terms of the potential of l. The eigenfunction of a wave function is defined by the terms of its potential. The potential is the potential in this statement that what we have here is just some translation by x. So we have this potential, and if we translate it by l, then I do a new construct called a new potential. We have a new wave function called Phi sub q, which is equal to e to the i q naught x. This diagram is telling you is which e's are allowed. If you put on a capacitor, played across your perfect lattice, you don't get any current. So the particle, the charged particle in your lattice just oscillates back and forth in a block oscillation. And that is manifestly what happens with copper. But the experimentalist comes back to you and says look dude. That is a ridiculous model because the copper isn't in fact perfect, it's messy. So how do you test the model? Well there are two ways to test the situation. One is you improve the model to incorporate properties that copper actually has. And see if you can actually get the same conductivity. the theory side, because I'm a theorist and you should not let me in a lab. But I collaborate with experimentalists, so they're nice people. They're very good physicists. So here's something you can do. You can build a system that has exactly a periodic potential. It turns out it's very difficult to do this with quantum systems. But what you canDo it with lattices not of atoms, but lattices of dielectric. That equation can be put in exactly the same form as the Schrodinger equation for the time evolution of a wave function. To handle an electric field, you need the potential to be constantly varying. In this experiment, so as the wave packet moves along, what's discovered is that the position-- if I draw the x as a function of t, so now the role of t is being played by the distance it's moved along the wave guide, what you find is that it does this. It exhibits beautiful block oscillations. And this has been proved in a very small number of real honest quantum mechanical systems. situation, it depends on the system. And exactly how it depends is something that is an active area of research. So don't throw away the model. Observe that you've modeled the wrong system. If you find a system that fits your-- that is-- that shares the assumptions of your model, that's when you ask did it work. And it worked like a champ. OK. Now let's talk about real materials. This is going to close up our discussion bands and solids. And this is actually what I wanted to get to at the beginning of the lecture. single electron, and let's put it in the system. What state will this single electron fall into? Yeah one event. But which state? AUDIENCE: [INAUDIBLE] PROFESSOR: Yeah, if you kick the system around, you let it relax a little bit. It's going to fall down to the ground state. You have to couple to something else like hydrogen has to be coupled with an electromagnetic field to decay. But couple it, kick it, and letting it decay. It'll settle down to its groundState. macroscopic amount of energy. Well, it's not macroscopic. it's large. It's not infinitesimally small. That means that there's a minimum amount of. energy that that incident light must have in order to excite the. electron in the first place. So very long wavelength light will never do that. Light along wavelength will not have enough energy to. excite an electron across this gap into the next band to allow. there to be a current, which could oppose the electric field. In one dimensional crystals, the only thing that can happen is, look if you have each band come from allowed energy state. If we include spin, and we have splitting, then it becomes a more subtle story. In 3D, this isn't such a big deal, because those splittings are tiny, and so the states can sort of overlap. But in 1D they can't. But spin in one dimension is little-- I'm lying about spin. But do you really want me to get in spin? In three dimensions, you guys did an interesting thing, when you studied, you didn't know this was about the structure of solids, but it really was. When you studied the rigid rotor, you found that you had energy eigenstates and they were degenerate with degeneracy 2 l plus 1. And what we found here is that these guys could cross. States from different multiplates, with different values of l, had energies that could cross as a function of the strength of the deformation of your system. So here we can have states crossing. There's no nodes here in three dimensions. we add in a lattice we get bands again. The structure's a little more intricate because it depends on the momentum. But these bands now can overlap. Everybody see that? Because there's nothing preventing states from different-- in different multiplates from having the same energy in three dimensions. So how much energy does it take to excite an electron and cause a current that opposes the induced electric field? Nothing. Any electric field that you send in will be opposed by an induced current. called a band insulator. Because there are other ways of being an insulators. So what determined the exact band structure in for a 1D periodic potential? Two properties. One was l, the periodicity. And that came in the q l and k l. And the second is the detailed shape of the potential. Now in three dimensions, the things that are going to determine the potential are not just the distance between atoms, but you have a three dimensional lattice. And so when you solve the problem for the energy eigenvalues is a function of now the three different components of the crystal momentum, you'll get a different set of equations. the atomic orbital structure of the individual atom, the crystal structure, and the resulting band structure. You will almost always find overlapping bands in three dimensions in sufficiently high energy. What we need is one of two things. We need either the band gap coincidentally is ridiculously small, or we need a free particle that has no band gaps at all. That's a good example of that? A free particle, these band gaps go to 0. And so that's a conductor. Just an electron. It conducts, right? OK. If you have a hot piece of copper, then the lattice is wiggling around. And every once in a while, an ion can hit one of the electrons and excite it, give it some momentum. The sea of electrons is constantly being buffeted by this thermal fluctuation. And as a result, you constantly have electrons being excited up, cruising around, falling back down. So you end up with some population of electrons. And they can ask-- and both when asked, although not quite in this language, how likely are you to get an electron up here? How likely is an electron to be excited up thermally? small number. And e to the minus of a small number is close to 1. So at high temperature, you're very likely to excite electrons up here. At low temperatures, it's basically an insulator. This is called a semiconductor. And there are notes on the Stellar. web page that discuss in a little more detail what I just went through and. show you how you build a transistor out of a semiconductors. And the important bit of physics is just this. and metallic without actually being shiny and metallic. And it's not a pigment, so it doesn't absorb light and decay over time. It's like the best thing you could ever do if you wanted to be a shiny, fluttery, flying thing. So there's an incredible amount of physics in this story of the band gaps. And consider this an introduction to the topic. OK. So that's it for band gaps, and I want to move on to the remainder, the last topic of our course. Which is entanglement and quantum computation. Einstein created a thought experiment which we're going to study in detail next week called the EPR experiment. He sent one particle off to a distant planet and the second particle to my sister in DC. And my sister measures this second particle and determines what state it's in and is immediately determined what state the first particle is in over in this distant planet Zorg, right? So that's deeply disconcerting. How can something here dramatically change the state, the configuration, the initial configuration, of a particle arbitrarily far away? Isn't that deeply concerning? who have taken courses in [INAUDIBLE]-- and I'm sure that's all of you because of the GIRs. So I'm very used to microphones, but not in this context. OK. Is this-- yeah, it's on. Can you hear me? All right. So there are lots of ways to slice the story of Einstein by the time he reaches the EPR experiment, which is Einstein, Podolsky, and Rosen for the three people who actually wrote the paper. Allan Bloom: Bell had a lovely way to describe this problem of entanglement. Bloom: He had a friend named Bartelstein who had two quirks. He used to say, if you could only see one leg and that sock was pink, you knew to a certainty that the other sock was not pink.Bloom: Same thing. If you have a coin and you cut it in half down the-- so you've got two coin shape disks. You know somebody is cheating by tossing in the half coin that only has a tail on it. Einstein, Podolsky, and Rosen argued that the EPR paradox suggested that quantum mechanics was incomplete. They said that if you can perform a measurement, you know that quantity absolutely. But you can't do the-- so on the one hand, quantum mechanics says you can’t know physical reality to this level of precision. And on the other hand, the fact that you can do that measurement violates the relativistic picture of reality. But the question is whether or not the framework of quantum mechanics is somehow unsatisfactory in any formal sense.