HONG LIU: So if you want to compute, say, some scattering amplitude from alpha to beta-- so alpha's some initial state and beta's some final state. Say alpha consists of momentum p1 and PN-- or pm, and beta, say momentum p m plus 1 and pn. And then you can get this scattering amplitude just by taking your momentum-space correlation function, OK, for the n points. So this is obtained by doing a Fourier transform. So any questions on this? Yes? AUDIENCE: So can you explain again why this diagram, like, you have one branch and then there's a loop? HONG LIU: To derive that theorem, the time-order matters. OK, you can do this for the full interacting theory. Yeah, just use the free scalar as the-- yeah, because when you go to plus or minus infinity,you can just reduce to the free particles. OK. So this is the first comment. The second comment, each side, we need to here-- from here,we need to truncate the external propagator. OK,. You can consider arbitrary, complicated diagram, OK, as far as that only happens-- yeah. HONG LIU: Z is the same for different processes, but it's different for different particles. Z also has an expansion, just 1 plus order lambda, et cetera, so the leading order, so Z does not contribute. OK, you can just set it to 1, and when you go to the higher order, then the Z can make a contribution. So you just need to separately take into account the Z, and there's no need to contribute-- to calculate those things separately. HONG LIU: This is the self-interact-- yeah, just when the-- when you have an interacting theory. When the particle propagates, it actually can interact with the virtual particle. And so that, this kind of interaction, will affect the property of the propagation. It can have the most effect by prefactor, but actually can change the mass, too. But for the-- oh, it can correct for the mass-- and also, that's the subject of the QFT2. Klein-Gordon equation was the first attempt to write down a wave equation for relativistic particles. Dirac equation was aimed to cure those problems. It solved the first problem, OK, but didn't really solve the second problem. But the level is, again, due to more fundamental reasons, you cannot really interpret the Dirac equations as a quantum mechanics equation. It should be interpreted as a field theory. So nowadays, we interpret this this is the-- gives the field theory for-- OK, of fermions. course, Dirac didn't know this, so essentially, he discovered this beautiful theory for the wrong motivation. And yeah, this happens over and over again in physics. But the key is that if you are good enough, you will find something new and that something new will be useful. OK, so this, first, I'll talk about, introduce the Dirac equation, OK, and its covariance. OK. So the goal is that you write down the equation, like a Schrodinger equation, which is first-order-in-time derivative. doesn't make any sense, OK? So alpha and beta, they have to be some kind of constant, OK, but if alpha andbeta are constant, then this is not even a rotational invariant, not to mention Lorentz environment, OK. So alpha is just some constant, and then, so let's say they are n-by-n matrices. Then in order for that equation to make sense, then psi has to be a n- component vector. OK. They're just some constant Hermitian matrices. And then, so then he reasoned that for this equation, if we want this equation to be Lorentz covariant, then at least it should have the relativistic plane wave as its solution. If it does not even have that type of solution, then you, yeah, of course cannot be covariant. OK, so the minimal requirement-- so before we really try to see how can we make this into a covariant equation, we say let's consider minimal requirement. So we'd like to call this equation star. The Klein-Gordon equation has the following form. We want the right-hand side to be equal to this equation. If that works, then we're guaranteed to have a plane-wave solution of such a dispersion relation because this equation has such a relation. So for this to be true, we just need to have-- so let's compare the second-order derivative term. And then we need alpha i, so we need-- first, when i not equal to j, the off-diagonal terms, they all should vanish, because here there's only diagonal terms. HONG LIU: We said the alpha and the beta, they must be Hermitian. So if we satisfy all these four conditions, and then we will guarantee that that equation star should have the plane-wave solution. And so now you just try to find matrices, satisfy those conditions. OK, you see that to satisfy them needs at least a 4-by-4 matrix, so n has to be 4. So for example, here is one solution. Say you take beta to be 1, so all matrices here should be understood as 2- by-2 matrices. alpha acts on a different component of psi. If you took the grad of psi and then multiplied by alpha, then you'd mix up the components of it. So you'd have a-- so alpha x because alpha x would just be the Pauli x matrices times the grad x. OK? Good? So now, good, you say we have an equation, OK, so psi-- soAlpha is a 4-by-4 matrix, so that means that psi should be a four- component vector. HONG LIU: This is a new object, so we call it spinor. OK, so one half, essentially, you can-- yeah, based on one half,. you can generalize it. So that's why I say this was really genius, because just nobody could have thought of this. OK? There was no clue of such a structure. Yeah. So this is a 4-by-4 matrix. It's just a convenient way to write these 4- by-4 matrices. OK. HONG LIU: So I divided these 4-by-4 matrices into four 2- by-2 blocks, and then I specify each block. AUDIENCE: Yeah, it's just blocks, not matrices in the matrix. HONG LIu: So that I don't have to write all four components. I just-- yeah. OK. So now I will denote-- introduce a new notation so that it looks nicer. I'll denote the gamma 0 equal to i beta and then the gamma i equal toi times beta alpha i. HONG LIU: All the gamma matrices, so you can check yourself, OK, all these are given by just this. When mu not equal to nu, of course, the right-hand side is 0, so that just is equal to that equation. From those solutions of beta and alpha, we can write down different solutions of gamma. So for example, for 1, you're corresponding to gamma 0 equal to minus i. There are infinite number of such solutions, and I will comment on all those different solutions. same story just here, you just forget about beta. OK, the same story, you forget the beta, and then you only need alpha i alpha j the commutator to be 0 for i not equal to j. And then also, you'd want the alpha i square equal to 1, OK, so for any i. So now these are the conditions for the alphas, and now you can actually satisfy by 2-by-2 matrices. So what matrix satisfies this kind of relation? AUDIENCE: Pauli. the meaning of all these different solutions for alpha and beta or for gammas, OK? So as I mentioned, you can have infinite number of solutions. What's the meaning of them? So first, let's imagine when we look at this equation-- so as I said, this is a matrix equation. In this matrix equation, then you have this psi which is a four- component vector. OK, so imagine, just say, consider making a basis change in psi. So now, so psi prime satisfies essentially the same equation but a different gamma matrix. because one is going to change the basis. So you can show any matrices which satisfy that equation, they're all related by similarity transformation. They're just corresponding to a change of basis. Different forms of the gamma, they may be useful for different purposes. OK, so it depends on which regime, sometimes you use different gamma matrices. So now having introduced the Dirac equation and then the structure of theDirac equation, but still we haven't showed that the DirAC equation is covariant. Consider such a Lorentz transformation, OK, so and then phi transforms as following, phi prime x prime phiprime. New phi evaluated at the new position should be the same as phi evaluation at the old position. So the phi-- yeah, just equal to phi lambda minus 1 x. So now if you look at the Klein-Gordon equation, let's see how this is covariant. OK, it's the same in any frame. Now we want to show that the Dirac equation has the same property.