In automotive design Dynamics plays a very important part because it's not rigid body Dynamics it's a bunch of rigid bodies with springs the Springs are called starts with an S suspens suspensions right and there's a trade-off between how comfortable the ride is and how tightly the car handles. In Dynamics there two sides to it one is here's the system what is its trajectory going to be in other words how will its various degrees of freedom behave over time if you you know stretch it and let it go and it goes twang. Dynamics end of the course we're going to solve the dynamical equations dou4 is controls where you actually try and put in extra things like cruise control so to make the uh system behave in a way you want it to behave. I should also warn you I'm a little woozy today uh I had some serious drugs this morning prescription drugs and the result is that I might I think Sam might be a little bit of a bit of an idiot today. I'm sorry Sam. was saying if I might start babbling but you won't notice because I Babble anyway right so all right Sam didn't say that I said that I bet but anyway s was very respectful okay so uh in the last class we did uh uh we did a problem essentially the whole Pro class was we looked at you know the skier situation and there's a handout AJ's published right on the web where we do the energy formulation and we solve the problem. The answer is the same both ways so today we're going to kind of flow the accelerator a little bit we've been slow and steady. There's no class next Monday and um we posted the solution to that problem from class uh just one last thing I won't have officers today only because you don't want to hear me Babel I'm really sick um but I'm also going to change my officers um several people suggest so the timing isn't right um so we'll talk about the end of class but I I might go to like a Monday off M um like later on a Monday or maybe Wednesday later or something like that. point right so let us say I could have done it around o but here's the deal when you do angular momenta it's very useful to pick some point that's convenient you'll see this a lot right if I'm trying to calculate the angular momentum of that door I prefer to do it about the axis for various reasons right forces vanish all sorts of cool stuff happens so I need to tell you which point I just want to to pick a random point and do it that that way so let's say it's Q so what's the angularmomentum of particle of Point p and by the way let's assume the mass is m What's the angle of momentum quick say it h lvm yeah but now let's do it in Vector form that's correct by theway how would you define it you can say it I you know yep R well R is a vector should angle momentum be a vector very good excellent it is this. it will be useful just take it from me for the time being I need the a here because there's an a here. If I use a different velocity to you know it's going to be a different angle of momentum. I'm going to write torque on a particle with a tow because Little T looks like time so I write as a tow. I need to use the chain Rule and yeah nothing special right everything is completely reasonable according to the laws of math and physics that we've learned so far. This is a really badly designed classroom in the sense that there's not enough room but it's a huge classroom so I'm going to write it big right and I'm not that neat so you're going to have to bear with me so this is a velocity of Point P minus a Velocity of Point Q cross product M velocity P. I'm just going to put a dotted line so you know that that's what this is is this I don't think you'll disagree let me just write some draw some lines I'm trying to save space as I said. There is this term and you need to know about it okay it just so happens the term vanishes in many situations but it's key that you know see for Force f is equal to D by DT of P momentum completely coer Crystal Clear when you come to angular momentum it's say artifice. 99% 99% of all engineering graduates who take a car class in Dynamics Berkeley Stanford Princeton might not even see this. The reason this will become important is that when you look at rigid bodies it actually you will end up doing something so this is a silly term. A lot of MIT grads old friends work all over the world very important positions around the world for example the foreign minister of the new British government is an MIT grad okay milbrand Benjamin Netanyahu who might end up being the next president of Israel MIT grad kofan MIT grad right but one of my friends Works in a congressional he she helps Congressional analyze things from a physics point of view so you know when Katrina occurred someone asked if it would be possible to change the temperature in the when a hurricane approaches to dissipate the temperature. call this Theta the initial length is L one and the initial velocity is we'll call it a scalar because this is how I'm defining the problem of V1 when we actually solve it we might have to define a vector okay. As the thing's going around this person is going to pull the string down and as it kind of goes around it's going to spiral in and end up it's a new length L2 and the question is what is V2 going to be okay. is so where does force get applied on this the string so the string is applying a tension force on this right are there any other forces gravity is not an issue here. linear momentum conservation is a vector equation which is the vector linear momentum is conserved right but if if it's not conserved in One Direction but there's no force in the other it's still conserve in the Other Direction. So let's so is angular momentum conserved let's think about it is there any talk on this particle yep go ahead well. There is no torque on this particle at any point in time it's just a very long way to say listen things going in circles and the only force is radial if we take a cross product it's going to vanish. In a lot of situations that pesky correction term doesn't make a difference you just need to be careful that it exists. The angular momentum is conserved because this goes to zero which means d by DT of ah p q is equal Z and what that tells you is understood. would have to do one of two things I would have had to either calculate this term or calculate or make you know make my frame attach it to the truck. I've just done it in a very precise way okay so in the end there's no surprise the whole point is to show you they could be surprises but be careful any questions about this all right snap quiz in the next 3 minutes I want you to calculate for me the final velocity literally 3 minutes because I have toDo the dumbbell problem. I do all the math the angular momentum as I get get it is a vector l^2 Theta 1 do s right so initial moment angle momentum is equal to final angular momentum. If I have the length of the cord the angular speed is going to double and the reason it's more interesting it could because when you watch a skater you know do the uh what's what's it called the twirl you know when figure skaters kind of rotate spin spin thank you yeah spin when they spin. and state it very clearly and I said it fast when I talking about energy so great question if the particle has an inward velocity when I look at that V2 State the L2 State then I missed some terms if however I State you which I I did not state I screwed up I made a mistake if I state to you that listen you start at length L1 is just going in a circle right and then I pull it in and bring it to an length L2 and I stop pulling. The question I ask now is how does this thing behave so let's examine this first of all how do I parameter or to use the more technical term what nonstandard coordinates do I need to describe the configuration of this dumbbell. If instead of a rigid bar if I had a string connecting them what would the kinematic constraint be less than equal to to R right but in this case it's a rigidbar so it's equal to R to R all right by the way just so you know if in rigid bodies you can make an equality constraint um in non- rigid in if it were a string it's an inequality constraints. different you'll find out later I would have picked the center of mass which would not have been the geometric Center Center okay but you don't know why so I can't tell you why. I just did some slate of hand and I made the masses equal all right a lot of terms cancel out that's the only difference I could still have by the way I could have picked a point on that line anywhere there would still be reasonable generaliz coordinates there wouldStill be three just the math is easier that's it okay. this R OC which is some component this way plus some components this way and an angle that we know the configuration of this dumbbell at any point in time. First we will do some free body diagrams then we'll figure out the accelerations of both particles. We'll write f is equal to Ma and we have differential equations to solve it right and you'll see that they come out to be very beautiful. You'll see out of the primordial soup you'll recognize the shape say hey that's a moment of inertia we'll do that. cool formula and tell me what's the acceleration of particle p a c yeah look at all the terms is is there a b acceleration of P that's zero What's the next term isthere a CH Stone no right because the points p and Q are rigid they're not moving with respect to frame B right. Is there a centripedal term yes and that's going to be what what well that's the oiler term so there'll be an Oiler term as well right. stick if I have something at the end of a stick can I apply like a you know does it only have to be a force inwards right. Next week we'll pick up on this and essentially what we'll do is I'll do the three body diagram. Define angular acceleration and moment of inertia and a more General sense okay so let's stop here because we are over time. CL you I mean you're getting that's right so there are a couple of ways to interpret this okay it's a massless rod and I'm invoking the strong form of Newton's third law.