Aristotle was born 384,15 years after the trial of Socrates. He was sent by his father to go to college. Unlike most of you, Aristotle did not spend four years at the Platonic Academy. He remained attached to it for the next 20, until the death of Plato. Unlike his intellectual godfather, Socrates, who wrote nothing but conversed endlessly, Aristotle wrote disciplined and thematic treatises on virtually every topic. He collected constitutions, 158 of them in all, from throughout the ancient world. Aristotle says man is more a political animal than any kind of bee or herd animal. He isn't saying that man is political by nature, he says, but that he is possessed of the power of speech. The city is natural in that it allows human beings to achieve and perfect what he calls their telos. A person without a city must either be a beast or a god, says Aristotle. He says participation in the life of the city is necessary for the achievement of human excellence. Aristotle says that man is a political animal and the city is by nature a polis. The form of association that leads to our perfection is necessarily something particularistic. Only a small city, small enough to be governed by relations of trust, can be political. The alternative to the city, the empire, can only be ruled despotically. A good citizen of a democracy will not be the good citizens of another kind of regime. Partisanship and loyalty to one's own way of life are required by a healthy city. condensed in very deep ways, carry a great deal of freight. There's a lot in there that needs to be unpacked. We need to avoid the temptation, in many ways understandable as it might be, to airbrush or sanitize Aristotle, to make him seem more politically correct for modern readers. The question is what did Aristotle mean by slavery? Who or what did he think was the slave by nature? Until we understand what he meant, we have no reason to either accept or reject his argument. the preserve of the few, of a minority capable of sharing in the administration of justice and in the offices of a city. It seems to be a very elite teaching. Would you agree? Unappealing to us, perhaps, for that reason, very contrary to our intuitions and the way we have been brought up. But before we dismiss Aristotle's account as insufferably inegalitarian and elitist, we have to ask a difficult question. What else is Yale, but an elite institution intended to educate, morally and intellectually, potential members of a leadership class?