In this lecture, we're going to talk about how neurons function and how researchers are able to control that function in order to modify behavior. Then we'll talk about synapses and how synapses function to communicate between neurons. And this is going to involve also sort of understanding how certain antidepressants, like Prozac, work. And then we'll end by talking about how researchers did this experiment to wake up the mouse. It all starts with something that I told you about at the beginning of the semester, which is that the plasma membrane separates distinct compartments. There are different types of signals that nerve cells can send. Signals can be excitatory, meaning it will tend to depolarize the neuron. There are other signals that bind to different receptors that are inhibitory. Neurons are totally prepared to send signals to each other. They have everything ready to go when they get word from upstream, and they're ready to sent signals to the next cell. And that's because if we look at the synapse prior to action potential, everything is ready to be released. In optogenetics, we use light to activate specific neurons in a brain and that leads to the animal waking up. Light induces sodium channel opening that's going to depolarize the cell. And if you have a gene that you know is expressed in a certain type of neuron, you can take the promoter and hook it up to this single component of that gene. And this is a light-sensitive protein called Chrhodopsin2 that's specifically expressed in the neurons that you're trying to test. you to test the function of the neuron in the behavior of an organism. So, in this case, this mouse, the light is shined into its brain, and they're testing a specific type of neuron that is involved in arousal of the mouse. And it's going to wake up right now. There it goes. It woke up. You see now its muscle activity is going, OK? So you can test thefunction of specific nerve cells using this approach, and it's because you have a light-sensitive sodium channel.