Ahern: I have never had an exam where I had fewer questions. There were maybe 10 questions I got on the exam and that was for a class of this side, really unusual. I find most students are honest. I've only had a handful of situations where in this class, where I've had dishonesty as an issue. The only students I've ever had with serious dishonesty issues actually were in smaller classes interestingly enough. But it has happened here and I do have taped evidence when it does happen. Ahern: How many zwitterions, how many amino acids can form zwittersion? None. They all can. That's not trick. You guys should know that, right? Is the answer "None" a trick? I'm sorry, I don't think so, folks. There are no amino acids, everything, so think about it. Ahern: What did you have in mind for the last question? The one about the Kcat. How can you have two apparent Kcats? It depends on how you calculate the concentration of the enzyme. where time is sometimes a factor, and so I was going to have 3 of the longer answer questions and I decided not to do that and I made them shorter. Next term, the format of the exam changes in 451. Most people like 451 better because the maximum number of points on a question I think is 3. If you're going to spend a fair amount of time on something, it should be worth more points. Anybody hate the exam? You can say it. As I said, I don't...okay, there you go. same manner that the enzyme is binding a substrate. And so the parallels of those with respect to concentration and so forth, that's really the reason you see those two curves being essentially the same. So the first thing I say is "Okay folks, let's get started." I don't live consciously, I just blurt it out. [class laughing] Alright, well let's turn our attention. Thank you for your feedback. That's not a lot of feedback, but I do appreciate feedback and I'm always happy to listen to what you have to say about exam formats. a few minutes talking about today. Using genetic techniques today, it's very easy to alter the genetic code for any of these proteases and change which amino acid is presence at any given place. Researchers have changed, for example, a serine residue of 221, which is the serine, gives it its name, to an alanine. Or changing the histidine position 64 to anAlanine or changing all 3 to analine. And when they do that, and they compare the activity, so this is the log of Kcat. So Kcat of course is a good measure of velocity. Neil Ahern: Are there studies done on where you can replace the serine, histidine, or aspartic acid with something other than alanine and perhaps increase the function? Student: [inaudible] Would this one respond to DIPF? Neil: It's possible it will be better but my suspicion is it will probably be somewhere in here. Mutation and selection. We think of mutation as mostly being detrimental because most mutations give rise to things that aren't functional, kind of kind of. Some mutations actually give rise to more functional enzyme. That's how enzymes evolved evolutionarily in the first place. One of these classes of proteases is known as cysteine proteases. Ahern: The nitrogen on histidine withdraws the electron from the sulfhydryl group on cysteina, which is then nucleophilic and attacks the substrate. It's actually removing the proton. The histidine is removing theProton from the sulfur. That makes a sulfur left behind with extra electrons. Those extra electrons are nucleophobic, they attack the peptide bond. "I hate telling joke about sex or the other, but... Carbonic anhydrase" is a pretty amazing enzyme. It can catalyze the conversion of a million molecules of substrate into product per second, per enzyme. Most of our body tissues are at a pH of 7 to 7.4. We look at Blood, for example, is about 7.3 to 7,4. "I want every woman to love me" and poof, he turns into a box of chocolates. Ahern: The rate of formation of the nucleophile is the critical step in the catalytic action of this enzyme. At pH 9, the enzyme is still holding its shape enough that it's actually able to continue catalysis. When we get above that, we're going to see the ending drop off precipitously. Ahern: There is a lot of interest in manipulating enzymes to increase their activity and increase their efficiency. In the case of carbonic anhydrase, what's actually limiting them is actually defusing them. A restriction enzyme is a protein that grabs a hold of DNA. Most of the time it's going down that trip down the DNA molecule, it does not encounter the sequence GATATC. In fact that sequence will occur randomly, only about once every 4,000 residues. What happened physically inside those enzymes? Shape change, right? We saw a shape change that happened in those. Those very tiny shape changes caused the enzyme to have all of its properties. In the case of the serine proteases, that shape change resulted in the creation of the enzyme. alkoxide ion. In the case of the restriction endonucleases, that shape change is more dramatic. What it does is it actually causes a bend to occur in the DNA. So we think of the DNA molecules of being straight and linear, but when the enzyme is bound to that proper site, the enzyme goes "oh, whoa!" and it bends. The DNA molecule is physically bent at that point. It's physically bent. Now that bending turns out to be critical for the catalytic action.