David Kaiser: particle cosmology is a new subfield within physics. He says it studies the smallest units of matter, the fundamental forces and elementary constituents of matter. Kaiser: The field is doing pretty well these days by other measures. Its annual budget just within the U.S. is on the order of $1 billion a year, roughly, he says. It is really a booming, booming subject of study, Kaiser says. The field literally didn't even exist 45 years ago, he adds. acceleration throughout the 1960s, a number of high-energy theorists were trying to put together these highly symmetric models to account for things like the nuclear forces. These nuclear forces are self-evidently of short range, unlike gravitation or electromagnetism, which, in principle, can extend arbitrarily long distances. The nuclear forces really exert themselves across nuclear dimensions, very tiny fraction of the size even of a single atom, let alone macroscopic scales. That will make it very unlikely for that force to be felt across a very large distance. The question of mass turns out to have been on many specialists minds in the 1950s and '60s, but as embedded in quite different-sounding conversations. The Brans-Dicke theory of gravity was put forward in 1961 by, at the time, a very young Carl Brans. Their idea was actually to try to go back to this notion of Mach's principle and more thoroughly account for mass. So even though the ideas were bubbling up around the same time and often published in the same journals, they still were embedded inquite different research traditions and conversations. for that within a quantitative theory of gravity. So they wanted to modify Einstein's general theory of relativity in a very specific way to try to address this question of mass as it had been articulated around Mach's principle. So their idea was to introduce a whole new kind of matter, a newkind of particle in nature. They labeled it with the Greek letter phi. And now the idea was that instead of having a single constant unit strength of gravity labeled by Newton's constant capital G-- that's the G that's in like Newton's force law. Geometer's tool of quantifying the warping of space and time is called the Ricci curvature scalar. multiplying that is this constant, this unit strength of gravity in Einstein's theory. So what Brans and Dicke do is say, well, let's replace G by 1 over phi. So now 1 over G becomes phi in the Lagrangian or in the action for gravitation, where in principle phi, the local strength ofgravity could change across time and space. field is much less likely to vary either over space or time. In the limit that omega becomes arbitrarily large, then phi, in a sense, can't afford to vary at all. The kinetic energy cost is too high. If the field doesn't change at all, it acts like a constant. So they had this very clever fudge factor, a coupling constant, so that, in principle, the local strength of gravity could be changing all the time. But the amount of that variation could be controlled by this one new parameter in the theory. Jeffrey Goldstone was among the first to show that a certain kind of characteristic shape for a potential energy function could be used to break the symmetry of the nuclear forces. Goldstone introduced a new hypothetical form of matter, the Higgs field, which acts like it has a molasses-like mass. He says this new field stretches through all of space and time, and all the rest of matter interacts with it. If these other force-carrying particles get stuck at some non-zero value of their field, it actually is stuck at a non- zero value of its field. Brans-Dicke field phi was the first quantitative alternative to Einstein's general theory of relativity in nearly half a century. Unlike the photon, these newer force-carrying particles interact with this new scalar field. When they interact with phi, then, all of a sudden, they have drag this field around. They start acting as if they have a large mass. It's an induced mass coming from this spontaneous symmetry breaking. So now, again, you can have your cake and eat it too. The Higgs and Brans-Dicke fields were published to wide acclaim in their own separate fields as early as 1961. It took more than 15 years -- nearly 20 years-- until people began to say, hey, these two scalar fields are meant to pervade all of nature. These were very highly prominent contributions, but there's almost no overlap between the two fields. The earliest paper that co-cited the two papers was 11 years later in 1972 after their original publications. It was really in this late period when a small handful-- still less than 1%-- started citing the papers together. In 1979, two separate theorists working independently of each other suggested that the two fields might be literally the same, not just comparable or worth considering side by side. So it's not that they're somehow intrinsically totally separate or different from each other. Instead, their status, really, is historical. How people assess them or what they thought they were good for was changing over time. And so what had changed? That's what we'll pick up in the next part of this three-part series. more than just the letter that they chose. There was a lot of what we might have considered similarities. And yet, the two sets of ideas really were treated so separately. By the end of the '70s, things did not look very good for Brans-Dicke gravity experimentally. In fact, Einstein's theory was not highly favored, and that's why everyone else started paying attention on the gravity side of the field. So we might wonder, well, was it changes in data? Did experiments force a new evaluation? Evidence for the Higgs-Boson wasn't found until July of 2012, or maybe December of 2011, the first hints experimentally-- well past the period we're talking about. The main story that's mostly given-- I alluded to this in the very beginning of today's class-- is actually hearkens to changes in ideas. Two of these sets of ideas, in particular, are usually pointed to-- and they came in rapid fire in 1973 and 1974. The first of them is called asymptotic freedom. That suggests the behavior of quarks and gluons might be really different at very high energies. In the late '60s and early '70s, physicists saw a really dramatic change in the kind of infrastructure for the discipline. The US budget for that subfield fell in half in just four years. The field that had, so to speak, the most to lose or lose during this reversal of fortune was high-energy particle physics. We can ask a bit more that's very coarse-grained, but we can dig in more and look at subfield by subfield. vast majority of those came really in the later '70s, in the wake of these pedagogical reforms. So remember that big report comes out in 1972. You start seeing curricular changes as early as '73, '74. By '75, '76, '77, you start seeing, in some sense, the market respond with many textbooks being really rushed into print. Some of these textbooks were basically mimeographed lecture notes. Now there's very, very fancy books published in a more typical way. You see really a rush to get more books on that subfield in particular. a continuous unitary symmetry, which is like saying you could rotate the electron field by any continuum amount, and the equations remain unchanged. The photon only has to mop up a relatively simple symmetry, the U1 gauge symmetry. Whereas SU2 was what I was pointing to when I was referring to the weak nuclear force. That's a discrete symmetry. It's a more complicated symmetry structure. And that's the symmetry group that these force-carrying particles-- the W and the Z particles-- are invented to enforce. broken at lower energies, they take on different features. It's another example of spontaneous symmetry breaks. So gravity gets stuck being weak because its local strength is arising through the Brans-Dicke field getting in a symmetry-breaking phase. And only in the broken-symmetry phase do we experience a phenomena that we are used to. That's right. And that's super cool and fun and lots more to be said about that. But that is, indeed, where that nomenclature came from. physicist with whom he accidentally wound up swapping apartments happens to have been immersed in gravitation and cosmology. By the mid to late '70s, he's now asking questions at this interface between his formal training in high-energy particle theory and this new hobby interest. He writes his version of his broken-symmetric gravity to suggest very creatively but tentatively that the Brans-Dicke field and the Higgs field might be identical. It was actually that second version that becomes more and more common. Few physicists today think Brans-Dicke theory of gravity best describes our Universe. But the theory is still very much alive today. In fact, interest in the field grew even as it was getting experimentally less and less favored. The idea that we're picking single theories and that they replace each other, I think, just misses this fine structure, says David Weinberger of the University of California, Los Angeles. He and Weinberger will look at inflation next time on inflation. does exactly the kinds of things that Smolin and Zee had been doing, trying to unify the Brans-Dicke and Higgs field. And in turn, these new folks, especially people like Mike Turner and Rocky Kolb, went on to become real institution builders in their own right. So in fact, they were accelerates. Not only had they been trained to think carefully at this new interface, they helped really accelerate the trend. So I'm going to pause there. We'll look more squarely at inflation in cosmology. new hybrid area, really of what becomes the poster example of particle cosmology. And as I say, including my own students and many people now around the world, it's now just totally bizarre not to consider the Brans-Dicke field and the Higgs field is somehow relatable or maybe even identical. So it goes from who even thought of it to who wouldn't even try that? What counts as natural can shift in a pretty short time scale. Those shifts can be driven as much by things well outside of the physicist's control, geopolitics, and national scale budgets. soon, everyone. Soon, everyone will be able to play together again. Soon. Everyone will be playing together.soon. Everyone. Will be. Playing together again soon.soon,everyone. Everyone, playing together againsoon.soon,. everyone. soon, everyone, will be. playing together once again. soon.everyone. will be Playing Together again.soon! everyone. will. be.playing together soon. soon! Everyone. will play together soon! everyone will.be. playing again soon! soon.