Professor Donald Kagan: We are living in the early years of a polis sometime in the eighth century B.C. The date that's sort of typical for the general phenomenon of colonization coming out of the mother cities of Greece. Every time we see a colony, learn anything at all about it, it appears to exist in the form of a Polis. That powerfully suggests that that was the typical characteristic style of life that had already been established for Greeks before they sent out the colonies. Greece is again that date we keep talking about, 750 roughly. But in fact, the earliest date according to Greek tradition, if my memory is correct, was something like 773. The Greeks were, even though they went to sea plenty, they were terrified of the sea for very good reason. The vast overwhelming majority of people needed to farm land, in order to stay alive. One answer, and it's the one that is most widely believed among Greek scholars, is that the growth of population that we have mentioned in connection with the rise of the polis is still working. place for trade. The desire for a good commercial opportunity might well have been one of the elements that these people who were leaving their home cities sought. In any group of people there is a small minority, I want to emphasize small, who just love to do risky things. They just love adventure; they're never happy if they're safe, and so off they go seeking adventure and seeking to make a fortune. And now that we do have something, namely, this wave of colonization, they join that as well. Colony is a Latin word ultimately for colonia and the Roman colonies were, first of all, garrisons that they planted in land they had conquered to keep the people quiet. The Greek word for this is, apoikia, and most literally it would mean a home away, an away home and that's what they're making. They are establishing for themselves a household, a home someplace away from where they started. They were the antecedents of the Serfs, which we will see later on in medieval history in Europe. of eminence, and yet unlikely to be part of the sort of dominant faction in that city, because otherwise why would they leave? Anyway, the Greeks had a name for this individual. He was called an oikistes; he is the found of the colony. So, now he has decided to do it and he's gained recognition from the town council, let's say, and he can go forward. Now, he has to have an idea. What is more typical, I think, is that he thinks, I would like to take and have found a colony on the southeastern coast of Sicily. Why? Because he knows something about it. John Hale of the Yale Class of 1973 is now an archaeologist at the University of Louisville. He discovered evidence that totally confirmed the Greek story. They tell you precisely what the gases were, what the characteristics of those gases were. It squared beautifully with all details that we heard about the Delphic Oracle. So, here's just one more case where Yale helped to straighten out the world, but you notice it wasn't done by a Yale faculty member, we engage in confusing the world but our alumni do a much better job. Greeks and barbarians came to Delphi to consult the Delphic Oracle. Most of the things they asked were questions that really had a yes or no answer. The oracle probably gained its fame for being very good precisely at answering this question. These people knew more than anybody else about these things, and so consulting that oracle was a very act of rational thought, says John MacIntosh, professor of ancient history at the University of California, Los Angeles, and author of the book, "The Lost City of Syracuse" will decide whether it's a good idea for him or not. Now, recruiting is tremendously important because you need to have a certain number of settlers to make the settlement viable. So however many that is, that is what you try to recruit and you recruit typically at a time when it's easy to get people together so you can tell them the story. The best time would be at some great festival. There are festivals held in each city just for its own citizens and my guess is that when you could do that, when you felt that you could recruit a full colony from your fellow citizens in Corinth, let us say, that's what you did. Syracuse is an independent polis, autonomous, self-governing, whatever regime it wants, etc. It is not a subject of anybody, not Corinth or anybody else. The most typical, the usual, everything else is an exception is that there are friendly relations between the mother city and the apoikia. In the Peloponnesian War, Syracuse finds itself besieged by the Athenians. They go to Corinth asking the Corinthians to please help us. The Corinthians send very little, send a couple of ships and a general. The city of Corinth sent out a lot of colonies, which is why we know something about their arrangements. When Potidaea got into trouble with Athens, and found itself besieged, Corinth sent a real army to go in there and fight, and I think that's because of this very special relationship that they had. At the other end of the spectrum it's again Corinth and they have a colony up in the northwest called Corcyra, it is the modern Island of Corfu. The first relationship between them is a navel battle, and thereafter we hear of them quarrelling and fighting with each other. more time, that the overwhelming normal situation is the first one I described, friendly relations. We do know, again, Thucydides is our source, that it was customary for colonies to send representatives back to the mother city for the religious observations that were common to them all. They feel like their relatives, and what could be more natural. You're out there in Sicily and you discover, of course, that you don't have all of the things that you used to have available to you. Kagan: Before the rise of the polis, the Greeks had already spread out from their original settlements. By the tenth century B.C., we see Greek cities lining the coast of Asia Minor on the west, and even around on the bottom and to some degree on the north, and on the islands in the Aegean. The way the Greeks did their immigration into Asia Minor actually had a pattern so that you can go from north to south and you will find some consistency. Kagan: It's a helpful story to remember, because we tend to think of Greece because of its modern geography. there, Palestine, there are no Greek cities there and that is because during the period we're talking about those regions were occupied by civilized powerful people. There is one exception. In the sixth century, I think it's around--imagine around 550 or something like that, the Greeks settle a single colony in the Delta of the Nile of Egypt at a place called Naucratis. So, that's a great exception to everything I've been saying. Going west, would you believe, when you get into what is now Libya, there was a very important Greek colony of Cyrene. powerful. It tried to control not only North Africa, but the waters of the Mediterranean in the west entirely. The Carthaginians, in fact, have a powerful pied à terre in the western part of Sicily. So, that's how far east they get and in time the Carthaginian also cross over into Spain and they control some portion of the Spanish coast closest to Africa. There are now Greek cities on the coast of Spain and there continue to be Greek cities, not everywhere, in a spotty way into France. Greeks are not interested. You will find very rare of the case of a Greek city, which is founded away from the sea. Lots of these towns sent colonists up north into the Dardanelles and so on and beyond. Sparta starts at an early point, sends out a colony to southern Italy at some time, probably early. Thebes, the greatest city in Boeotia, also does not colonize. So what can we speculate is the meaning of that? Greece's impact was greater in the west and the north than it was in the east and the south. The Greeks lived among people who were more civilized than they. They had very little to teach or to impose upon those people rather than vice versa. philosophy is going to be invented in Miletus probably in this sixth century B.C. Well, MileTus was on the main routes to all of the places where advanced knowledge could be found, Mesopotamia, Egypt. It is inconceivable the Greeks could have developed a civilization that they did without contact with these eastern civilizations. There is no evidence of a capitalist class growing up in Greece. But you do have people who are engaged in activities that are different from those of the rest of their people. The hoplite revolution is going on. More and more farmers are becoming independent, self-sustaining, hoplite farmers of the kind that I've described. You can't expect them to continue to live in the same way as they did before, deferential to their betters, that is to say, tugging their forelocks before the aristocrats. come to mean weights of silver or gold. So now you have a change in fundamental economic things. Well, all of this is tied up with this colonial story I've been telling you. Finally, I think, it works in both directions at the same time in terms of the impact all of these changes have on the political situation. On the one hand the changes, that is (A) the rise of the hoplite class; (B) the development of lots of commerce and industry and wealth in a new kind. that colonization provided something analogous to that for the Greek people. So now, here we are somewhere in the seventh century, most of these places I've been talking about have been settled, the currents that I have been describing are flowing and the kinds of problems they have give rise to what will be felt in most of the towns. That is the proper introduction to the next topic, which I'll discuss next year. No not--it seems like a year, but it's next Tuesday actually.