MIT OpenCourseWare is a free, online education platform. MIT OpenCourse Ware is available in English and French. The weekly Newsquiz tests students' knowledge of MIT courses. This week's quiz includes questions about the i3, Mr. Sticky, and the smart car. The winner will receive a prize for their best knowledge of an MIT course in English or French. Back to Mail Online home.Back to the page you came from.. The quiz: Do you have a concept you want to share? If so, please share it with us. defined could almost apply to a Tramway as well. If this was like a streetcar, don't you think it would apply to that as well? So I think the fact that it's a personal vehicle, I think it's important. So the key in this is, describe the concept using few words precisely, but to set it apart from neighboring concepts. What about Rolex Center? It's a single-layer building with multiple straw used as a library for people to meet and study. built. The first thing you do is understand where is the value-- the stakeholders and the stakeholder analysis and the requirements definition. And then you interpret and incorporate some of the needs into goals, which become requirements. And so the goals then are an instrument of the primary delivery value delivering process, which is your value proposition. To then actually deliver that value you need to design the product, the product system, and understand the operand, the thing that is being operated on or transformed by the primary value delivery process. EPFL's Olivier De WECK talks about how to reduce food spoilage rate. He says the key is to think in an abstract way and then pick a specific concept. He explains how bears use fat to transform it into fat and store it in their bodies. The process is similar to conserving grapes, beer and wine, he says. The concept was developed by EPFL's design and creativity unit. The project is now being developed by a company in the UK, and is expected to be completed by the end of 2014. A cooler has the chilling function, and then the sub-functions when we zoom in are holding the food, exchanging the heat between the food and the environment, reducing the heat load, interfacing, connecting, powering, regulating the temperature, et cetera. And then on the form side, the cooler itself is very simple structurally. And you can go very detailed here, even for something very simple like a cooler. One question and then we'll talk about the refrigerator and how it's different in a minute. is concept generation. So take the requirements and think creatively about how these requirements could be fulfilled. And then once you have several concepts, you've got to select among them. That's our topic next week is concept selection. So let me briefly talk about the NASA approach to this and then talk about some methods and tools for concept generation, which we'll talk about next week. It's about starting with the operand. What is the thing that the beneficiary, the stakeholder cares about, and how do we transform that? The logical decomposition process, as described in the NASA standard, is used to improve the understanding of the technical requirements. So we started with mission authority, stakeholder expectation, and then defining those high-level requirements. And then on the right side, you come out with the lower-level derived technical requirements, logical decompositions models. So you can see this relates very strongly to the system modeling languages that we talked about. And we really talked about much of this already. And in terms of the logical decompose flow diagram, you start with your basic high- level requirements and measures of performance. You essentially do your decomposition. and the logical decomposition work products, which are essentially lower-level definitions of what these subsystems look like. And then you can go off and do the detailed design and then the testing verification and so forth. So it's essentially focused on decomposition, which is an important part of architecting, but it's not the only thing you do. So let me talk about methods and tools for concept generation. So what are different ways of stimulating or organizing creativity? And what I'm showing you here is-- that's essentially a mind map of how to think about the creativity space. which I'm going to mention, but we're not going to do as part of the class, which is stimulants. So this is the idea that somehow people are more creative when their brain, when you put yourself into some other state. So bio-inspired design would be you go in nature, or you read books about seashells and animals and you really try to understand from nature. So you putting yourself in nature and be inspired by what you see. Random inputs, provocations, challenges, and then things like alcohol, and even drugs. There's got to be a driving question for the brainstorming session. There's an ideal group size, and it says 5 to 10 here, but I should probably revise this to be-- what do you think? 7 plus minus 2. The idea is to produce a large amount of ideas and then at some point, maybe 30 to 60 minutes, Brainstorming session that last four hours is probably really good and then the rest is kind of shot and there's not a lot of new ideas coming. Leonardo was a head of his time in many ways. So he's really been identified as an exceptional individual. How to Think Like Leonardo, Seven Steps to Genius, is a book on creativity. The seven da Vincian principles of creativity are here in Italian. They include curiosita, lifelong quest for learning. Dimostratzione, testing your knowledge through experience, trying things out. Sensazione, continual refinement of the senses. Mastering ambiguity, paradox, uncertainty. Arte/Scienza is the whole brain thinking, left-right brain. Corporalita, balance of body and mind. or an architecture. So the key decisions are the rows. There are factors in the rows, and then for each row you think about what are the number of possible alternatives for doing this. And then you enumerate all possible combinations. And the big challenge with this, of course, is if you have many factors, you could generate many infeasible architectures. Not all these combinations are actually feasible. So that's architecture enumeration, and there's different ways of doing this at different layers of abstraction. like 12 different tail geometries here. But at that higher abstraction layer, it's just a single tail. So how do you combine these using compositional rules? That's architecture enumeration. And we'll post some information on this if you want to try this out for your concepts. So let me summarize. System architecture is definitely very abstract, but it's also, potentially, the most influential activity that we do in system architecting. The concept is mapping function to form. A3 assignment A3 asks students to come up with new ways of brainstorming. Students must use mind maps, morphological matrices, and architecture enumeration. The assignment is due in two weeks and will be graded on a scale of 1-10. The final assignment will be given to students at the end of the month and the results will be published in the next few days. For more information on the assignment, visit the assignment website. It is open to students from all over the world and can be downloaded from the assignment site.