which we are to for next week and here and I'll talk about that actually week from today because it's callay on Monday so it will get behind but if we get any further behind I'll have to make it up sometime the but if you don't have that you be copies available upstairs is it c um come to my office okay to dany's office he doesn't have copies of it there that's six six upstairs in the first floor immediately after CL and then on the next Friday I will talk about the parts in the in the inquiry that were assigned and also a that essay of of the oral concept. exclusion crisis of 1679 and 81 um the original part of the second CH was written it believe about 79 and 880 and then other chapters that were were added in 81 83 and two chapters added after. Now by definition a mixed Constitution is a constitution in which two or more constitutionally defined agents share in and each have a part in What L calls the legislative power that is the supreme power in the constitution is the Legislative power. In the English case of course it's the crown and Parliament so we're only actually dealing with two agents in this case and neither is supreme so we want to say that they are coordinate powers. changed his mind he thought perhaps it was not all together safe never knew in England the English were regarded in those days as very unstable people. Mark says nothing about the details of of this process that is how does he Enis that this constition power is actually to take place he doesn't give any institutional account of how he supposes actually might be done laon is also vague on this he says something has the idea that it would begin in the county courts and they organized there and would then they presented Des sent to a parliament. L's View might have been a politically unappealing Doctrine so far as in might estimate also the other way wanted to emphasize the continuity between Charles II James II and of Orange and Mary Mary was James's eldest daughter. They maintained in effect that James had just advocated or meod from bacon and the Parliament finding a bacon Throne had simply found an occupant for it and that act did not imply the parliament was Supreme. Now why did L refuse to alter his view I think we have to assume that he didn't change his mind and he persisted in the doctrine. The distinction between constituent and and ordinary power and the idea of power is is connected with the motion of aary trust. How this constition power gets expressed in institutions and may effective then it's always some extent this problematical. These basic rights ways of politically expressing this power have a kind of priority over over other rights and reason I mention this is I want to think of the basic structure what I earlier called that as of course including these institutions or whatever they are that provide ways through which this conuent power can be both expressed and protected. and who does not have the right to vote and what the conditions on it are maybe we want to free it from that of course what I'm thinking of eventually um is that that that would be one motivation for introducing an idea like the origal position that say it's a way of conceiving how con power might be exercised. No point in criticizing someone for something they didn't intend to do okay well I think it's stop so remember there's no class here Monday so the next class here will be next Friday.