AI is replacing human tasks faster than you might think according to a CNN business article more than half of large US firms plan to use AI within the next year. The New York Times reports that generative AI could automate activities equivalent to 300 million full-time jobs around the world. open ai's chief executive that's Sam mman says governments will need to assume the bulk of responsibility in supporting workers AI labor market disruptions and the question will employees just end up training AI systems only to them be replaced by them. last decade you know over a trillion customer insights are built on our platform every single week and now here we are in the generative AI Revolution. One quarter employees saved a combined 50,000 hours call me a cynic but are you just there putting those people to work harder or are you saying actually you can have a day off go home I mean how does that work how do we square that Circle well I think like you know any other uh benefits of becoming more efficient or more productive it is now spending more time on higher value impact work in your job. Cisco CEO: We have to train the Next Generation in both these Advanced AI skills but also some of the fundamental essential digital skills that we need. We've got to do both uh to help Society yeah and so that's a sort of skills Gap isn't it and Stephanie I wonder whether firms are ready because I'm looking at numbers here 97% say they are.get us that extra day off or a 3-day 4 day working week that we might all want um chintan talk to me about skills as well.  AI decoded looks at the impact of AI in the world workplace. Will AI be able to speed up and automate all sorts of monotonous or repetitive roles but there's also now a concern that intelligent chatbots could replace roles that have traditionally relied on a more human touch things like customer service or call center helplines. Are we destined to teach AI how to do our own jobs we're going to speak to one reporter who's been researching the threat posed to workers and how some are now fighting back around the world. Emma asked if we would actually see an increase in Union membership for private sector workers in the United States. She said that workers who feel that their jobs are at risk because of AI are going to rely more heavily on their unions to advocate for them. Emma said that the role that I'm seeing unions play is just reminding employers that they should be bringing workers to the table to help make and shape decisions around the way that AI is used in the workplace. EM: Could we actually replace CEOs or Executives and actually end up having AI run companies and just get rid of those High expensive salaries altogether? were most at risk because of automation. People are realizing you have to throw out the door any ideas you had about who is really at risk and say every job is going to be changed. We just hope that the workers whose jobs are changing have a voice in saying how yeah it's turkeyy is not going to vote for Christmas are they if those are the ones that could find their jobs being replaced but there's so much in there and Stephanie just a final thought from you in all of this about briefly if you will.