Political philosophy is the oldest of the social sciences. It can boast a wealth of heavy hitters from Plato and Aristotle to Machiavelli, Hobbes, Hegel, Tocqueville, Nietzsche. The study of the great books or great thinkers of the past can easily degenerate into a kind of antiquarianism, into a sort of pedantry, says Professor Steven Smith. But these works provide us with the most basic questions that continue to guide our field, he says. "The ideas of John Maynard Keynes, both economists and political philosophers, when they are right, are more powerful than is commonly understood," says Smith. The term "regime" is a familiar one, but what is a regime? How many kinds are there? How are they defined? What holds them together, and what causes them to fall apart? Is there a single best regime? Those are the questions I want us to consider. The concept of the regime is perhaps the oldest and most fundamental of political ideas. The title of the book that you will be reading part of for this semester, Plato's Republic, is actually a translation of the Greek word politea that means constitution. The political world does not present itself as an infinite variety of different shapes. It is structured and ordered into a few basic regime types. Regimes are necessarily partisan, that is to say they instill certain loyalties and passions. The study of regime politics is in part a study of the distinctive national character types that constitutes a citizen body. You can't understand a regime unless you understand, so to speak, what a people stand for, what they look up to as well as its structure of institutions. David Frum: Political philosophy is always guided by the question of the best regime. He says it's difficult to make a judgment on what is the best. The best regime is superior in some ways to all actual regimes, he says, but it has no concrete existence anywhere. Frum says philosophy can never be truly loyal to anyone but what it thinks is best, or what is best for its own people. The good citizen is relative to the regime, you might say regime-specific, Frum writes. unnecessary or redundant. It would wither away. Political philosophy exists and only exists in that... call it "zone of indeterminacy" between the "is" and the "ought," between the actual and the ideal. This is why political philosophy is always and necessarily a potentially disturbing undertaking. Those who embark on the quest for knowledge of the best regime may not return the same people that they were before. But there is some compensation for this, I think. The study of political philosophy may be the highest tribute we pay to love.