JUDY HOYT: We're going to begin this lecture on handout number 14. We'll be moving now to chapter 7. This will be our first lecture on chapter 7 on the topic of dopant diffusion and profile measurement. So far, we've discussed a number of major topics, including the fabrication of wafers themselves and cleaning, point defects in silicon. During the next few lectures, including this one, we'll discuss the accurate control and placement of active dopant regions. In semiconductors or in silicon, we typically don't have a cube or a chunk of material. We're usually measuring the resistance of a thin sheet in the near surface region. The resistivity of the cube is given by, essentially, the electric field divided by the current density. The sheet resistance is just given by rho over the resistivity over xj. So that's a simple way and a convenient way of calculating resistance of various structures in semiconductor devices. The resistance of the regions that are extrinsic to the device, such as the contact resistance, the source and drain resistance, should be no more than about 10%. refer to different lateral source-drain gradients. For lateral gradients larger than about 4 nanometers per decade, the Vt roll-off is just too large. You wouldn't be able to make a 25 nanometer MOSFET-- so, again, illustrates the importance of controlling the lateral doping profile and of controlling diffusion processes themselves. So given that brief introduction to the electrical effects, let me go on now on slide number 15 and talk about dopant diffusion fundamentals. In silicon IC processing, there are two different steps that we refer to in diffusion historically. Dopant diffusion is described by Fick's first law, which describes how the flux or the flow of dopant depends upon the doping gradient. When the concentration gradient goes to 0, essentially, the dopant or the atoms are uniformly distributed, say, in the solid, and the flow would stop. Later on, we'll talk about the more atomistic diffusion mechanisms and effects of dopants in the silicon lattice. We're going to consider macroscopic first-- macroscopy models for diffusion. The placement of dope regions is critical because it determines many of the characteristics of short-channel MOSFETs. The time evolution of a doping profile, if the case is simple, is governed by a fixed loss-- the so-called diffusion equation. We talked about the diffusion of a Gaussian profile with a fixed dose with a complementary error function, which we apply for a constant surface concentration. And finally, we talked about some simple analytic solutions that the diffusion equation can be applied to.