This is part 2 of a guide to clinical reasoning or how to create an accurate differential diagnosis from a patient's presentation. The patient is a 75 year old woman presenting with epigastric pain for four hours. She had moderate nausea it has refused to attempt to eat or drink anything since the pains onset because she is concerned that it will concert a vomit which she has not yet done. She denies changes in her bowel habits shortness of breath chest pain changes her skin or eye color. She has had no surgeries her medications her medications. The patient is an elderly woman a piercer stated aged in moderate discomfort secondary to abdominal pain her temperature is 99.8 heart rate 110 blood pressure 132 over 80 respiratory rate 26 and oxygen saturation of 98% on room air h ee and t exam reveals normal oral pharynx but poor dentition her neck is supple without breweries and without lymph adenopathy her chest is clear to percussion and auscultation bilaterally her cardiac exam has a regular tachycardia hypertension her jbp is undetectable at either 45 degrees or when she's completely sipping on abdominal exam she has non distended and there are no scars. The problem representation is a one to two-sentence summary using precise medical terminology of the most highly relevant aspects of the patient's history exam and diagnostic tests. The patient is a 75 year old woman with abdominal pain for four hours it is epigastric well localized progressed over 45 minutes is constant with no exacerbating or alleviating factors and associated with nausea. She has hypertension diabetes moderate alcohol use smoking and is drinking water from a newly drilled well on exam. She is MA in moderate distress she has a borderline temperature tachycardia and tachypnea. primary symptom using semantic qualifiers and ending with the highly relevant diagnostic data using clinical syndromes when possible. For this patient we would start with mrs. Smith is a 75 year old woman with multiple cardiovascular risk factors and alcohol use presenting with acute constant epigastric pain. The next time you are in rounds or in a teaching conference and the senior physician asks you to summarize the case if a statement similar to this one effortlessly comes out of your mouth I guarantee you everyone in the room will be impressed. bowel that can cause acute epigastric pain include relatively common and minor things such as food poisoning and gastroenteritis and the uncommon but potentially lethal problem of bowel infarction. The major structures are of course the liver and gallbladder along with other components of the extra hepatic biliary system. Other organs in the chest to consider include the esophagus from which pain classically radiates to the epigstric area as in GERD the heart can also referred pain to theEpigastrium region as seen in acute coronary syndrome. pain from a pulmonary embolism can be referred to the abdomen although it more typically is to the right or left upper quadrants and not the epigastric now that we have a framework we move on to the final and hardest step applying the key features to that framework so here is our framework once again and here are our key features how does one start this process the brute force method would simply be to take each diagnosis listed one at a time and review each individual key feature to decide if it impacted the probability of the diagnosis and what that impact was. severe nausea at that so the presence of knowledge here definitely argues in favor of the diagnosis arguing just modestly against pancreatitis is the fact that the pain had no exacerbating or alleviating factors. The pain from pancreatitis classically improves with setting up or leaning forward which this patient does not describe. The sensitivity and specificity of this symptom feature to the best of my knowledge has never been studied therefore we don't know exactly how much to weigh this in our assessment of the probability of pancreatitis there. I would place relatively little weight on the lack of positional component to the symptom. The patient does have numerous risk factors and the combination of epigastric pain and nausea is not an uncommon way for acs to present particularly in a either a woman or a diabetic. The unremarkable lfts in and of themselves rule out acute hepatitis a paddock abscess usually has symptoms localized to the right upper quadrant and is also associated with lft abnormalities. A normal light bass cholecystitis also typically causes right upper Quadrant symptoms and signs along with elevated alkaline phosphatase although it's not enough to make the diagnosis likely enough to seriously consider. The patient has no major risk factors for RPE and has no shortness of breath well it's certainly possible to present with a PE with just pain this case is just not what a PE looks like. The combination of acute abdominal pain nausea and a possible contamination of well water is all consistent with heavy-metal poisoning specifically arsenic and lead. The history of the newly drilled well depending on where you are in your training is the most interesting it's the most important point if an RPE. element does not fit into the framework yet still seems to be a key feature the framework must be incomplete in this case I would add another category of diagnosis to our four existing categories of epigastric right upper quadrant left upper quadant and chest that fifth category is acute abdominal pain secondary to systemic toxic metabolic problems. Four major members of this group are heavy-metal poisoning a rare genetic disorder called acute intermittent porphyria another virgin etic disorder called familial Mediterranean fever and finally angioedema for any of these to be the final diagnosis this patient would need to have an atypical presentation of a rare disease. involves the provisional diagnosis and as you move further down the list ideas start to diverge a little bit I would certainly expect most experienced doctors to identify pancreatitis as the leading diagnosis in this case so that concludes part 2 of 3 of this video series on the clinical reasoning. I hope you found it interesting and useful while the approach I presented here is not the only one in use I guarantee medical trainees that if you consciously employ it while on the wards you impress your peers and evaluators and more importantly create a more accurate differential.