JACK HARE: Let's do a little recap on electron cyclotron emission, and then we will go on to a few other things. We didn't actually derive the emissivity of it, but we gave ourselves a hand-wavy reason why there may be multiple peaks here. And we can say this is m equals 1, m equals 2,m equals 3. And they're evenly spaced. And this is just for a single particle. And so, if you see some emission at some certain frequency, then you know it's been emitted by a region of plasma which has this magnetic field. different because the magnetic field is dropping off nice and monotonically throughout our device here. So we said that, for example, we might have three different regions, which we could label positions R1, R2, and R3. And each of these then have different magnetic fields, B1, B2 and B3. Each of these magnetic fields will then produce a spectra of lines at these different harmonics here. And at each ofThese points, if we measure the intensity, we then know straight away what the temperature is corresponding to the black body spectrum. temperature as a function of frequency. Then we can say, well, that frequency corresponds to a certain magnetic field. And then we can says that magnetic field corresponds to an spatial coordinate. This is a technique which will give us, by looking at the spectrum for lowish frequencies, the first or maybe the second harmonics of this cyclotron emission. We can work out what the temperature is as afunction of space. So this is why this is a powerful and popular diagnostic in MTF. want to understand in plasmas so that we can build an economically viable fusion reactor. Now, the fact that the noise is too high does seem like a big limitation. But there are some clever tricks that we play where we use correlations. And I'll talk now about what exactly these correlations are and how they provide us with information that allows us to get a signal out despite the overwhelming [INAUDIBLE]. So our setup here is borrowed from ASDEX Upgrade. And, in effect, I referred to Alex Creely's PhD thesis, which you can find online if you want more information. The size of our turbulence of R turb, is on the order of 100 microns. That's the width of a human hair. So we are trying to measure turbulent eddies inside a tokamak on this scale. And so, that means, we're not trying to cover this entire frequency range. We're zoomed in on only quite a small frequency range, which is 10 gigahertz. This is the sort of signal that we can actually digitize now. And that is quite an affordable digitizer compared to the ones you would need. Many oscillations. And so, it will average out to 1 or something like that. So it's some DC offset that we can subtract off after. So all this is doing here is mixing the signal down so it gets to a regime that we could effectively digitize. Yeah, another question. Anyone know how micro splitters work? Looking at you? STUDENT: RF. JACK HARE: The answer I got is that you can actually collect from a very small region on the order of 100 microns. was RF, which I don't think is much more satisfying than my answer. So, yeah, there are circuits which will split microwaves. What they were actually doing with this system is all of these were very tunable. And so, if they wanted to look at turbulence in the edge or turbulence near the center, they could actually tune all their bandpass filters to do that. But this is getting way beyond what I was hoping to talk about on this. So let's get on to correlation ECE see what that does. This technique is incredibly powerful because it's enabled people to measure, again, delta Te upon Te on the order of 1%. And they've done this at 13-- on ASDEX Upgrade-- 13 radial locations. So on very small scales, very fast time scales, we can now measure temperature fluctuations in tokamaks. And this is something that has revolutionized our understanding of and can finally characterize it. That was a lot. Any questions? We're going to move on from there. we have positioned these two volumes, which are producing frequencies omega 1 and omega 2. And we think that that distance is smaller than the size of our turbulent eddy. The temperature should be the same going up and down. And if you do this correlation and you get out nothing, that probably means your volumes are too far apart because there is-- this T correlation would just go T1 T2. And there's no good reason to believe those temperature fluctuations are correlated, because they'll be part of a different turbulent Eddy. situation where, at some point, your eddy has moved across, and these two are no longer correlated because the next two are correlated. So it-- yeah. I think we're reaching the limits of my knowledge. JACK HARE: I mean, there's no reason to believe that each of the fluctuations is the same size. So this is going to be a time-evolving system here.Yeah, exactly. Cool. Any other questions? Anything online? Now we're going to go to bremsstrahlung. here with the ions and electrons as point particles. There's a semi-classical approach where you start bringing in some quantum physics and treat, I think, the electron as a wave. And then there's a full quantum approach. What's remarkable about all of these approaches is they all give the same answer with just a very slightly different coefficient. So we get a small change in coefficient. The scalings are the same. So in some sense, although it's important to get the exact coefficient, it doesn't matter exactly which one of these techniques you use. This, therefore, has units of watts per hertz per meter cubed. And these constants are things like e, the electron charge, and the electron mass, and epsilon 0, and h bar, and c, all arranged in some way to make all the dimensions work. And so, this emissivity, as a function of photon energy, is a very simple function because it just decays exponentially with photon energy. So that is the spectrum coming out of a plasma that's emitting bremsstrahlung radiation here. at all frequencies, like a black body kind of spectrum here. That goes down to very low frequencies and goes up to very high frequencies. We're going to talk about lots of other effects which produce emissivity which is higher than the bremsstrahlung. So, I guess, you always need to worry about this, even if you managed to clear out all the impurities, you don't have any electron cyclotron emission. This is still going to be there. at synchrotron, yes. So cyclotron is when the particles are spiraling around the magnetic field. Synchrotrons are used as a source of X-rays for diagnosing many other things. So it's interesting in its own right, but I don't know whether people use it as a diagnostic. It depends mostly on the magnetic fields and the radius in a tokamak. But maybe there's a really clever diagnostic you can do, like fast particles or something like that. That entire acceleration yields one photon, one energy. And, indeed, it's going to have to pay back any debt it has in some other way. And you can do that because we're going to switch to a slightly quantum model of the atom. And the energies of these levels are given by this unit, Ry, which is the Rydberg z squared of our ion over n squared. It is not the density anymore. We're dealing still with the single-atom picture, one electron, one ion. fulfills this equation, which involves these discrete energy levels. And that equation is going to be the photon that is emitted. So that just has our familiar bremsstrahlung type coefficients, electron density times the ion density times z squared e to the 1/2. But now we have an additional term, which is a new Gaunt factor for level n. But, don't worry, these Gaunt factors are all about 1 again, so it doesn't really matter that much. And then, to get the total j, you have j brems plus the sum over. The spectrum, therefore, looks like we had something like this for bremsstrahlung before, and now we have a spectrum that contains a series of edges, like this. And this lowest edge here-- I should draw this as a straight line-- this is n equals 1, 2, 3, 4, and all the way back up here, where, again, this is our brems result. This is our recombination. So if you're asking, what happens if you can't fulfill that, it just doesn't happen. Quantum mechanically, that would be a forbidden transition. related to the overlap integral between those with a dipole operator, the dipole operators being the thing that emits the photon in between them. So, yeah, you're right, there are inverse processes for all of these that will affect the spectra that you get. One use of this is a diagnostic called bolometry. It cares not at all about the detailed spectrum of what the emission is. It just wants to know how much power is being radiated by the plasma. We'll go into some ways of actually making some use out of all this stuff in a moment. This is balanced by conduction losses and what we, at the time, we assumed were bremsstrahlung losses, but in general could be any sort of radiative losses here. And so, bolometry is focused on measuring the total power that's being emitted. So we take our beautiful spectrum like this, and we integrate over all of this. We lose all of the detail. But, of course, the detail matters when we're doing the integral because you can see the recombination increases the amount of emission. So there'll be more emission here. divider just drawn in a complicated way. The reason why this is interesting is that, in general, M is going to change with T. We're going to have some resistivity as a function of temperature. And so, we can have-- yeah. Have I broken this? Yeah. It was right in my notes and I decided to innovate-- it's a terrible mistake. Never do that. Thank you. right, that looks better. Right, that look better. Good. Bolometry was one of the first diagnostics that we had on many MCF devices. Now, this itself is a very simplistic system, and it does not work because it is very susceptible to noise. So we have to, as always, come up with a clever system, which is noise resistant. And then, using heterodyning techniques, we can then measure it very cleanly without noise. This may be an experimental technique you're familiar with with the head of a bolometer. This is often made out of gold. Gold is chosen because it absorbs all wavelengths relatively evenly. This thin layer of gold has been deposited on top of a substrate. And it's on the back of the substrate that you have your resistor. And depending on whether it is M or R, you either have this open to the plasma or you have a thick block some distance in front of it so it can't see the plasma. It's the heat capacity of the absorber, c, that goes into our previous equation. difference between those. neutron damage leads us to use much thicker substrates, which gives us a longer time response and so, therefore, a worse bolometer. So, ironically, the bolometers that will be used on [INAUDIBLE] are significantly worse than the bolometer used on existing devices. And I'm sure that [? Spark ?] will have exactly the same problem. Almost everyone in the world uses this design of bolometer that they pioneered on ASDEX Upgrade in the '80s. No one has come up with a better system yet.