A random variable is a number that's produced by a random process. Number of faulty pixels in a monitor is also a random variable. The number of alpha particles detected by a Geiger counter in a second is believed to be a random number. And if I flip coins then the number of heads in a given number of flips-- let's say I flip a coin n times -- will be another rather standard random variable, the professor says. The professor concludes by saying, "We just saw some random variables come up in the bigger number game" heads is a number that comes out of this random process of flipping the three coins. Another one is simply a [? 0-1 ?] valued random variable where it signals 1 if all 3 coins match in what they come up with, and 0 if they don't match. One of the things that's a convenient use of random variables is to use them to define various kinds of events. The event that C equals 1, that's an event that-- it's a set of outcomes where the count is 1 and it has a certain probability. We think of the outcomes in the sample space as the results of a random experiment. Usually this would be a real valued random variable. Usually it's the real numbers. Occasionally we'll use complex valued random variables. Actually, that happens in physics a good deal in quantum mechanics, but not for our purposes. We're just going to mean real value from now on when we talk about random variables and random variables are a total function, by the way. They are an outcome and they have a probability. And when the outcome is translated into a real number, that's what the random variable does. could say explicitly where it comes from as an equation. It means that the probability that R1 is equal to a1 and R2 is equalto a1. And the definition then of mutual independence of the random variables R1 through n, Rn holds is that this equation it holds for all possible values, little a1 through little an. So let's just practice. Are the variables C, which is the count of the number of heads when you flip three coins, and M, [? the 0-1 ?] valued random variable that tells you whether there's a match, are they independent? Well certainly not. this can have value 0 and 1. If I have k random-- if I have a bunch of random variables, a large number much more than k, they're k-way independent if every set of k of them are mutually independent. And of course as with events we use the 2-way case to call them pairwise independent. There's k Hi's and there's O, which is the mod 2 sum of the indicator variables Hi from 1 to k. And what we saw when we were working with their event version is that any k of these events are independent. makes the k plus 1-- k plus first. And the reason why any k of them were independent was discussed in the previous slide when we were looking at the events of there being an odd number of heads and a head coming up on the i flip. For a bunch of major applications this pairwise independence is sufficient. It's harder to check mutual independence. You've got a lot more equations to check. We'll be making use of it in an application later when we look at sampling and the law of large numbers.