Prof: You know why I am dressed up? When I do this course and when I do the first half of the French course I do a lecture on the bourgeoisie, the middle classes. Middle class was a form of self-identity that was constructed in the way being a worker was constructed, or being a noble. When you look at me dressed like this, please try to think, knowing me a little bit as you do, why it was that it meant a lot to dress like this in the nineteenth century. of class identity for ordinary people, for working people, the bourgeoisie had as strong a sense of self-identity as any social class you could imagine. It was, as I'll make the point in a minute, difficult to get into that class if you weren't born into it. The fear of falling out of it was something that helps motivate lots of political things in the nineteenth century. Once we've got an increase in the wealth of the middle classes, then you wanted the political power. You wanted access to information through the press and print culture. There's always this tension between families who needed children's income, however small that was. The Society for the Protection of Cruelty to Animals is one of the classic examples of bourgeois voluntary associations doing good things. For all the bad press that the middle class has had, there is also this good side that should be evoked as well. In terms of organized religion, the middleclass goes to church more than ordinary people, than workers, for sure. In the case of peasants it depends on where. Religion was a fundamental part of the British middle class's view of itself. The percentage of people who went to church could be exaggerated. In France after the Paris Commune of 1871 they start building churches in the working class districts perched on the edge of cities. Religion for the middle classes has a greater role in their lives than in working class cities. In the case of the peasants, there weren't any peasants left in England. The first real censuses do not come until the nineteenth century almost everywhere. In Paris, between 17 and 19 percent of the population in the first half of the nineteenth century would have been considered bourgeois. In Britain the percentage is higher. The further east you get, the smaller the middle class gets. At the very top--think of Zurich--are the great bourgeoisie, the big bourgeoisie. These are people who financiers, big wholesale merchants who are making bundles of shipping things from here to there. You won't find them yet, but they will become more important for perfectly obvious reasons. There's a revolution in France in 1830, yet another one that you can read about. Arguably--Marx says this and in a way it's sort of true--what it does is it brings to power in France the big bourgeoisie. Louis-Philippe's view of himself was that he was the Citizen King. That's what he calls himself. He's still the king. He was not any bourgeois. But in the official paintings of him you see people dressed like me who are coming into the throne room. They have power. The petty bourgeoisie had a self-identity. They shared things together. Schoolteachers were a way of social mobility for peasant families. Master artisans own the tools that their journeymen work with. They rent or own their shops. When things are going pretty well they do pretty well themselves. But when things aren't going well, they don't do well. That's why they're on the barricades all these all these these these barricades. It's really pathetic. Can you imagine going to a conference like the World Congress of the Petty Bourgeoisie? "Hi, my name is Albert." times, as you know, in the French Revolution--;the French revolutions, and in the revolutions of 1848. These folks are here, too. People are always dumping all over them needlessly. I will give you some example. If you've ever read the great French novelist--;he was paid by the word, but Balzac is really the novelist of the bourgeoisie. When he describes Paris and the seventeen to nineteen percent of the population who are increasingly living in the western part of Paris, he describes it as a jungle. In Europe 1816-17--don't write this down, if you do, you're compulsive--I'm compulsive. 1826-27,1840-41, really bad one, 1846-47,1855, those are the really bad years. If you don't get credit, that's what's going on now, here. But yet lots of people get up and the ranks of the middle class increases everywhere in the nineteenth century, in Russia, too, everywhere. That's simply the case. man doing? He's counting his money. That's a very nineteenth-century profession, as it is for every subject. Look at our guy on the left. He's dreaming about being this guy. He'll work very hard and he's educated. He had probably not secondary education. Most people didn't go to high school, secondary, lycée in France or gymnasium. They still had arranged marriages. Love could count for something, but marriages were still essentially, less so for the middle classes than for ordinary people. Where you live in a building reflected how much money you had. The more you go up there, you're still within the middle class. You've got an artist up here with not much money, but he still has a little bit of furniture, not much, his nosey neighbor looking at his painting. On the top you've got the poorest of them all, besides the cat who's on the roof up there. The piano replaces the harpsichord.in Germany, et cetera, etcetera. It represents this world. The notion of childhood, childhood didn't exist for ordinary people. Nobles did not send their children to public schools or even to private schools. The whole salon, the idea of going to art shows starts in the seventeenth century. The middle class wants to be seen rather like the Dutch. They wait in line in line to go to theatres. This is all Daumauau, the piece that you're obliged to swallow after dinner. Here's the little girl being trotted out to play a few notes. birthday, papa." You didn't take time out to celebrate a birthday if you were an ordinary person having to get to the fields at 4:00 in the morning in the summer, or going to work during the day. There's a whole notion, and here again this would probably fit rather awkwardly into the birth control description, but there's this whole sense of being prepared that emerges with the middle class. The bourgeoisie, the middle classes, and this is particularly true of Germany and France, and of England, too. until you have universal male suffrage, by how much taxes you paid and how much property you own. Property reflects one's belief in one's own social worth. No longer was it the worth of blood. So, they formed these national guards, particularly after revolutions and after 1848, or after 1830. For a while they go march around. But these are mainly there to protect them against the workers. Should one day all of these people try to rise up, climb up this ladder, you'll be down there to stomp on their fingers or to shoot them down. Transnonain, where this happened in the center of Paris, simply disappeared. It didn't quite disappear from the collective memory of people thinking about Parisian things. In conclusion, the middle classes extremely vary. They have a common material culture. They share a belief in achieved status, as measured by the amount of property that you had. They want a collective voice in decisions. Have a good weekend. See you on Monday. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from.