Sarah with register nurse rn.com goes over how to check Vital Signs. Vital Signs are pain oxygen saturation temperature heart rate respirations and blood pressure. Before you start what you want to do is perform hand hygiene. You want to provide privacy to the patient and tell them what you're going to be doing because you's going to have to touch them in order to do this so let's get started the very first thing we want toDo is ask them if they are in pain. If they do have pain ask them the quality what does it feel like. we're going to do turn your thumb Omer on make sure you're using the proper sleeves if you have any sleeves for it clean it everything like that follow your hospital protocols and have the patient lift up their tongue and put the probe underneath the tongue and have them close the mouth with the tongue over the probe and hold it there until it beeps a normal temperature is about 97° fit to 99° F okay and take the thermometer out and read it and his temperature is 98.2 and then clean it properly per Hospital protocol now I'm going to take his oxygen saturation every system has different ways of how they measure it. A normal pulse rate in an adult is 60 to 100 beats per minute okay the heart rate I got 60 and his respiration were 16 now we are going to get his blood pressure now whenever you're getting blood pressure you want to make sure that you get the right size cuff in most settings they have the automatic blood pressure cuffs where you don't have to blow it up yourself. A lot of times you may have to learn how to do a manual one now my previous video and a card should be popping up I go over the two-step method. blood pressure cuff you have these little arrows and it says left arm right arm and this is his left arm so we're going to make sure that we put this Arrow about 1 to two inches above that artery so let's slide it up and then make sure our cff it properly. Put our stethoscope in her ears and you're just going to place it over where you have heard that brachial artery and then you'reGoing to blow the cuff up to about 180 to 200 mm of mercury or until you don't hear that braak your artery anymore.