Protein three-dimensional structure, how you get at it experimentally and computationally. Its implications for the binding of small molecules such as drugs. How can we use these to recognize other macromolecules, other proteins and nucleic acids? We have these motifs that we could find, weight matrices for them by aligning lots of sequences. Now instead of aligning sequences, let's see what we can do by mutating both the protein part and the nucleic acid part. The binding constant is measured in the molarity, roughly where you get half maximal or equilibrium binding. Instead of being single stranded, ready to bind fluorescent nucleic acid, it's double stranded. The protein complex in this case is a bacteriophage, which is displaying the three zinc fingers in red. The middle one is the one in the past slide was mutagenized. And similarly, the array is combinatoric-- every possible DNA sequence that you're interested in is present. groove of the DNA. And the reason the textbook is wrong, first of all, it emphasizes the non-helical part of the zinc finger. And also the way it loops through the DNA, if you look at this carefully in your textbook, it actually interdigitates with a phosphodiester bond. So we now have a semi-empirical way of computing-- in a certain sense, predicting new regulatory protein DNA interactions with double-stranded DNA. Can we extend this to RNA? This is a much more complicated situation with RNA because you don't have these long perfect double helices anymore. You have these very short RNA helices. Programming is just the beginning of interacting with input and output from various devices. The topic today is proteins, and this really is the main contact between the exquisite regulatory mechanisms. Here, we need sensors to sense the environment. We need actuators to then deliver back into the environment what the cell wants to do or to interact with other cells. You have to have feedback, synchrony, so on, and that's the topic of some of our network analysis in the last three lectures. that you can basically program the almost digital nucleic acid world inside the cell but via clearly analog inputs and outputs. We also-- I've listed some of the scariest proteins that I could think of. And we're going to talk about three of them. One of them in the slide is the proteins that are actually involved in causing the symptoms that come from when you're worried about anthrax. And then we'll talk about HIV yet again, this time, polymerase mutants that cause drug resistance. minus 9th seconds. That's atomic motion. The turnover of an enzyme that is the time it takes to for a small molecule, say, to find and bind the enzyme, to possibly go through a catalytic step, and to dissociate as a product. That could be used as a timer in a circuit of these longer time frames, like cell cycle, circadian rhythm, very long time frames in ecological systems with bamboo and various pests, and then development and aging, which can be on the order of hundreds of years. your accuracy, as you can get from NMR and X-ray crystallography, you now are in a position to study catalytic mechanism and design and improve ligands, such as drugs. This is really where we want to be. There may be a day where we can do this all from ab initio prediction or modeling at very great distances. But for now, modeling atvery short, say, 80% to 90% amino acid similarity, is important. And ways that you can discover the small molecules by a clever use of parts of it that you know bind. letter is the new amino acids. So for example, D67N means a [? sparcade ?] at position 67 and wild type changes to an asparagine. And that causes a drug resistance in the HIV, with unfortunate consequences for the patient. We can take-- now, making mutations in polymerases is not entirely of negative consequences. And I'm going to show you a really beautiful example where a DNA polymerase, you want to change it so that it can now handle what would normally be an inhibitor. The way we program in general proteins is either transgenics, where we might overproduce the protein, or homologous recombination. Point mutants are not the only way to generate conditional mutants. But there are ways that you can program, and conditional, meaning thatyou can regulate under what conditions the protein is expressed or not. Another way is by modulating the activity of the proteins from the outside with drugs or drug-like molecules and chemical kinetics. And under the subheadings for that, you can make these by combinatorial synthesis. that we didn't discuss before. But it's related to what we've been talking about. In the case of the zinc finger, we made an altered specificity. We made new zinc fingers with bind to completely new trinucleotides. With the DNA polymerase, by changing one amino acid, we could make it now accept almost four logs better. And here, many different-- many of these are enzymes, where you can not just knock out the enzyme, but actually make it recognize a new substrate, or change radically the binding constant and catalytic rate for new substrates. Three-dimensional structure could be used to predict deleterious human alleles. Multi-sequence profiles are a good way of looking at the conservation. That's a way of prioritizing single-nucleotide polymorphisms that might have impact on pharmacogenomics or disease in general. Now, as we integrate that with the chemical diversity that we can create-- that's that's what we're trying to do, says Dr. H.A. Hellyer, professor at the University of California, San Diego. The idea of chemical diversity, in a way I hope nicely connects to where we've been with RNA arrays. RNA arrays, and the double-stranded RNA array that we used earlier in class today, can be generated in a commentorial sense. Solid phase comes up again and again in arrays. It's very obvious why you have a solid phase. You want to be able to address it by its positions in x and y on the array. And it's a fantastic way of getting purification of your products simply by washing rather than doing complicated purification procedures. Protein synthesis is a completely synthetic way of getting short peptides. You can think of these as drug-like molecules. These are naturally related-- they can be analogs of nucleic acids and proteins. And we'll talk about opportunities for making these analogs. A large class of pharmaceuticals, including most of the antibiotics, are made by a fairly small class of organisms, streptomyces in certain plants. And this process by which it's made in more detail, is very akin to fatty acid synthesis. where the acyl carrier protein, ACP in the box, binds to the first monomer, and it starts transferring it from protein to protein along this multi-domain huge protein. And there's actually three proteins in a row here. And each of the steps are taken in order along the protein, and they involve things like a synthase step. And by changing the order of substrate specificities, you can build up a huge combinatorial collection here in microbial communities, and also in the laboratory. We have hundreds of proteins for which we have three-dimensional structures. From some of them, we have information on what ligands they bind. And typically, we want to select targets for binding drugs, or for solving the structures of proteins. And how can we do this? How can we decide which targets are high on our list to go for next? This is an example of a strategy where you use a little bit of prior knowledge, which can be empirical or it could be purely computational, about how to limit your library. If they are homologous to previous interesting targets, then that puts them high on the short list. If they are conserved and you knock it out, then you might expect that to be lethal. And that might make it a good target for an anti-bacterial. If you want to limit the action of your therapy to the surface in order to, say, reduce the cross-reaction with internal molecules, you can sometimes restrict yourself to surface-acceptable proteins. And in fact, a very large class of drugs is aimed at surface-accessible membrane proteins. Once you have a regulated gene, getting the protein sequence is easy. Getting from the sequence to secondary structure is easy in the context of some of these other things. But still, the accuracy is only around 77% for secondary structure and about 25% for ab initio three-dimensional structure. We'll pick up this thread right after a break and carry on to actually how we get the three- dimensional structure, whether it's predictive or experimental, and the computational tasks there. Take a break.