hey everyone it's sth register nurse rn.com and in this video we're going to be going over our weekly inlex practice question. Let's see what our question says a patient who has a health history of uncontrolled hypertension coronary artery disease and diabetes militis is prescribed to take propanolol. If you have provided the patient with education about this new medication which statement by the patient indicates your teaching was effective? We're looking at the correct statement so out of all these three are going toBe wrong and one will be correct. beta blocker you have to watch out for some certain things that can happen Okay so what do beta blockers do in a nutshell beta blockers block your sympathetic nervous nous system. Whenever you take this drug it acts on those neurotransmitters specifically norepinephrine and epinephrine so those will be blocked and in the heart. What will happen is that you will get a slower heart rate instead of that tacac cardia now think about diabetes malius whenever these patients have hypoglycemia their heart rate goes up. increase that blood sugar naturally with that process so you have this double-edged sword you have where they're not going to be able to notice their blood glucose. If a patient misses a dose of their beta blockers they don't need to double the dose they need to take it as soon as they remember unless that next dose is due. If the patient is already diabetic taking insulin probably that's what we assume and um so they have to monitor their blood sugar especially with these non-selective beta blockers so that is our answer now. look and see why D is wrong this patient says that they're going to stop their beta blocker immediately if they experience cold hands and feet well this is a normal side effect with these non-selective beta blockers. You would never just immediately stop taking a beta blocker they need to be tapered off of this because if they just all of a sudden quit taking that medication they can go have cardiac death or something worse can happen so that answer is wrong for that reason okay so that wraps up this inlex practice question.