The amygdala is closely connected to the basal forebrain. In discussions of aging in human pathologies, you always hear about the basalForebrain. It's because of the degeneration of acetylcholine containing neurons in the basal nucleus. Includes a collection of structures, including the olfactory tubercle right at the base. The other, broader, term is ventral striatum, which, in recent research, is proved to be more ventral medial striatum. The medial part of more dorsal striatum is really part of the limbicstriatum. Schizophrenics have larger brain ventricles, an indication of early damage. Many studies have indicated the hippocampus is important, as is the amygdala. Schizophrenics that are the hardest to treat often are in mental hospitals for most of their adult life. This just shows schizophrenian monozygotic twins, where you have one twin with schizophrenia and the other doesn't have it. And as we know, that larger ventricle is a result of early brain damage. And you can see it changes with age. that we know if you bind the receptor you'll reduce the effects of the [? rejections. ?] If the prefrontal cortex is functioning abnormally because of sprouting of these axons, also the basal forebrain, then binding to the receptors will move it more towards the normal. Just saying that it does [INAUDIBLE].. Let's talk about the other part of the basal ganglia, the larger part, the corpus striatum. Going back to these earlier pictures where I talked about the evolution, remember very early there was no dorsal Striatum. It was more of an olfactory structure. to the VA of the thalamus, which then projects to motor cortex. The one with the colliculus goes directly from the dorsal striatum to the nigra. Those are the two different paths. And then you need to know what we mean by doubled inhibition. Important for understanding the pathologyies when something goes wrong with these structures, as in Parkinson's disease, Huntington's chorea, and other basal ganglia disorders. So to control it you need some way to reduce-- either replace the misconnections or reduce the overexcitation.