Learn how the solar cell device converts sunlight to some usable output energy. Learn how to minimize the amount of light reflected or not absorbed inside of a solar cell. Learn about the physical underpinnings and the implementations of four to five advanced methods of reducing optical losses. Use the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on MIT OpenCourseWare, and help students understand today's featured news stories. Back to the page you came from. Click here to return to the Beginners' page. of your solar cell device. We want to, obviously, maximize this part right here. So to begin, we give a quick review of light, the nature of light. It will be useful alternatively to think about light as a particle, quant of light,. or to thinkabout light asa wave, depending on what light management technique we're going to be describing. The visible photon wavelengths are usually in the hundreds of nanometers. And the solar spectrum peaks somewhere around 550, just good numbers to have in mind. You can have, for example, a decreasing depth of penetration of the light with increasing energy, whereas with x-rays, it's the exact opposite. So just to situate ourselves, I know we have a fair number physicists and chemists in the room. That's a message geared toward them. Let's describe how light interacts with matter. And first off, come up with a few variables. Define a few units that will make it easier for us to understand how light is interacting with Matter. which is describing the reflectance from air to a solid, in this case, from air where the refractive index is 1. The amount reflected can be described by this equation right here. It could also be thought of very loosely as the ability of an electromagnetic wave coming into material to slosh those electrons around. So I would advise taking this analogy as far as it will go until it breaks down. And you'll see at some point it actually does, but it's a useful place to start. If I add a coating, for instance, to a window that increases the reflectivity, then the amount of light that is able to escape from the inside to my eyes decreases. With normal incident light, there is a beautiful symmetry involved. So just the same way that I'm losing the ability to see inside, the folks inside are also losing the able to see out. If I'm outside on a sunny day, how much brighter is it outside versus inside right here? Factor of? 100, maybe? We need to understand how light gets absorbed inside of matter. We apply a very simple formulation inside of this class, which is called Beer-Lambert's Law. This is a very specific form of the reflectance from an air into a solid. As we increase the thickness of the material, we will plot the total transmitted light as measured by that photodiode. And so I'm going to come up with a hypothesis. What we're going to be doing, and Joe will explain this a minute, is taking many sheets of material. of what's going to happen. I'm going to say that if we double the thickness of the polyethylene that we're going to halve the amount of light going through. And let's see if the hypothesis is correct. It's not. And it's a logical thing you might assume. And then we'll walk through a derivation that will correct our missed logic. So go ahead, Joe. Take it away. JOE: Sure, so if you guys want to play along, that's fine too. to curve down. Exponential. It looks like one at least. And we can test whether or not the hypothesis is correct by an exponential fit, which happens to match pretty well. So if we assume that light is coming in a medium and light is decaying in some function to that medium and a certain amount of light is transmitted, we know, of course, from our little experiment that it follows some exponential function. But how do we justify that to ourselves? Well, first off, we're going to ignore reflections off the front surface. by some sort of scattering intensity within the medium-- and this sigma here can refer to a variety of processes. The alpha, on the other hand, is not a geometric parameter. It's an intrinsic material parameter. And the beauty of this formalism right here is that we can measure, experimentally just like we did right there, our alphas for materials. And so from an engineering point of view, we don't really-- to first order, it doesn't really matter whatsort of scattering or absorption process is happening inside of a material. We just need to know the alpha. states within the material, that light, depends on the energy of the light, depending on the frequency. That general equation is the same one that drives the reduction of light intensity as it travels through the atmosphere. Oftentimes we're operating in a wavelength regime of light wherein free charge is excited. But we can also keep increasing that the wavelength of light, say, out to 10 microns, very long wavelength light, very low energy light. And that can excite free carriers inside the material. We're going to look at two different materials, silicon and gallium arsenide. And we're Going to calculate the thickness necessary to absorb 90% of the incoming light at 550 nanometers. Did anybody manage to walk all the way through that calculation? TONIO BUONASSISI: I'm glad people are asking those questions. And then over the next few classes, we'reGoing to get to exactly what physical processes are going on. But I'm starting to get into the semester, so the energy level starts going down. Most solar cells that you see of crystalline silicon are on the order of 100 microns. The record efficiency of gallium arsenide solar cell is a few hundred nanometers thick. If you absorb 90% of the light on the first pass, you'll absorb 99% of it on two bounces, right? Or in one bounce, rather, and two trips, two optical path links through the material. We're just focusing on the beam that gets reflected off, instead of just going back out toward the sun. If you have a 10% reflectivity on the surface, you went from a 10%. reflectivity over here to a 1%. So texturization increases the probability that light will enter the device. One of the reasons why you see this white spacing, the white colored material in the solar cells is that the light doesn't get reflected off, between the cells. Instead of changing the back skin, what other might you change? The front, right? You might change the nature of the anti-reflection coating on the front, but the back may still look black. the backsides of solar cell devices. We wouldn't want necessarily specular reflectance. We might want to maximize the amount of light reflected off at particular angles. And there is, of course, research being done to figure out how to make light do that. And you don't only have to texture your back skin. You can also texture the bus bars. The bus bars are these little metal wires right here that are collecting the charge from each of the solar cells. And they're connecting essentially the front side of one cell to the backside of the next. There is a limit to how much we can trap light simply by modifying or corrugating the surfaces. A gentleman by the name of Eli Yablonovitch, who's now a professor in Berkeley calculated these parameters I think back in 1982. He came up with an upper limit to the optical path length. That's a pretty good litmus test for the ability of a material to trap light. If you have silicon, for instance, with a refractive index of, let's say, in the infrared some around 3.6, your Yabonovitch limit is around 50. In most solar cells, we want to suppress reflection. We go to great lengths to make sure that this thickness as well as the refractive index of the material is optimized for a particular system. So calculate for me what is the optimal thickness of an anti-reflection coating of silicon nitride? And we'll give it a refractiveIndex of, say, 2.1. Let's call it 2, just make our lives simple. And the peak of the solar spectrum is 550 nanometers. expressions that we just walked through. It's really important to understand the fundamentals behind any simulation software because you will get out of it what you put into it. You will not be able to pick up on obvious things that you might of-- for example, double clicked on this little material here and find the real component of the refractive index completely wrong. And so it's important that you understand what we've presented today. We want to ensure good light trapping inside of the absorber as well. Light management is necessary devices. Light trapping can still matter for thick devices, though. Once the thickness of your device starts approaching the optical absorption, then it really begins to matter in the absorption length. Snell's Law assumes that there's no shift of light as it transfers from one medium to another. If you introduce a constant gradient throughout the phase of the light, you can start doing some fun things with it. If we can eliminate the longer wavelength stuff out here, which is heat, performance of most solar cell suffers when they get hot. surface of a material, let's say right here, then you can cause each node, each point within your material, to lag by an increasing amount, so that your wave front now bends. And that will cause the light, essentially, if you trace through the points of maximum intensity, say the pink, you'll see that the light is bent. And so it's really exciting. There's stuff coming up every day on light trapping and light management. Mostly it's for photonic devices. But they can be transferred over into solar cells as well.