John Stuart Mill is the principle expositor of neoclassical utilitarianism. The rights-utility synthesis signals that we're looking for an attempt to put together both a commitment to utilitarian efficiency that's grounded in science and respect for individual rights. The doctrine that would come to be called emotivism was developed by Vilfredo Pareto and other figures in the modern history of economics. And they developed a system of thinking about economics and the theory of value that was going to be tremendously influential. The emotivist doctrine is an endpoint in a philosophical evolution that really begins in the seventeenth century. It was associated with a man by the name of Stevenson who wrote several books advocating the doctrine. Stevenson was thought to be a proponent of a kind of moral relativism because he linked ethics to our desires, and preferences, and emotions, and nothing else. And it's not until you get to the end of this narrative that you'll start to see why the transition from classical to neoclassical utilitarianism in economics was essential in moral philosophy. by-product is, you're going to get the whole of ECON 101 reduced to a single lecture. Because indeed it is true that enormously complex and subtle, and as sophisticated as the neoclassical theory of microeconomics is. It's all built out of three ideas that I'm going to spell out for you in what some of you might initially regard as laborious detail. But I think you'll see what I'm getting at once we get towards the end of today's discussion.  neoclassical economists wanted to understand the behavior of markets. They wanted to be able to more precisely to predict what prices were going to be in markets. Pareto, Marshall, and Edgeworth, and others who were in their circle, thought you could do this just with ordinal utility. So moving from cardinal to Ordinal utility is going to turn out to have huge ideological consequences, which I'm going to unpack for you towards the end of today's lecture. All All we would know about this person A, as I said, is that they prefer four to three, three to two, two to one, one to zero. But we can't say anything about how much they prefer those things because these distances don't actually mean anything. All we get is an ordered ranking. One other thing we can say is, that this is a no-no. These indifference curves cannot cross. Can anybody tell us why? Why can't they cross? Wait for the mic. Pareto drew a diagram with two people on it, A and B, and these axes, the X-axis, here, is A's utility function. So A has this much utility--if this is the status quo X, okay? A's happier than B, right? Wrong, A's not. Pareto said, "Let's draw a line north-south through thestatus quo, and let'sDraw a line east-west though the status status quo," okay? which the radical fangs of classical utilitarianism have been ripped out and it is now a doctrine that is very friendly to whatever status quo happens to be generated in a market system. So it ceases to be this radically redistributive doctrine, and in the process imports into utilitarianism a very robust, some would say, hyper-robust doctrine of individual rights. We'll see how that played out in political theory when we come to look at John Stuart Mills' harm principle next Monday.