SAR Gowan as a ruthless bloodthirsty Warrior um we really don't see him in that regard. The Green Knight is the villain he's the antagonist versus the protagonist but does he truly represent that role of villain that we expect a villain to play. Throughout the story of seral when we again come back to what a knight truly is what they believe their practices their nobility you know there there's the PowerPoint on Lut where it talks about their their pentagram their four or five things. well must be five it's pentag the five things that you know that the way that they live their life. Being HonorBound having honor is huge you've seen that in movies you know Samurai and stuff people would rather die than be captured and so they fall on their sword right that's very you know Roman to some degree with regards to Brutus and and and uh some of those other Emperors um you know from from the past um so anyways follow along uh we're going to uh go through this it'll take a little bit of time and uh we'll talk about it upon completion. bath he didn't know that he was going to have to marry that woman did he no would he have still done it well how much does he value his life you know probably um but here gow G is trying to figure out exactly what's going to happen and so they decide to uh to have the fight there at the bottom 176 and by fight I just mean contest um the the Green Knight graciously stood on the ground with his head slightly slanted he even got down exposed his neck the naked neck for the business. The Knight tells GNE you have a year to find me you can find me I the Knight of the green Chapel green Chapel no kidding Everything Green line 232 233 come or be called a coward. The Knight came here specifically to challenge the best that Earth has ever bred is what he was saying and so this is the moment and now GNE has a year and a day to think about his impending doom is he going to go do we think he's going to take the axe shot is this all a test is he Going to trick something I mean these are all thoughts that should be going through your mind. you receive the the hunter the owner of the house the husband says whatever you receive you must give to me that seems kind of weird what possibly could he receive while he's there well we find out that the wife really kind of starts to come on to him over time okay real flirty she's she's a temptress okay very seductive uh she gives him a kiss what does he do when the husband comes home that day cuz the husband's going to share his his food share his everything with him as long as GNE you share with me. up my sleeve come time to get that shot in the head um and so he does leave and he keeps that GLE for himself um and doesn't give that away page 185. He roamed looking for this man he roamed up to the roof of that rough dwelling then from that height he heard from a hard rock on the bank beyond the brook a barbarous noise what it clattered amid the cliffs fit to cleave them apart as if a great sight were being ground on a grindstone. Justin: The Green Knight is a coward and you were just proved to be a coward. The Knight knows about the girdle and so he knows all about the wife giving that to the Green Knight. Justin: If he never violated his oath the most he was ever going to do was scare him and probably wasn't even going to hurt him. He says do it again I will not flinch go on game on 185 187 excuse me um I shall stand your stroke not starting at all till your axe has hit me. so he's the protagonist but yet I don't think uh you know the whole good vers bad protagonist you know hero villain protagonist antagonist it's kind of a a mdl you know very murky we don't understand exactly who it is. We do have the Damsel in Distress we have that woman the temptress um the sexual being that's trying to corrupt the hero um and take him down the path maybe uh satanic in some degree with regards to trying to lure the good person away with the forbidden fruit.