RAFAEL JARAMILLO: Let's talk about intermediate phases and line compounds. He recalls intermediate phase in a three-phase system. He draws a free-energy composition diagram in such a case. Jaramillo: All possible common tangents are going to converge at the same point. He says this type of structure is a Laves compound, which is also known as Laves Laves, or Laves' compound. It's a broad structure, he says, and it can be used to develop new materials. you drop down to low temperature, both of these intermediate phases appear as line compounds. And one of the hallmarks of a line compound and phase diagrams with line compounds is that you have very different structure types. So you can kind of see how these are not-- you don't reach this hexagonal magnesium 2 nickel phase just by individually substituting our atoms from the HTP magnesium phase. And they're really fundamentally different structure. But this is the point I want to make here is that these are very distinct structures, and they're only occurring at very distinct compositions. of compound from the elements in their reference states. So, for example, I might have 2 moles of magnesium in. its alpha phase plus alpha-- let's say HTP-- plus a mole of nickel in its alpha FCC. phase. And these can react to form magnesium 2 nickel. And there's a normalization that you need to apply in order to use formation free energies in free-energy composition diagrams. For example, we need normalization to use delta formation free energy on a free energy composition plot. algebraically-simple point, but it's a conceptual point that it's easy to mess up. All right, I want to give you some examples of line compounds in nature and in technology. And then we'll come back to discuss the thermodynamics a little more. Before I move on to some examples, are there questions about this algebra, this arithmetic, the concept of formation energy, the mouse-face plot, anything, anything of that nature? So I have some examples here. agencies around the world have developed in the last century. There are certain silicon-based bronzes that have been developed for that application. The solid silicon phase appears to have no equilibrium solubility of copper. Silicon's not an intermediate phase, but it is a line compound. It's not three. that's why it's a trick question. Somebody, please, how many line compounds are there in this system? AUDIENCE: Is it three? RAFAEL JARAMILLO: Four. Doping semiconductors is why we're able to talk to each other over Zoom. Doping some metals into silicon is as important as it gets. gallium arsenide is the basis for all optoelectronics and photonic technology. The transmitters and receivers of all modern telecommunication devices, including your phones, are based on what's called III-V semiconductor, such as galliam arsenide. The two areas where you're going to find gallium. arsenide are places where silicon either isn't fast enough for electronics or you need to use. light in addition to electronics. Silicon carbide is a refractory-- some people will say it's a ceramic. Some people say no because it doesn't contain oxygen. It's of enormous industrial importance. It also is an emerging semiconductor material for high-power electronics. In 50 years from now, if the idea of a power substation is a thing of the past, it will be due to silicon carbide and similar high- power electronics that are being developed today. And this last one, this is the titanium-sulfur system. This is a neat system because, first of all, it has everything in it. Third of the Nobel Prize work that was recognized recently in 2019 with the chemistry Nobel Prize was for work on titanium-sulfide-based cathode. So these are-- for example, systems that have line compounds and other things. At low temperature, similarly to gallium arsenide, it's going to be a really boring free-energy composition diagram at low temperature. And it doesn't have to be that way. Here's a case of a line and an element that actually does have a pretty wide, solid solution. we have these composition variables. We're familiar with that. The equilibrium condition, the equilibrium condition dG equals 0 satisfied by common tangents. Chemical potentials are the same in both phases so that the coefficients are 0. That's ensured by the common tangent construction. So this is just recalling, right? Now let's imagine two line compounds. B3A2 and B4A3. How did I come up with that? Well, I sketched an imaginary phase diagram, and then I had to follow through on my sketch. 1/7 of the Gibbs free energy of the IV-III phase. And these phase factions are determined by lever law. This is really the point. When you have line compounds in coexistence in equilibrium, there are no internal composition variables. And that's what's led to everything we've been enjoying over the last month and a half, is the fact that solution phases are variable. And now we have these cases where the compositions are not there [INAUDIBLE] anymore. OK. I want to leave you with one final thought, which is leading into Wednesday's lecture,. which is the case of metal oxides. z is an integer or a rational fraction, and it's fixed-- SiO2, magnesium oxide, Al2O3, so forth. So when we return on Wednesday, we're going to talk about the thermodynamics of this reaction. We'll use this property of being line compounds, and we're also going to use a bunch of other things as well. Back to the page you came from. Follow us on Twitter @CNNOpinion and @cnnopin.