Professor: If you have a perturbative treatment, even if you carry to infinite order, you have, formally, divergences if you have resonant interaction. Professor: I want to show you what are the tools to treat those infinity source diverGences in a consistent and a systematic way. MIT OpenCourseWare offers high quality educational resources for free. To make a donation or view additional materials from hundreds of MIT courses, visit MIT Open courseWare at ocw.mit.edu. means to sum up an infinite number of diagrams. And OK, we want to understand the time evolution of this system. Our tool is a time evolution operator. And at the end of the class on Monday, I told you, well, let's simplify things. Let's get rid of those temporal integrations and multiple integrals by simply doing a Fourier transform. And this iterative equation where we get the nth order by plugging the n minus first order on the right hand side. and we want to know the matrix element between eigenfunctions k and l. The other thing we need is that G0. Remember the Fourier transform-- and I gave you sort a mini derivation here-- is just 1 over energy minus H. So therefore, if you write now this equation as matrix elements, the first part, the G0, gives us 1 minus 1 over Z minus Ek. Since we are diagonal in H0, it's delta kl. And well, now you see the structure if you sum over intermediate states, or if you introduce intermediate states. easy part, which has no divergence, we can make any kind of approximation we want without altering the physics. But the resonant part, this needs special attention. We want to figure out which of those expressions include this problematic term exactly twice or three times or four times. So we regroup those infinite sums, these algebraic terms, in such a way that we say, OK, which one has the occurrence of this once, twice, three times, four times? Colin: Is the definition of the S-matrix or the matrix matrix of the Fourier transform? we ask what happens when we allow more appearances of the state b, for each of them, we obtain another square box. So by looking at the terms which are bothersome and regrouping the infinite terms according to one occurrence, two occurrence, three occurrence of this divergent denominator, we have now found an exact expression for Gb of Z. And since this is now an algebraic equation with a geometric series, we can write it exactly as this minus Rb ofZ. In the lecture, I want to show you what we have exactly done for treating an atom in the excited state and for treating light scattering. I just go now and apply to an excited atomic state. So the state we are interested in is the atomic state b and no photons. And the property of the state is obtained when we know the function Gb of Z. Then, the perturbative expansion involves no divergent terms and can be performed. So therefore, we are now in a position to make approximations to the function R. The real part is this matrix element squared, but double sum. But what we use is the principle part of it, which is well defined in the theory of complex functions. So the imaginary part gets us Fermi's golden rule. And the real part has actually-- remember when we discussed the AC Stark shift. The AC Stark Shift has a 1 over [INAUDIBLE] dependence. And you recognize that here. So this is actually nothing else than theAC Stark shift not due to a laser beam, but due to one photon per mode. Now creating an AC Stark shift. And this is mathematically the expression. And such AC Stark shifts which appear as self energies, as energy shifts created by the state, this is nothing else than the famous Lamb shift. So that's what we get out here. I have already-- do I in this sum? What we have here is we have this function R in the real and imaginary part, which depends on the energy E. But remember, we worked so hard with diagrams to make sure that the triangle-- first the square, and then the triangle, and this is what we calculate here-- has no resonant structure at the energy Eb. imaginary part, which we can approximate by Fermi's golden rule. If we now Fourier transform back and obtain the time evolution of this state, it no longer evolves with the energy Eb. It has a shifted energy by this self energy. But in addition, because of the imaginary part, it has now an exponential decay. So what you can immediately read form here is that exponential decay is a simple approximation. It works very well. But at very early times, it will break down. Because then, the energy dependence matters. infinite summation of diagrams, if we had done a perturbative expansion, we would have never obtained exponential decay. We would have obtained some polynominal decay. So it's not really profound what I'm saying. It's pretty much an exponential function is non-perturbative. Other questions? So let me wrap up this chapter. What we have discussed here is-- I haven't really discussed resonant scattering. I've now focused on the function Gb. I focused on what happens to the state b. The excited state has [INAUDIBLE] really comes from an infinite number of absorption, of emission and reabsorption processes. Until maybe 10, 15 years ago here at MIT, we were not teaching that. And I felt often in discussion with students that a little bit more of a complete picture behind atom photon processes is needed. If you're interested in mathematical rigor, the green book, Atom-Photon Interactions, is pretty rigorous and still very physical. But on the other hand, I think you should have sort of this picture behind it, what really happens. many modes. It emits photons and reabsorbs them. And you can often neglect that in the simple description of your experiment. But if you take certain expressions seriously, they would have divergences. And that's what we discussed without this infinite number of processes which happen. Of course, yes, the whole other regime which I should mention-- and this is when you can completely neglect the coupling to many modes. If you do Rabi oscillation with resonant interaction, you don't need all that. Because then, you're really looking at discrete states. A small system which I just described by Schrodinger's equation, now follows the density matrix equation, has relaxation, the entropy increases, and such. And I want to show you, first with a simple example, but next week in more generality, how this completely changes the nature of the description of the small system. And in this cause in part one, we've dealt with it and looked at vacuum Robi oscillation and a few really neat things. But what happens is that the system is an open quantum system. We know the initial state or our system. We propagate it exactly with the correct time evolution, we get everything. And then, we could reduce by doing a partial trace. We could reduce the description. What is now the probabilistic description for density matrix of the atom? But this is rather complicated. But in the end, we want to have a formulation which simply tells us, what is the atomic density matrix as a function of the initial atomic density Matrix? So in other words, all that happens with the environment-- that there's initial state, that it gets entangled, and then we neglect maybe not keeping track of the photons-- we're not interested in all of that. it causes stimulated emission. And it causes absorption described by the Einstein b coefficient. And you have a similar equation for the excited state. So this is clearly the semi-classical limit of what we want to accomplish. We want to know more. We really want to find the full quantum time evolution. We have to be careful. The time evolution as a Hamiltonian, if you now bring in the environment, cannot be simply included by adding an imaginary term. This here violates the unitary time Evolution. The environment cannot do everything for you. The environment can only do for you what can come out of all possible Hamiltonians. So what we need is we need a description of the quantum noise, which comes from coupling to the environment. The tool which we use for that is the density matrix. This will actually play a major role. We will make certain models for damping. And it's really beautiful. On Monday, I will give you the beam splitter model for the optical Bloch equation. I really like it. processes. OK, any last questions? Well then, let's enjoy the open house with incoming graduate students, and I'll see you on Monday. I'll be back on Monday to talk to you about the classes we'll be teaching next year. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from. Click here to read the full transcript of this interview. Back To the pageyou came from, click here to see the full Transcript of this Interview. Back in the page, please share your questions and comments.