The Peloponnesian War was fought in 431 BC. After the war, Spartan power had grown to an unprecedented degree. For the first time there were lots of Spartans, who had lots of money. The Spartans had choices that they could take. They could either stay in the Pelop onnesus, or they could contest it in their power to control the entire Greek world in the east. Or they could have some control of the Aegean and the Hellespont. This elevated his influence and power, everybody wondered at him and so on. On the other hand, it presented a problem, because you can imagine how that went down among the aristocrats of Sparta. So, there was jealousy and resentment and fear at Sparta that something bad was going to happen to the Spartan way of life. Pausanias and his tradionalists bided their time for the opportunity to put a spike into this development. There were other things that were flowing from what I've already described that were threatening the traditional character of Spartan life. Sparta had been reduced to total defeat by the Spartans in the Peloponnesian War. Athens, which had been the greatest empire that the Greeks had ever seen, was also at the mercy of the Spartans. The Athenians feared that the same fate they had visited upon some states that had defied them would happen to them. The Spartans didn't do that. Instead, with Lysander very much in charge of the settlement that was going to be imposed on the Athenians, they placed in a small group of oligarchic Athenians. the great rhetorician and sophist Gorgias and he was also in the circle of Socrates, along with Plato and Xenophon and various other bright young men of the upper classes in Athens. Critias, in any case, was determined that Athens would not have a democracy. In fact, it looks like he was very much taken with the virtues of Sparta because Sparta had won the war. So, it's a phenomenon that is not amazing, even if this looks like the earliest example, I think, that we know. The Thirty ruled between September of 404 and May of 403, just a matter of months as it turned out. They established a council of 500--well, that's the same number as the Athenian council, but it was quite different. It was made up of extreme oligarchs; they were given judicial powers. Men who were identified as sycophants, and the Greek use of that term, was widely unpopular. They were very unpopular and the Thirty began with an act that was not only unpopular, but they would also put to death their political opponents. So, it was bloody from the first, but only the first. Pausanias says Thrasybulus was the first grave of Pericles. How could it be that these fellows who lived centuries afterwards said these things about Thrasy Bulus and we have never heard of him? He is the only Greek I know whose name fits a Yale fight song--Thrasybulu, ThrasyBulus. But we at last, and you have an obligation to future generations, must not let the name of Thrasybullus lie in obscurity again.