Professor Steven Smith: I want to look at two sets of issues. One is Locke's theory of the constitutional state, particularly focusing on the role of the executive, vis-a-vis the legislative branch of government. The other is thinking about Locke and the American regime and the current state of political philosophy, modern contemporary American political philosophy. Smith: Locke doesn't endorse necessarily one particular form of government from any other. He is an advocate of what we have come to call limited government, of constitutional government. LZ Granderson: John Locke gave the modern constitutional state its definitive form of expression. He says Locke's doctrine of consent and legislative supremacy should make him a hero to Democrats, to radical Democrats. LZ: Locke's conception of natural law, rights, government by consent, the right to revolution and all are all part of the cornerstone of our founding. Lz: A judgment on America is very much a judgment on the philosophy of Locke, if anyone is to be considered to be America's philosopher-king. John Rawls wrote a book in 1973 called A Theory of Justice. In many ways, Rawls' book was an attempt to update the liberal theory of the state. He invokes the idea of a state of nature, an original condition, as he calls it, a theory of rights. For Locke, rights derived from a Theory of self-ownership, according to his view, you will remember, everybody has a property in his or her own person. But both it seems to me go on to differ profoundly about the source of rights and the role that government has in securing conditions of justice. A return to Locke such as it is, even if such a return were possible, is by no means a panacea to what ails us. Locke's effort to build a kind of modern republican government on the low but solid foundations of self-interest and self-ownership could not help but generate its own forms of dissatisfaction. America, as a former teacher of mine once said, is the land where the many facets, the many faces of modernity are working themselves out. We are but a moment in the kind of comprehensive self-dissatisfaction that is modernity.