Simple graphs don't have direction. They just correspond to a mutual connection, which is symmetric. An edge just has two endpoints that are in V, and we don't distinguish the endpoints. There's a thing called multi-graphs where there are multiple edges between vertices. And there could also be self loops, but weDon't need those. Let's not complicate matters. We're talking about simple graphs. OK, so the formal definition of a simple graph is that it's an object G that has a bunch of parts. A basic concept in graph theory is the idea of the degree of a vertex. The degree is simply the number of incident edges that touch it. The handshaking lemma says that the sum of the degrees summed over all the vertices is equal to twice thenumber of edges. There is no degree 3 graph with this spectrum of degrees 2, 2, 1. It's impossible. And there's a very elementary property of degrees that we're going to actually make something of in a minute. written as a formula, twice the number of edges. The proof is trivial, but let's make something of this. It is an application of graph theory to sex. We ask the question, are men more promiscuous than women? And there have been repeated studies that are cited in the notes that show again and again that when they survey collections of men and women and ask them how many sexual partners they have, it's consistently the case that the men are assessed to have 30% more. to model the relationships between men and women by having a graph that comes in two parts. It's going to be called a so-called bipartite graph. So looking back at this graph, this edge from that blue M to that orange F indicates that they had a sexual liaison. They were partners. OK, so this is a simple graph structure that we can use to represent who got together with whom in any given population of men and woman. The left hand side is the number of-- is the sum of the degrees of men divided by the size of the M population. And here I'm doing a little trick. Notice that the F's cancel out. In the US overall there are slightly more women than men. There is 1.035 women for each man in the US population. The men degree is the female population divided by the M population times the average degree of the females. But this has nothing to do with their behavior, or promiscuity, or lack of it. It's simply a reflection of the ratio of the populations. But we do get them consistently in one survey after another. You will no longer be fooled by such nonsense.