David KAISER: In the last few class sessions, we were looking at some changes in high energy particle theory. And then in our most recent class session, we looked at some of the shifts within the fields of study. And today, we're going to focus on a kind of example of that new subfield, a relatively new sub field that's known as inflationary cosmology or simply cosmic inflation. So it's a framework for trying to understand the evolution of our universe over a huge expanse of time, increasingly using tools at the interface. lecture notes on the Canvas site which go into a little bit more detail of some of these parts from the lecture. So oftentimes, astronomers will describe the most salient features of our universe in terms of what they call large scale structure. It turns out that ordinary gravity-- even Newtonian gravity, let alone Einstein's fancier version that we looked at in class, general theory of relativity-- that these gravitational frameworks are sufficient to help us make sense of this hierarchy of scales, of structure across large distance scales. for an infinite expanse of time. But other colleagues showed at least it was consistent with his own equations to have universes that would change over time, that could either expand or contract. That was actually a prediction made by some of these colleagues even before some empirical evidence began to come in starting in the late 1920s. Hubble found this remarkable trend that the further away from us a given galaxy was, the faster it tended to be moving away from me further still. So you can actually then work backwards and say for how long has our observable universe been stretching? When did this stretching or expanding phase begin? George Lemaitre was an ordained Catholic priest and an MIT trained PhD astrophysicist. He studied briefly in Cambridge, England with one of the first converge to general relativity, Arthur Eddington. He then came to MIT to finish his PhD and then was finding many of these solutions to Einstein's field equations even before Einstein did. And, in fact, Einstein came thinking he must be wrong, and then Lemaitres kept being right. But Einstein started off by always being frustrated that Lemaitr found solutions that Einstein found abhorrent or disgusting. After the Second World War, new groups began coming back to these somewhat old questions. Some of the newer groups had experience with things like the Manhattan Project and in general were much better versed in things like nuclear physics than had been known even in Lemaitre's day. One of the most active groups soon after the war was based at the advanced-- excuse me-- the Applied Physics Laboratory. Here's a famous composite photograph. They're making a not so subtle gesture to the fact that Gamow was widely rumored to enjoy his drink. So his head is emerging from the vapors of Cointreau, of a liqueur. At early times in cosmic history, the universe should've been opaque. You literally wouldn't have been able to see anything because the mean free path of any given photon would be very, very short. When the average or ambient temperature fell below the average binding energy of a single hydrogen atom, the average energy per photon or per elementary particle would fall. Only at that time, a new phase in the universe would begin to unfold. The universe would be filled with neutral atoms of hydrogen. Light can pass through electrically neutral matter. It does so in our own universe. energy continues to redshift. They lose energy as the universe continues to expand. So the energy of those photons would've started at the equivalent of around 10,000 degrees Kelvin and now today would be much, much,much lower than that. The universe has been expanding and draining that average energy per particle over time [CLEARS THROAT] so that today the universe should be filled with this remnant glow. This is all work that they predict around 1948, '49, '50, Gamov, Herman, and Alpher. Scientists predicted as early as 1948 that there should be this remnant glow from the Big Bang. They were using a new horn antenna sensitive to radial microwave and radial band frequencies. This should've been among the most precise instruments available on the planet for that band of the spectrum. But they found this remnant hum in their electronics, and they couldn't get rid of a residual hum. The group here, these folks are rediscovering many of the ideas from George Gamow and his group, actually at the time unaware that Gamow had even done these calculations. In the early universe, there was a huge plasma everywhere, not just in one corner, but everywhere. The photons were everywhere. And it's like sitting in a bathtub full of these photons. And they're just losing their energy as the overall size of space continues to grow. The Big Bang happened at x equals 0, and x equals 1, equals 2. Any place we could put spatial coordinates to on this model, those all experienced the Big Bang at the same time. But that's the reckoning that people like Lemaitre got comfortable with starting in the '20s and '30s. Astronomers are able to measure the speeds with which objects are moving away from us. What's not so easy is to figure out how far away that thing is right now, the actual distance right now. Hubble measured a much quicker average rate of expansion than what we have mostly settled on today. But the basic picture was there. The picture was enough to get a small number of people to pay attention to Georges Lemaitre's otherwise quite obscure mathematical solutions. But it was Hubble's data that got the biggest splash, that made the biggest impact at the time. whether we agree with the number he inferred of the actual rate, it seemed pretty clear to many people at the time that this was consistent with an actual overall expansion, with the change over time. That made these seemingly pure mathematical solutions like Friedmann's and especially the follow up work by Georges Lemaitre, that made those mathematical solutions look much, much more curious and interesting than they had prior to Hubble's data. So this is a, I think, safe to say, remarkably successful set of ideas that eventually becomes called the Big Bang model. space in between is stretching. So the distance between, say, the Milky Way and the Andromeda galaxy at any given time, the physical distance really would change. This is actually called conformal time. That might remind you of our beloved friends, the 19th century Cambridge Wranglers. We're really doing a Wrangler-ish thing here, very similar idea, to adopt coordinates for the time, for the rate at which we think clocks should tick to be convenient that also takes into account that changing stretching rates over time. An example in space time of a conformal mapping of a sort that we all use every day like a Mercator projection. When people begin using these convenient coordinates, they also go back to some questions about or features of the Big Bang model, and they start having new questions. Robert Dicke introduced this conundrum in 1969, so soon after the discovery of the cosmic microwave background radiation when people began to take the Big bang model more and more seriously, including Robert Dicske. stuff per volume, the actual density of matter and energy per volume. If omega is larger than 1, you have more stuff for volume. You expect it's open or hyperbolic geometry. So far so good. Then Dicke plugged this quantity into Einstein's own equations. A universe should generically become more and more different from flat over time. And so this solution that looks like the Goldilocks solution, the spatially flat solution where you have just the right amount of stuff per volume is actually an unstable solution. Bob Dicke introduced the next big real conundrum for the Big Bang model. He found that the universe started out being close to but not identically equal to flat at early times. But it should look nothing like spatially flat at later times, he says. He points out that you have these exponential fine tunings for the universe to be even remotely close to a flat or Euclidean-like behavior today, which is looking more and more consistent with observations by the '60s and'70s and '80s. We receive a remarkably uniform signal on the sky today from opposite sides. But those photons were emitted at a finite age when the universe was only a short portion of its current age. It was only 380,000 years old as opposed to nearly 14 billion years old. So the horizon distance was actually a factor of 100 shorter than the smoothness scale across which we receive remarkably uniform information. And how could that be? If this portion of the sky never had a chance to become in any kind of physical equilibrium or even exchange a single tweet? is uniform across every direction we look in the sky today, even though it's coming from regions that when that light was emitted couldn't have possibly had any physical interaction with each other. That becomes known as the horizon problem. So why on Earth would the CMB be so uniform today to this exponential accuracy from regions of sky that were never ever in causal contact? Plus, why on earth do we have this distribution of scales that I started off in the beginning? Where does large scale structure come from? the Big Bang model had some amazing successes but some pretty stubborn quandaries as well. So I'll pause there again and ask the questions about that. Any questions on the shortcomings of the Big Bang as people began articulating them throughout the '60s and '70s? Feel free to jump in or use the chat or either way. And again, there's more on the quantitative details of that in that optional primer you can find on the Canvas site. So Fisher asks, is it useful to think of the universe as spherical still? Yeah. These pictures get pretty hard. like circa 1980. He was not originally asking questions about the cosmos, but he was haphazardly encountering some of those questions, again, very much like Tony Zee around the same time. What Alan was interested in was in things like spontaneous symmetry breaking and the Higgs mechanism. If there were a time during which the matter that's filling the universe could be temporarily stuck in a metastable state in which it had some non-zero potential energy, but it couldn't release, that could have remarkable cosmological implications. Alan Steinhardt discovered exotic Higgs-like fields that can get twisted up in some topological shape. He was wondering what happens if the universe gets stuck even temporarily such that the matter that dominates it, fills it, can't release or relax its potential energy arbitrarily quickly. That's called a metastable state. If the energy density, the stuff per volume, remains constant, then very counterintuitively, you have a runaway growth in the size of space, says Paul Albrecht. Paul: Alan is unbelievably anal retentive and writes everything down. in a stretching space time, if you take that stretching of space seriously, then you don't even need to cook up those exotic Higgs-like potentials that Alan was first thinking about. Quite generically, you'll have a damped oscillator behavior. This comes from the fact that space itself is stretching. And that alone it turns out is enough to find these self-consistent solutions in which the field moves very slowly. You can imagine it rolling down this hill, rolling down-- sorry-- rolling down slowly as a function of time. The latest measurement from the Planck collaboration using a satellite is that this parameter in our actual universe today is 1 to better than a percent level accuracy. This is a remarkable shift even over the course of 20 to 25 years, let alone since the days of Lemaitre and Hubble. The horizon problem was originally phrased because we thought there was an origin to all of time, this Big Bang surface, at tau equals 0. So we're adding more real estate along our time axis. We're unfurling a little bit extra time that hadn't been taken into account. in the standard Big Bang model. So if you allow for more time before what you would call the Big Bang, you can continue tracing those past light cones further and further back and say there should be some time earlier than what we were starting from. So then it would at least be plausible there's at least now a causally self-consistent mechanism by means of which the universe could have similar conditions everywhere because they were causally connected at a time before we had previously taken into account. So therefore, you could have the horizon distance, the maximum causal distance, becomes much larger than the smoothness scale that we measure. distance and conformal time. You can see that as you trace backwards from today, instead of going back to saying the universe at early times should've been on the order of 1 meter, you say at those early times, the universe was actually exponentially tinier than you had thought. It grew exponentially quickly to map onto where we see today. And so the universe could very easily have been in a kind of equilibrium or at least a causally self-connected state. And this became clear to people about a year or so after Alan and Paul and Andy and all those folks began writing the first papers on inflation. moment, that field would be subject to slight, slight quantum fluctuations in the distribution of energy across space. That starts to yield this tiny little fluctuation in why there's slightly more matter and energy in this region of space than the other one. So now those very tiny quantum scale fluctuations get stretched as the whole universe stretches. As the scale factor grows exponentially, you have the average length between the distance between crests of those tiny wiggles get stretched to galactic and even super galactic scales all within that blink of an eye. ground based measurements as well. And each of these came out 10 years apart with an increase of about a factor of 30 in the angular resolution of the sky. So now not only do we know do we live in a universe that is indistinguishable from flat as inflation suggests we should, but the actual pattern of those wiggles, the pattern of the very slight early unevenness in the sky matches predictions to, again, better than a percent level accuracy. I find that astonishing. I was a senior in college when the first of these released their data in September 1992. Inflation says similar kinds of things should've been happening in the earliest moments everywhere in space through this very violent, rapid stretching of space. Inflation arises from types of matter in interactions that we now know exist that are heart and soul of this particle cosmology community. And it addresses several of these long standing conundra about the standard Big Bang model. And the simplest models fit to unbelievable accuracy despite what my mean dormmates used to say in the mid '90s. Now we have extraordinary agreement with many, many of these predictions, albeit not the final one. why the universe is so messy is actually because Alan's been generating the mess in his own office, and it's expanded to cosmic scales. So if you want to study that part of today's lecture, it's probably the most important lesson, you'll ever take away. And I'll be glad to stay a bit longer if people have questions. Again, I'm sorry for running late. Feel free to drop off if you need. Any questions on that? The photos in Alan's office are on Canvas.