This is actually the second time we are having this class. We had it last year in a smaller version. That was for six units of a credit, and we had it once a week. And so we got some good response last year. So, with the support of the math department, we decided to expand this class to be 12 units of credit. And we have every Tuesday and Thursday afternoon from 2:30 to 4:00, as you know, in this classroom. And the purpose of this course is really to give you a sampling menu to see how mathematics is applied in modern finance. my personal story. I want to tell you why I tell the story later. But the story actually was in the mid '90s. I just left Salomon Brothers -- that was my first financial industry job -- to go to Morgan Stanley in New York to join the options trading desk. So the first day, I sat down, I opened the trading book, I found something was missing. So, I turned around, I asked my desk quant. I said, where is the vega report? So, let me show you. called kappa at Morgan Stanley. Kappa is also called vega by some uneducated traders at the Salomon Brothers. They have mistaken vega as a Greek letter after gambling at Vegas. So anyway, so that was my first day. So obviously, I learned how to call kappa very quickly. And I called it kappa in the last 17 years, but you will hear people calling it vega. Obviously, I have probably more people call it the vega, but anyway. But why did I tell you the story? What point I try to make? everything are changing very rapidly. Even nowadays, they're still changing. So with that, I will give you some background on how the financial markets actually started, and that's really the history part of this industry. In early days people need to exchange goods, so there's exchanges. Then it becomes centralized. There are stock exchanges, futures exchanges all over the world where these products will be listed as securities. That's one way of trading, which is centralized. Obviously, in the last 10, 15 years, now we have ECNs, electronic platforms. Trade over-- you know, even larger volume of those trades. has money to lend out, someone needs to borrow money. Loan is really a private agreement between two counterparties or multiple counterparties. When you securitize them, they become bonds. Commodities, actually, you know. Metal, energy, agriculture products are traded, mostly in the futures format and some in physical format, meaning you take deliveries. And the real estate, you're buying and sell houses. And further of all of these, you heard probably a lot about the derivative products. So, that started with swaps, options. type of player is really bank. After 1933 Glass-Steagall legislation, there were two main types of banks. Commercial bank is supposedly, you're taking deposits and lending out the money. Investment bank supposed to focus on the capital markets, raising capital, trading, and asset management. Some people blame that, and probably for a very good reason, for the cause of 2008 financial crisis. But why do we need financial markets? There's a need for it. It's really the need to bridge between the lenders and the borrowers. Banks and so-called dealers play the role of market making. If you want to buy something or sell something, if I'm a broker, I don't make you a price. I actually put two people together, matchmaking, make that trade happen. So, that's a broker's role. There are individual investors, retail investors, same meaning. Mutual funds, who actually manage public investors' money. Hedge funds. They basically find opportunities to profit from inefficient market positioning or pricing, so they have different strategies. If you invest in the Australia Ozzie, Australian dollar. The Australian dollar may become weaker to the yen. You may lose all your profit, or even more. And further, if everybody plays the same game, then when you try to exit, you have the adverse impact of your trade. Even if you are not a finance guy, you work in a corporate, you just do you import, export, or building a factory. So, risk management, nowadays, becomes pretty widespread responsibility. stock, I think a lot of people know pretty much where it is. But if it's not transparent, so what do you do? So that market maker comes in to provide that liquidity, and then takes the risk. They manage the book by balancing those Greeks, which I mentioned earlier. And we talk about the volatility exposure was vega. And on top of that, what are the tail risks? What are the events can actually get you into big trouble? So people use value at risk. I think Peter will-- or Choongbum will-- probably Peter will teach. Trading is about finding relationships between prices, and trying to profit from those relationship mispricing. Not many people focus on arbitrage, because lot of people are gut traders. If you trade gold in the States, the gold price happen in Asia and in Europe matters, right, because you're trading the same thing. And that's just a simple example. But a spot price versus forward price, that's a deterministic relationship. It's a mathematical relationship. If that relationship breaks down, you can also profit. So there are many examples mathematical relationship which gives you the arbitrage opportunity. Math is very effective, because when you, your bank, your corporate, you want to buy some financial instruments, you have to know where is the price. So, pricing model, which Vasily and many of his colleagues can tell you more. Risk management itself is very challenging. It's not a purely mathematical question, but yet, math plays a very important role to quantify how much exposure you have. Then, I think a lot of people with math background, or in general, people are looking for the so-called holy grail trading strategies. You just turn it on. It makes money by itself. Professor Jake Xia: Trading is really all about how do you risk manage, have the discipline, and how to manage your losses. When you go to the market, you buy a stock. When the stock goes up, makes bit of money, the natural tendency is to let's take profit. But when the stock loses money, what's your natural tendency? Professor Jake XIA: I think natural tendency, lot of people will keep it. But if you think the fundamental story is very sound, you should think about as if you don't have a position. actually choose choice B, because that's low expectation, which makes sense. But I think if you ask a larger audience, I think a lot of people don't really want to choose choice A, because they don't want to lock in the loss. If your bank account balance is-- let's say you are a freshman student. Your choice will be very different from someone has $100,000 in his bank account. And also, your risk tolerance, how much you can tolerate. Learn the math, learn the finance first, but keep those questions along the way when you are learning during this class. Go to the course website, read what we have put up for the financial glossary. If you still have things you don't understand, compile your own list of financial concepts, which you can search on the web or even ask us. So, that's really-- and read other materials on the course work. We got maybe-- how about this? We still got about 15 minutes or 12 minutes left, so I'll pass it to Vasily, then maybe we can leave five minutes for some questions. every time. So, if you want to differentiate this functions and get a derivative, then this derivative will be quite noisy. And so, instead of getting the true derivative, you might obtain something quite different from true derivative just because there is a confidence interval around any point. So obviously, there is somewhere balance, and the question was, is there an optimal shift size to get the derivative? And that's what-- uh oh, the slide got corrupted. There was an answer. And we actually are implementing it in our systems and plan to use it in practice. We put syllabus there, a short list of literature. We will be posting a lot of materials there. Probably most lectures will be published there. Jake's slides are there already. So, any questions? We like to get your emails so we can put you on the website for further announcements. But it's probably easier if you put your email on the sign up sheet, so that we can [INAUDIBLE]. VASILY STRELA: Yeah, but please visit and sign up here, because there will be announcements to the class.