Adam Martin: I want to show you how you can go from being interested in some property of an organism, or even its behavior. How would you go from there to identifying genes and mechanisms that are responsible for that type of behavior or appearance? And on my title slide here, I have three fruit fly mutant phenotypes that you can see, and each of these mutants defined genes that were subsequently found to be present-- or homologous genes were present in humans and were shown to play important roles in human biology. "Genetic approaches are as fundamental to biology as math is to physics," says professor. "The two heroes of today's lecture will be the roundworm, Caenorhabditis elegans, and the fruit fly," he says. "These model organisms are fairly small, and they're easy to house large numbers of them in a lab," he adds. "They're often cheap to house in the lab and work with. Also, they develop fast," professor says of model organisms. The goal in genetics is to identify a mutation that alters a gene function that gives you a phenotype that you're interested in. So you try to induce mutations. And these mutations could be spontaneous mutations, meaning you didn't do anything to induce it, but they just appear as a variant in the population. In the way we can induce mutations is by using some type of mutagen. So for example, you could have some sort of chemical mutagen that increases the error rate in DNA replication, or you could use radiation to induce DNA damage. Miles Miles: If you're feeding an organism some chemical mutagen, you're inducing random mutations in different places. Miles: You don't know which are the ones that you want until you look at their phenotypes and try to find the needle in the haystack. He says in model organisms, we can actually find these types of mutations. Miles says the most likely mutation would be overshadowed by the direct gene, the female gene, that's in the male generation of fruit flies. the sonic-hedgehog gene is important in cancer. And actually, there are now a number of drugs that are being developed to target the hedgehog pathway. One was approved back in 2012 for use in treating basal-cell carcinoma. And there's currently another drug that's in phase-II clinical trials for treating some forms of leukemia. So this is a story that goes from identifying this weird fly mutant all the way to clinical trials, developing drugs, whose purpose is to inhibit this signaling pathway. if this is a bona-fide cell-death mutant, then you should have extra cells. And it turns out the ced-3 mutant blocks all 131 of these cell deaths. So there's an active mechanism involved in the cell death. Any questions about how these screens go in the crosses before I move on? OK, so I have one more story to tell you about, and this relates to behavior. We all behave, some of us better than others. So how is it we can go from something as abstract as behavior to specific genes and mechanisms that control this? Researchers identified mutants that didn't show this 24-hour cycle. Other mutants alter the period of this cycle so that it's either longer or shorter. This is a really elegant way to look for genes that are important for circadian rhythm. This was done by Konopka and Benzer. And they did a nice screen. It involves a genetic trick which I'll show you. And the fly-- the reason it was done, in this case, is they wanted to mutate the X chromosome and then have the fathers pass on their X chromosome. F1 mutated males, and crossed them, again, to attached X flies. So now, you have multiple males, all of which are mutant. The mutants that the Benzer Lab identified had altered period of the sleep-wake cycle, and therefore, the gene was named "period" So this screen identified a gene called "period." This is a gene. And the gene in humans is associated with familial advanced sleep-phase syndrome. So defects in the genes that were identified in Drosophila are relevant to human sleep disorders.