NORVIN RICHARDS: Today is phonetics, which means that today we begin making funny sounds at each other. Let's see. I'm trying to remember if there's anything that I ought to announce. You remember, maybe, that problem set 1, which confusingly is your second problem set, is due on Thursday. Normally, it would be due on Tuesday. But because I am technologically challenged, it's due onThursday. I just figured out how to get the projector to project over there instead of in the middle so that I won't have to write everything twice. Linguists have a system for writing sounds down so that we'll all know what kind of sound we're talking about. A lot of the symbols of the International Phonetic Alphabet resemble letters of the English alphabet. The symbol for the sound at the beginning of "paint" is the letter p. There are also what are called labiodental sounds, which involve your top teeth and your lower lip. We'll talk about other kinds of articulation that English doesn't use, but I think that one just doesn't exist. The International Phonetic Alphabet was invented by English speakers. It was also invented by speakers of German, which they use this symbol for. the "y" sound at the beginning of "year" The symbol for the sound of the start of "face" is an f, and the symbol for "vase" is a v. These are the sounds of the beginnings of words like "thistle" and "this," where you're sticking your tongue between your front teeth and making air flow out. In the velar sound, the body of your tongue is up against what's called the velum, which is the soft tissue at the back of your mouth. English doesn't make a huge amount of use of the glottal stop, but it's what shows up at the beginnings of words like "uh-uh," that catch that you're getting in your throat. There are places in English where things that we write as "glottal stops" are actually, in fact, sounds. in mind? STUDENT: No. NORVIN RICHARDS: Oh, OK. We'll get to "r," eventually. People investigate this kind of thing in all kinds of ways. These days, people do a lot of MRIs. There are charts of all of the sounds that we're going to talk about plus many more together with MRIs of the insides of people's mouths making these sounds so that you can see the anatomy. You won't just have to think about it. "Cat" and "dog" end in sounds that differ in voicing. We say that "z" is voiced and that "s" is voiceless. It's like whistling with a blade of grass, or playing a reed instrument, right? It's getting something to vibrate really fast. And that's what you're hearing and feeling if you put your hand right here when you're doing a "z." That's that buzzing sound that you're seeing and feeling. or-- what's my other example here-- "th" [pronounced as in "thistle"] and "th," right? If you whisper "safe" and "save"-- (SPEAKING NORMALLY) you have the feeling that you can hear the difference between them, yeah? I think if you were to whisper one of these-- so do a controlled experiment. Whisper to your dorm mate, (WHISPERING) "safe." And then find out what they think you said. what it means is that your vocal cords are vibrating. But I think maybe what we're learning is that you do some other things, too, to optimize the flow of air so that you will get a good vibration going. There's experimental work on this. This is the kind of thing people try to figure out. OK. So you have voiced sounds and you have voiceless sounds. So "s" and "z" are alveolar. But "s," "t," and "d' are voiceless. And "z," "d" are voiced. Does that all sound right? In Polish, "g" becomes "k" at the end of a word. Voiced "b" becomes voiceless. "s" and "t" are both alveolar. And they're both voiceless, but the way we distinguish them is via what we call manner of articulation. For "s and "z," the airflow is restricted, but you hear his sound as a "shsing" and his "fth" "f" is a fricative. Fricatives are sounds in which you don't hear the flow of air. English doesn't allow words to begin with velar nasals. But there are languages that do. Tagalog is one. Cantonese is one, and there's a bunch of others. English, for example, has bilabial stops, "p" and "b" But it doesn't have a labial fricative, which sounds like a candle, just like blowing out. Are there questions about any of this? Is anybody looking at this and saying, whoa, this table has grown out of my ability to keep up? English has interdental fricatives -- thuh and thuh. There are languages out there that have what are called dental stops. Part of your job, if you're learning Tagalog, for example, is to learn to make dental "t"s instead of alveolar "t," because that's what they've got. If you're studying another language, this is the kind of thing to think about because sometimes, your teacher will not be thinking about this. And then you're like, what will you do with your tongue to make the best sounds as you can? uvula, which is the little doohickey that hangs down there at the back. That's your uvula. We do not have these in English, at least when we're feeling well. But there are languages out there the do. Inupiaq has a uvular stop. Pharyngeals involve constriction near the pharyngeal wall. Arabic has these. The Berber languages have these. You're getting the back of your tongue to get against theBack of your vocal tract. uvulars, retroflexes. And for some reason, the dental stops are still red. Have to fix that. OK. Now people keep asking me about sounds that I've been carefully avoiding, so let's talk about them. There are what are called approximants. Approximants are not stops, and they're not fricatives. And they are sometimes divided into glides and liquids. And I'm hoping that nobody will ask me how you know whether something is a glide or a liquid. English has a very large number of vowels and a not-very-good system for writing them. One way of classifying vowels is in terms of height. For "ee," your tongue is tense. And then for "ooh," where does it go? It moves, right? So you aren't just rounding your lips and leaving your tongue where it was. In fact, that's why when you take photographs of people, you have them say something with an "ee" vowel in it, like "cheese" English is supposed to have five vowels. It does not have five. It has 14. Why do we only have five letters for vowels? Who gave us this alphabet? The Romans, right? In Latin, there in fact are 5 vowels, which can be either long or short. And so we've ended up with 12, 14 vowels in English. Different dialects of English are different. And we have 5 letters to spell them with. And this is why we have spelling bees, yeah-- one of the reasons. English doesn't have words that end in "ih," "uh," or "eh," with the possible exception of "meh" English monosyllables can't end in lax vowels that are either front or high. Not all speakers of English distinguish schwa from wedge. Not every dialect of English has all of these vowels or has them all in the same places. As we go along, I'm going to be asking you to read things in IPA. We'll do this exercise next time.