HONG LIU: So, first, we talk about chiral fermions. So, previously, we showed that the Dirac equation requires, actually, psi to have four components. And the answer turns out to be, no, you can reduce it, OK? And so there are two ways to reduce it. One is called the Majorana fermion. So we first talk about the chiralfermion and one way to do it. And then, we will look at the specific representation of gamma matrices. HONG LIU: So if sigma is block diagonal, then that means this S is also block diagonal. So that means, when I write psi-- so, psi-- have four components. That means that the upper two component and the lower two components-- they don't transform to each other, OK? They only transform within themselves. They just transform among themselves. So they actually have well-defined Lorentz transformation as a smaller unit. You don't need four components to be able to transform. the algebra for the gamma matrices, you need four components. But we actually knew all along that two components is enough for Lorentz transformation. How do we actually know all along? HONG LIU: It is the mass, OK? So it is theMass m. If you want to describe a massive particle, then you must have four components, and it's the mass m which is the key. OK, good. Any questions on this? So, now, we have shown in this particular representation of gamma matrix, for this particular choice of gammaMatrix, and then the psi transform block diagonally. Gamma 5 is defined to be i gamma 0, gamma 1, gamma 2, gamma 3. So you take the product of all the gamma matrices together and then with a factor of i, OK? So the i there is for the purpose that if you-- you can check yourself-- that the gamma 5 is actually Hermitian. And you can also check yourself that gamma 5 squared is equal to 1. So, this, you can almost easily understand because it's all Gamma 0, Gamma 1, Gamma 3. HONG LIU: gamma 5 squared, squared to 1, is Hermitian, which means its eigenvalues are all real. He says if gamma 5 commutes with sigma mu, nu, then gamma 5 will commute with Sigma S. So gamma 5 acting on psi then just equal to psi L, and the gamma 5 psi R is equal to minus psi R, he says. HONG LIu: So you can easily see, by definition, that gamma 5 acts on psi L and psi R. HONG LIU: In physics, actually, the massless case actually gives you very much richer structure, normally, than the massive particle. In the Dirac spinor, which we have talked about so far, is four components. And then the chiral spinor we talked about-- essentially, you have two complex components. So the next one I'm going to talk about is the Majorana, in which case, I would argue, we have 4 times 1 real component. HONG LIU: The Majorana spinor was discovered by Majorana in 1937. Majorana is, like, half electron. Heuristically half electron, it has very stable topological properties, which a single electron does not have. He says if you can engineer in your condensed matter systems, Majoranaspinor then became a Holy Grail. HONG LIu: People say they have engineered Majorana Spinor in the lab, which I think has never been fully confirmed. we get a very nice relation that, under Lorentz transformation, is generated by this B, related to this B matrix. When you have the psi prime equal to that, let's just take the star of this equation, OK? So psi prime star just equal to S star, Lambda psi star, equal to B S. B minus 1 and B S-- B psi. So that means that the psi star should be equal to gamma 2 psi. That's the Majorana condition here. HONG LIU: So, by definition, discrete symmetries are symmetry, which don't have continuous parameters. So, for example, let's imagine we have a real scalar theory. This theory has a discrete symmetry because this is invariant under phi. It goes to minus phi, OK? So because you see all the terms are even, so it's no continuous parameter. And so this is often called the Z2 symmetry. And there are also spacetime discrete symmetry. So this is an internal discrete symmetry-- have nothing to do with spacetime. just reverse one direction or reverse two directions, OK? That seems also to be a discrete symmetry. And indeed. So if you just change the directions, say, in the x direction, that's also a discrete. And if you only change the direction in both x and the y direction, That's also an independent symmetry. But if you change-- if you do the reflection in two directions,. that's equivalent to a 90-degree rotation. And so it's part of the continuous symmetries. And now, when you change all three directions compared to change one direction, you differ only by changing two directions.