Barbara Imperiali: We are going here now from the smallest carbon atom. She says in order to make proteins like hemoglobin and antibodies, we need large entities. The things that will feature today are the transfer RNAs and the ribosome, she says. IMPERIALI: And what to me is intriguing is that the size of theribosome is pretty similar to theSize of the rhinovirus, a little smaller than the hepatitis virus, but quite a bit smaller than some of these other viruses. messenger is single-stranded RNA, obviously. It has a 5 prime cap, which has got this funky 5 prime, 5 prime bridge that's resistant to exonucleases. Somewhere in that sequence is a start codon. It's something that says this is the bit I want to translate. Often, there's a lot of stuff here that you don't translate. Part of what's known as the ribosome binding site. And there are many features in this part of the sequence that are very important for translation. The genetic code, which forms the basis of this entire concept, has some features to it where it does have some degeneracy. But we'll go through the degeneracy, and we'll take a look at the genetic code because it will tell us exactly how the three letter-- the words made of three bases encode everything we need for translation. The ribosomes were a point of work that was awarded a Nobel Prize for that work, and then on, things started to get to the point where you know, these are the things you want to get out to. decade later, the sort of details of the structure, but not the structure itself. And it was really exciting in the 2000s when Ramakrishnan, Steitz, and Yonath solved the structure of the prokaryotic ribosome. So each of these things has taken a decade to happen, but they are fundamental, major, important things that we can act on and move forward to understand more. All right, so let's move to the transfer RNAs. And I've flashed up this slide a couple of times, but I actually now have the movie of theructure of a transfer RNA. A lot goes on with the rest of the structure. It's a very important structure in the mechanisms of protein translation and synthesis. And, coming down to the anticodon loop, you're going to read the messenger 5 prime to 3 prime. And so, if you look up here at the acceptor stem, the amino acid is joined by an ester bond to the 3 prime end of the transfer RNA, but, hopefully, you can see in here. There's the carboxyl. And CHR designates the aminoacid where R would be the side chain of your amino acid. Pseudouridine is a base known as pseudouridine. It has an interesting structure where the bond to the ribose ring is not a carbon-nitrogen bond. The genetic code gives you the identities of what are known as the codons. The codon is the absolute-- the sort of Rosetta Stone for translating messenger RNA to amino acid sequence using codons, says Barbara IMPERIALI. The most common start is the codon for methionine, which is the terminus of the protein. When you're looking to read what your amino acids that get put in may be, you're going to look at the codon. And it will tell you exactly the amino acid. The genetic code in that box that I just showed you is written down for maximum clarity and ease of use. So, whenever you see a particular three-letter code on the messenger, you will then be able to know what amino acid it would code. So you really want to be reading 5 prime to 3 prime in the codeon. small and large subunits. In orange-- well, that's kind of a burnt orange-- is a sneaky little bit of the messenger. In yellow are the transfer RNAs. And there's one more unit on here that I won't describe too much. It's a protein factor that helps all the processes occur. Generally, it's thought to help the loaded tRNA come to the ribosome, get it in place, and then go away. So it's some of these extra helper proteins that are involved. In each step, you're bringing in a tRNA that's loaded with an amino acid where the anticodon of the amino acid is complementary to the codon that's within the messenger RNA. Methionine is the first amino acid. And it's always at the N-terminus. Then there's another amino acid comes in. And then the next thing that happens is there's a movement such that a new bond gets-- a new amide bond is formed between the methionine and the phenylalanine. That's how that comes together. There are errors that will introduce defects into the ultimate protein. The first type of error is a nonsense mutation, which might be leaving out a base pair, inserting one, substituting one. The next types of mistakes are what are called silent mutations. And the last ones are the ones where we start to encounter errors in DNA that result in errors in proteins that may cause genetically inherited diseases. But that's the story for another day. It's not always perfect, but what is known now is that, as proteins are emerging from the ribosome, they're starting to fold almost immediately. we had a missense mutation, and we incorporated a valine instead of a glutamic acid, just through one change in the DNA. The missense mutations are the more serious ones because you end up with a full length protein that might have a mistake in it. And then that would affect the function. Don't forget my office hours on Monday if you need them. I think this field is fascinating. Once you get used to the mechanics of it, it's really cool to think of how you go from DNA to RNA to folded proteins.