Markus Klute: We're starting a new chapter in which we look at tests and implications of special relativity. We started the entire discussion and evaluation of Lorentz transformations and the description of the paradoxes based on Einstein's postulates. One experimental test is stellar aberration, which we discussed can be explained by special relativity and by velocity addition. So this gives us some idea about what light is. Light isotropy is being tested in a new experiment that will reveal more about the nature of light. variety of different experiments, starting from Michelson-Morley, which basically tests that the speed of light is independent of the orientation of the apparatus. We can look in particle physics at the decay of a pion into two photons. And those pions, they can have a lot of energy, for example, with a beta of 0.999 times thespeed of light. And still the photons are of course of the same type. And that has been tested with the motion of binary stars, as we did in our pset. One of the hypotheses you could have is that the photon actually is a massive particle. This would directly modify Coulomb's laws, which are tested experimentally. Another class of experiment is where we look directly at time dilation, for example, in the decay of the muon. There is weird electromagnetic effect if you introduce a mass to the photons like torque on a magnetic ring. Again, here precision measurements have been performed. And they're all in agreement with the hypothesis that the photons are massless. muons in the laboratory as well and study them. Or we can put very precise clocks on planes, fly them around the globe, and compare them with stationary and just simply measure the effect of special relativity on those clocks. In all of this experimentation and experimental verification, it's important to understand the importance of uncertainties in the scientific process overall, he says. "Experiments can have biases as well. And one example of a biased experiment is here one by Walter Kaufmann who tried to measure e/m" bias. And he conducted the experiment at the time Einstein was proposing his theory. And, as experiments, they were inconsistent with Einstein. So he said Einstein is wrong. Einstein and Lorentz are wrong. Planck looked at this and said maybe, but Einstein's conclusion immediately by looking at this was, no, this cannot be. And it took a little bit of time to tee up those experiments until 1940. You can read more about this in this Wikipedia article about Walter Kaufmann's experiments. and optics, upon the principle of relative movement." We now know this was wrong, but scientific process happens in scientific environment. And I started this class by explaining that one needs to be open minded to learn and to study and to grow scientifically. And one has to question the assumptions, understand the assumptions when then go into measurements. So this is the first part of this chapter where we talk about tests. We will have a discussion of implications of special relativity as we move on from here.