This is cereth registered nurse re and calm and in this video i'm going to be going over blood transfusions which will include the nurses role and as always I've been to this YouTube video you can access the free quiz that will test you on this procedure so let's get started what is a blood transfusion it is where as a nurse we will transfuse a patient who is low on red blood cells with new blood cells via a venous access of some type. This is most commonly done through donated red blood cell so a patient needs them. they're low on red blood cells and what can cause a person to be low on Red Blood Cells. Red blood cells are very vital for our survival and how our body works so in other words our body can't function very well without them so what a red blood cell do with the help of the body. What can happen in conditions like renal failure cancers just to name a few because the body is not producing enough substances to produce or maintain those red Blood cells now what's the importance of red Blood Cells? hemoglobin it carries oxygen it receives from the lungs throughout our body in addition it removes carbon dioxide co2 and it will take that take it to the lungs so the lungs can't exhale it. Whenever your patient is low on red blood cells they're going to have some side symptoms that can present especially if they're really low they'll be very pail. I've seen patients they literally look white as a sheet before the transfusion and then after they've had a transfusion their skin color is back to where it should be. be tachycardic because that heart is trying to pump that blood because consents of the oxygen is low so it's like I got to get more blood everywhere else so it can overwork itself so when is a patient transfuse well this really depends depends on what's going on with the patient their vital signs how are they tolerating that low blood level and recent guidelines by the American Association of blood banks recommends transfusing blood when hemoglobin levels fall to 7 to 8 grams per deciliter. Nursing lecture exams but you need to know it for the job okay the first thing before a patient is even transfused is a lot of prep work that is super important and essential because our prep work helps prevent transfusion reactions. Most hospitals require that you're a registered nurse in order to transfuse the blood so again follow your Hospital protocol with that so let's say you got an order for patient to be transfused with two units of packed red blood cells what's the very first thing that's going to be done. whole video where I went over that in depth with you and you can access that and take a quiz that can test you on that. You'll want to get informed consent tell the patient what they're going to be receiving assess their understanding of it also this is a good time to ask about their allergies and if they have received any blood transfusions in the past. If you have received a lot of blood transfusion in the the past they're at risk for febrile nan hemolytic transfusion reaction where their body has just built up these antibodies. and things like that so a lot of times physicians like to pre medicate them and you'll want to let the physician know if they do have a history of that. Sometimes they're pre-medicated with benadryl or Tylenol acetaminophen before hand orally or when about 30 minutes before you start the transfusion. Look at the health status of your patient are you giving a patient who is in fluid overload or congestive heart failure has renal failure and but they really need blood you need to be looking at that because they may be at risk for circulatory overload. You typically want an 18-gauge or larger IV site. It takes anywhere between two to four hours for a unit of blood to transfuse. You use special tubing which is called Y tubing with an inline filter which helps filter some of those substances out of the blood before it actually goes to the patient and keep in mind again it depends on hospital protocol a lot of protocols say only one set of Y tubing per unit that you transfuse so you'll have to use multiple sets. next you'll want to grab a bag of normal saline 0.9 percent ofnormal saline this is the only only solution you ever use whenever transfusing blood you never use any met other medications or any other fluids only saline. Because dextrose and red blood cells don't get along it can cause them to clump up together. We will be using that saline to prime that why tubing whip and then to flush that tubing with afterwards once the blood is done transfusing and in addition just whenever everything's wrapped up you're ready to take that tubing down you'll need to get a red biohazard bag to dispose of it properly. Trash now let's talk about transfusing okay done all your prep work the blood bank calls you and says hey your blood is ready let us know whenever you're ready for us to send it to you because they're keeping it refrigerated for you. Some key things you want to remember you will be giving one unit at a time patient needs two units you're gonna give one unit now and then whenever that's done call blood bank and say send me the other unit and then they'll send it. notify the blood bank whenever you're ready to start that transfusion now blood wormers blood warmers can be used if the patient needs large amounts of blood quickly and they're at risk for experiencing hypothermic response so you're not gonna warm the blood up by using a microwave or anything like that you want to use a special device if need be next before you even start the transfusion you're gonna be doing this verification process so as the nurse you're going to be getting another nurse it's usually to our ends cuz ourian's are usually the ones who can transfuse. matches up perfectly you're gonna look look at the patient's blood type versus the donors tie and the Rh factor. If there's a discrepancy you'll need to notify the blood bank immediately and just from personal experience this has happened with one of my patients I was doing the whole verification process with another nurse and we were looking at the blood bag. There was one letter that they had did a clerical error on so I had to send the blood and we had to go to the hospital. through the whole process again so this does happen so always make sure you verify everything also before transfusing you're going to be getting baseline vital signs which is going to include the temperature the blood pressure respirations and heart rate. If you have a temperature greater than a hundred degrees Fahrenheit you'll want to notify the physician and make sure they just want to still proceed with the blood transfusion then again before you actually transfuse you want to explain to your patient if they're alert and oriented they can talk to you what you're about to do and for them to notify and report to you if they feel any of the signs and symptoms I'm fixing to describe. breath headache backache or nausea and vomiting and if this happens you'll immediately want to stop the transfusion okay now it's actually time to start the transfusions so you're gonna have your blood ready hung and it's going to be controlled by an infusion pump which will deliver it to the patient. You want to start  slowly about two milliliters per minute for those first 15 minutes in addition you want to stay with that patient at their bedside looking at them monitoring them. of different reactions the patient can have and here in a moment we're gonna go in-depth over those but it's where the recipient that patients immune system is interacting with the donors blood. You can have a hemolytic transfusion reaction where what's happening is that the patient's blood and the donorsBlood are not compatible. This is dangerous it can lead to death also allergic they can have an Astra cry this because this tends to happen days two weeks after a blood transfusion it's rare and it's deadly. any patient that's at risk for whenever you put extra fluid volume in their blood they'll have trouble with it. Patients who have heart problems like congestive heart failure their heart muscles weak and you just throw that extra fluid in it it can't do well with it so the fluid starts backing up into the lungs and into the tissues. Also patients who have renal failure you know these patients need blood but their risk for being able to tolerate all that fluid going in there so you want to keep that in mind. A 418 is your patient saying I have a backache all of a sudden or I'm having chest pain or my head is hurting that's a red flag c-4 chills t4 tachycardia especially if it's really increased from baseline I for increased respirations same thing with that increase from baseline oh for all glory so you really want to be looking at your patients urinary output during this blood transfusion and you want to remember those major signs and symptoms of a transfusion reaction. after are they putting out low or are they just putting out no urine at all are they an Urich and then look at the color what does it look like are they experiencing a condition called hemoglobinuria where there's free hemoglobin in the urine it will have like this purplish color so watch the earring closely and then in for nausea GI issues like diarrhea then when the transfusions done your patients tolerated it well you'll want to flush that remaining blood out of that line with that saline that's hanging on that Y tubing. hemolytic this is where the immune system is killing the donors red blood cells. antibodies in the recipients blood match that antigens on the donors blood cells so hence they've been missed tight. This can lead to di C and renal failure and even death and a lot of times what's going to happen is you're gonna see a fever chills anxiety back pain chest pain hemoglobinuria where you have that purplish look to the urine. Another type is called allergic and this isWhere the recipients immune system. is reacting to the proteins found in the donorsBlood leading to like rashes hives and itching. someone's having an anaphylactic reaction to something another type is febrile and this is non hemolytic so you don't have the breaking up of those red blood cells. This is where the recipients white blood cells or reacting with the donors white blood cell. This causes the body to build antibodies so you can see that increased temperature like one degree Celsius or one point eight degree in Fahrenheit from the baseline. Another transfusion reaction you can have is the GVHD. graft-versus-host disease and again like I said this is rare but it's deadly and it tends to occur days to weeks after the transfusion so this is where the donors T lymphocytes cause an immune response in the recipient but actually in grasping in the marrow of the recipient and attacking the recipients tissue. Other complications that can arise that really aren't immune related it's like septicemia where the blood is contaminated. There can be a risk for hepatitis B C or HIV etc also that circuit or e overload we are talking about or developing high iron levels and this happens with people who've had frequent blood transfusions. it in the back of your mind so the first thing what you want to do is stop the transfusion. Note mentally what time this occurred what time you stopped it because you'll be documenting this later on. disconnect the blood tubing at the access side and replace it with new tubing and have some point nine percent normal saline running to keep the vein open then you're going to notify the doctor and the blood bank of what's going on. During all this you'reGoing to be staying with the patient at their bedside you need be watching them you need your eyes on them so this is a great time to call in other people on the floor. signs every five minutes looking at them watching them looking at that respiratory status it's not compromised or they have an allergic response what's going on now whenever you contact the physician depending on what type of reaction they suspect the patient's having or how severe it is they may order some medication so it varies some things they can orders like corticosteroids which is going to suppress that immune response along with fluids helping flush out that free hemoglobin that's in the body getting it out we want out of the body. diuretics also some labs are going to be ordered they want to look at those claudine levels because remember if this is hemolytic type because a lot of times they don't know what type of reaction this patient is having. Look at the renal function how's our kidneys and other blood levels in addition you'll be collecting urine urine urine on them looking for the free hemoglobin that's came from those red blood cells I have lysis and whenever you are disconnecting your tubing over here do not throw it away don't throw any of it away. bank who's going to test it look out and see what went wrong. Of course you're going to document you want to document the time it happened. What actions you took what the patient was given if you gave them anything. What labs you drew all that and how the patient is currently doing okay so that wraps up this review over blood transfusion. thank you so much for watching don't forget to take the free quiz and to subscribe to our channel for more videos. Back to the page you came from.