Deuteronomy describes Israel as a holy people, separated from the common or the ordinary. Intermarriage with the Canaanites is prohibited in Deuteronomy. All alien practices are to be removed from the covenant community. The privilege of having been chosen or singled out entails obligations and responsibility, Professor Hayes says. The idea of a superiority complex, a moral danger involved in the notion of election, she says. It is by no special virtue or merit that Israel has been chosen, she adds. that Israel was the one chosen. Moses admonishes the Israelites not to suppose that their inheritance of the land of Canaan is due to their own powers, or on account of any righteousness or virtue that they possess. Israel was chosen by Yahweh in an act of spontaneous love--;it does not imply her perfection. And the election was entirely God's initiative and is no cause for Israel to boast. So Deuteronomy 7, verses 6-8 read: Of all the peoples on earth the Lord your God chose you to be His treasured people. Moses later warns the Israelites: Don't be tempted to say to yourselves, "My own power and the might of my own hand have won this wealth for me" He emphasizes, it is only because the wickedness of the Canaanites is so great that the Lord has to drive them from his land, and now he is giving you a chance. But it is conditional for you, just as it was for them. Don't fail him or he will, he says. "The Lord has enabled us to possess this land because of our virtues," Moses says. drive you out just as he drove out the Canaanites. That's a theme in Deuteronomy. God's providential love and care for Israel is expressed through various metaphors in the Bible. So in a way, the language we were just referring to was really the language of husband and wife, you know, someone who simply loves someone, not because they are perfect, but that is their. But we will get to that in a few lectures, how important that idea is for the Deuteronomistic historian in general. choice. They love the person, and they make a bond with them. It does not imply anything about other people. It is simply that is the person who has been the focus. So we have a lot of sort of love and marriage imagery, husband and wife imagery, used for God and Israel. But we also have this parent and child imagery that appears. In Deuteronomy 32:10, the image is that of an eagle that bears its young on its wings.… It almost seems to play on the idea that God and his children are one and the same. At the end of Deuteronomy, the promises still are not fulfilled. The people are still outside the land. Some have suggested that this is quite purposeful. It points to an exilic date for the work's final composition. When it was finally redacted, the redactors were in exile, writing for a people living in exile. And the Deuteronomist was a man of the people, a man who had lived in exile for a very long time, and had to deal with the exile himself. Deuteronomy is not simply the concluding book of the Pentateuch, or the story that began in Genesis. It's also the first part of a much larger, longer literary work, as I mentioned last time. And we are going to consider today the program and the work of this so-called Deuteronomistic school. But before we do that, I wanted to just make a few concluding remarks about source theory and the Pentatesuch. We have talked about the Documentary Hypothesis. of times are some of the debates that occur on the question of dating. There is a great deal of ideological baggage that is involved in the dating of the sources. One of the issues that I think is a real problem is the fact that the Priestly source, P, is so often misjudged and maligned. I hope it gave you a sense of its communal ethic as opposed to an individual morality. But the anti-priest, anti-cult sentiment, of European Protestantism, is apparent in the history of biblical scholarship. Wellhausen: Priestly source represents a late degenerate stage in the evolution of Israelite religion. He argued that in 586, with the destruction of Jerusalem and the people were taken into exile in Babylon, that was when the priests were able to assume control. Wellhausen says the priests built a new identity and religion that stressed the sinfulness of the people, and the need for ritual purity and ritual observance and legalism as the road back to God. And this, according to Wellhauson, was a degeneration. that all scholars who date P to the post-exilic period are motivated by the same problematic assumptions. That is certainly not the case. There are scholars of all stripes and allegiances who view P as late; and there is some very good objective evidence for dating parts of P and D. So when it comes to dating the sources, certainly I would say all scholars agree that the Priestly materials reach their final form in the exile or post-Exilic period. So that is the sixth century, right? the sixth century, the bulk of the middle of the sixth century. P espouses a communal ethic, and post-exilic priests are going to turn increasingly to an individual ethic. Many sections of P do not seem to assume a central sanctuary. Remember that the idea of the central sanctuary really took hold in 622, with Josiah and Josiah's reform. So it becomes a real watershed for us in dating texts. Texts that are happy with the existence of shrines throughout the land of Israel are probably pre-Josiah, pre-622. P contains no universal ban on intermarriage. It does not employ its purity laws or language to mark an inseparable boundary between classes within Israel or between Israelites and gentile others. The use of purity and purity language to inscribe boundaries between Israel and other nations is very characteristic of the post-exilic period. We are going to see that when we get there. So I think that instead of charting an evolution or a degeneration from JE, the pure spirit-filled religion, to D, the humanitarian, ethical religion. cultic obsessiveness and guilt-ridden legalism, as is done or implied in some classical source theory. It may be better to see these three as really representing three distinct and roughly contemporaneous strands of ancient Israelite tradition and experience told from their own perspectives. These materials were transmitted and developed by different circles within Israelite society over centuries, and they crystallized at different times. JE has fragments that are quite old, but it probably reached its final form before the centralization of the sanctuary. traditions, but reached its full and final form in the exilic or post-exilic period. Each of these complex, multi-layered sources possesses its own emphases, its own agenda and its own perspectives. Sometimes they complement one another, sometimes they challenge and contradict one another. Their diversity has not been flattened or homogenized by the final editor of the text. It has been preserved in a manner that stimulates reflection and debate. The Latter Prophets is a collection of books, each of which bears the name of the individual whose prophecies it purports to contain. redaction of these books, would put the materials together by inserting verses and speeches that would frame the older sources and link them together, give them some sort of common uniting thread. The redactors' linking and framing passages exhibit certain common features. They harp on the same themes over and over again. And those features and assumptions have a lot in common with the book of Deuteronomy, and that is what led the German scholar, Martin Noth, to surmise that Deuteronomic and these historical books really form a unit. The interpretive history that runs from Joshua to 2 Kings is based on ideals that are set out in the book of Deuteronomy. The whole unit, as a whole, was redacted after 622: that's clear. It assumes and insists upon the centralization of the cult. The last dated event that is mentioned in 2 Kings was when King Jehoiachin was released from prison in Babylon, in 562. So the work was probably concluded shortly after that date: so in exile or towards the end of the exilic period. or even more, successive editions of this history because there are multiple perspectives that seem to be represented. The last seems to be an exilic perspective, the perspective of someone sitting in exile and we will be returning to that in a future lecture. Some of the books within this very large unit are less influenced by Deuteronomy and its themes and its concerns. But I encourage you to read the excellent introduction to the Prophets, the section of the Bible "The Prophets" which was written by Marc Brettler in your Jewish Study Bible. obedience or disobedience to the covenant with Yahweh. And that conviction is going to color its presentation, its evaluation and its interpretation of Israel's history and her kings from Joshua right through to 2 Kings. Yehezkel Kaufmann uses the term "historiosophy" which I have written up here, historiosophy, to describe this material. It's seeking to ascertain the meaning of events to draw larger philosophical, ideological conclusions from the events of history, and to point to the larger purpose of history. means for us today that it did happen. So the Deuteronomistic history is not simply a history of Israel until the destruction of Jerusalem, it is a historiosophy. It is making an argument and it's attempting to communicate the meaning and the significance of the events of that time. It does so through a pattern, a literary pattern we will see, of reward and punishment. This is an important point, and as we begin to go through the material, we will be coming back to this. There is also a belief in the divine election of David as the king of Israel and his dynasty. In Genesis through Numbers none of the legal materials say: when you have a king this is what he shall do. It is only the book of Deuteronomy that assumes or prepares for a monarchy. Another theme that we see in these books or feature of the Deuteronomistic School is the emphasis on what we call the Yahwist prophets -- prophets like Elijah and Elisha. They are held up as heroes and champions of religious purity. because they maintain cults that rival the central sanctuary of Jerusalem. And this is going to be what does them in. The other theme that we see throughout the Deuteronomistic material is the negative presentation of the Canaanites. But we will talk more about who these Canaanites were and how complicated, in fact, that presentation is. To gain an understanding of some of the issues involved, and the emergence of a tribal structure in the land, it's helpful to know something about the geography of Israel. In the past 4000 years more wars have been fought for the possession of the tiny strip of land known as Canaan. Canaan is about 150 miles long and 70 miles wide, about the size of Rhode Island. Control of these international highways brought a great deal of wealth to the area. In times of peace it would bring prosperity, but, of course, in times of war the land was perpetually invaded as armies would crisscross the land going off to do battle with the great powers.. Egypt boasts great geographical diversity. There are three main geographical subdivisions. You can see them on your map, and they really run in strips from north to south. If you look at your map you will see first on the west side, you've got a low coastal plain. That area was controlled by Egypt at the purported time of the Exodus. Next to that coastal plain is a region of low mountains. These low mountains are cut by some valleys that sort of run east-west. Jezreel, in particular; that was a particularly fertile valley. So the valleys that cut through the mountains are extremely fertile. The Plain of Megiddo also joins with the Valley of Jezreel. That is the most fertile part of the country, but it was also the site of many of the most bloody battles in Israel's history. Then next to that north-south central hill country, you've got also running north to south, what we call the Great Jordan Rift Valley. And the Jordan River runs through this valley. This is because the water is 25% salts and minerals. So it is a very desolate area. Tradition identifies this as the site of Sodom and Gomorrah. The area around the Sea is basically semi-desert. We call this the wilderness, the wilderness of Judea between Jerusalem and the Dead Sea, the Wilderness of Judah or Judea. Being somewhat isolated, the inhabitants of each region developed a distinctive economic and cultural character. You have the small settled farmer in the more fertile areas, you have semi-nomadic shepherds. city dwellers. You have merchants and traders who are handling the commerce on the trade routes and enjoying broader cultural contacts. So that's the geographical setting for what we are about to read in the Book of Joshua. The structure of Joshua is really somewhat simple. We can really divide it into two major parts. The first 12 chapters form a unit that conveys the invasion and conquest. The story of the Battle of Jericho is really a composite of two accounts that have been woven together into a single narrative. According to the Book of Joshua, Israel's tribal structure assumed its classical form at this time. The account of the conquest in Joshua 2 through 12, is concerned to express the basic idea that Israel's victories would not have been possible without Yahweh, without his wondrous help. The first half of the book of Joshua contains a streamlined, idealized account according to which the Israelites managed to take the central hill country, confining the Philistines to a little strip here on the coastal plain. just one small area. In Joshua 13:1: Joshua 13 opens with the statement that Joshua was old, advanced in years, and there was much of the land remaining to be possessed. In Judges 1:8 and 21, we read that the people of Judah did this (conquered the king of Jerusalem) and that despite that victory they failed to actually drive out the inhabitants, the Jebusites, who lived there. And it is not until King David, 200 years later, that we will read about the capture of Jerusalem. of the places from which the Canaanites were not expelled. Also archaeological evidence contradicts the picture in Joshua. Excavations at Jericho and Ai indicate that both of these towns were laid waste at least 200 years before the probable time of Joshua. Some of the sites that are said to be destroyed by Joshua and the Israelites weren't even occupied in this period, the late Bronze Age, beginning of the Iron Age. So the conclusion one can draw from all is that the Bible is wrong. The formation of the nation state, Israel, was much more complicated than the picture that's presented in Joshua 2 through 12. Scholars have proposed three possible models to explain the formation of Israel. The first is an immigration model. This was first posed by German scholars. Well, we do know that at the end of the late Bronze Age, the Israelites, it's thought according to this model, would have entered and they would have occupied the very sparsely populated central highlands. They would slowly have begun to take control of the plains. beginning of the Iron Age, around 1200, this was a time of great upheaval throughout the Mediterranean world. Many are sailing from mainland Greece and from the Greek Islands, and they are flooding this area. They are referred to as "peoples of the sea," coming in from the sea, from islands and coastal areas of the northeastern Mediterranean. One of these groups inhabited an area here: Perasta or Pelasta. The word "Palestine" comes from this, Peresta, Palesta or Philistines. The idea of the immigration model is that Hebrew settlement would have probably occurred at about the same time in the latter part of the thirteenth century. The Hebrews could take advantage of all of these upheavals and the weakened hold of Egypt. Egypt had control of this area but their grasp was weakening with the flood of people coming in from the sea and other migrations. Their hold was weakening and the Hebrews would have been able to take advantage and enter in and occupy areas in the central highlands. model, again, is the archaeological record. Archaeologists have, indeed, found several sites in the central hill country -- which is pretty exciting-- and they were clearly newly established in the thirteenth, twelfth, eleventh centuries. Some have suggested that Israelites escaping from Egypt may have joined with these disaffected Canaanites in revolt, known as Habiru. A final model, then, is a model of gradual emergence, which simply holds that Israelite were basically Canaanites who had developed a separate identity. of Judges, you will read of a temple to Israel's God, the God of the Covenant. The word "berit" means covenant. So in short, we really may hypothesize a union of cultural, religious and ethnic elements. All of these would come together to produce what would be a new political and religious reality called Israel. If so, why does the book of Joshua provide such a different account, one of outside conquest by means of a war led by a man named Joshua? by the hosts of the Lord? Because in this account military skill is much less important than ritual preparation and purity. The conquest is represented as a miraculous victory by God. That's emphasized in Joshua 24:12. It was God, not the sword or the bow, that drove out the enemy. And why the claim of the utter destruction of the Canaanites when evidence points to close Canaanite origins? This practice, which I mentioned before and is known as herem or the ban, is not unique to Israel. century BCE, written by King Mesha of Moab Moab is to the southeast of the Dead Sea. In the inscription he writes, he boasts: "And the god Chemosh said to me, go, take Nebo from Israel" It is likely that such claims are hyperbolic in Moab, and it is likely they were hyperbols in Israel. But that does not lessen the shock value for a modern reader, says Andrew Keen. "War in our time is no less savage and no less brutal," he says. Canaanites were to be completely destroyed. I think assertions of national identity and independence are often predicated on differentiation from others. If the Israelites were, in fact, basically Canaanites, who had withdrawn from the larger collective, then Canaanites who did not join them in this were a special threat to the new Yahwism. This same dynamic of intense sibling rivalry appears again in the first few centuries of the Common Era. Some Jews separated from others and in differentiating themselves and creating their own identity as Christians. In the first half of the book of Joshua, alongside the call for the destruction of all Canaanites, we find interesting tales of alliances and incorporation of various Canaanite groups. One of the heroines of the Battle of Jericho, if not a Canaanite woman, a prostitute no less, named Rahab. She declares her faith in Yahweh and she delivers the city into Joshua's hands. Another Canaanite group, the Gibeonites, trick the Israelites into making a covenant with them. Michael Coogan has described such stories as etiological tales. ideological account in which all Canaanites are obliterated or destroyed. At the very least, these stories raise questions about the biblical portrait or portrayal of invasion and conquest. And at most, they illustrate the biblical writers' taste for literary subversion yet again. The imperative of preserving a distinct identity--based on giving up the worship of other gods or older gods and observing all that is written in the law of Moses--is reiterated in Joshua's farewell address in Joshua 23, and in the covenant renewal ceremony in 24. not serve them or bow down to them, but hold fast to the Lord your God as you have done this day." And verses 11 to 13: For you own sakes, therefore, be most mindful to love the LordYour God. In 24, the Israelites are assembled at Shechem to renew the covenant. Joshua recounts God's mighty deeds on behalf of Israel and exhorts them to keep their promise to God. The Israelites then intermarry with the remnant of these nations. Israel is to show undivided loyalty to God, or God will take the gift of the land from her as he did the Canaanites. Marriage with Canaanites, the people closest to you, specifically, will lead to the worship of that spouse's god. The ban on intermarriage here is quite specific. It is directed against Canaanites only, not all non-Israelites, for a very specific reason: religious purity. The Israelites are sitting. in the sixth century, the time of the final editing of Deuteronomistic history. in exile in Babylon. They are trying to make sense of the tragedy that has befallen them, the loss of their land. Consider how a text like Joshua 23 and Joshua 24 would go a long way towards explaining their fate while retaining faith in Yahweh. We're going to return to this when we reach the conclusion of the Deuteronomistic history in 2 Kings. It would be interesting to see how they would have reacted to the events of the time in which they were living.