Professor: The plan for today is as follows. We're going to look at this unitary time evolution and calculate this operator u, given the Hamiltonian. Then we will look at the Heisenberg picture of quantum mechanics. And it's a pretty useful way of seeing things and calculating things as well, and makes the relation between classical mechanics and quantum mechanics more obvious. So we'll discuss that. We'll find the heisenberg equations of motion and solve them for a particular case today. t t0 is equal to H of t U of t t0. You should be able to look at that equation and say I see the Schrodinger equation there. So what do we have? ih bar. Let's write dU dt is equal H times U. And we tried to write a solution of the form U use equal to e to the minus iHt over h bar times U0. Does that work? Well, we can think du dt and ih. the right. It cannot be to the right of U0 though, because this is a matrix, a constant matrix that we've put in here as a possible thing for boundary condition. So so far we've taken this derivative, and then i's cancel, the h bar cancels, and you get H. But this whole thing is, again, U. So the equation has been solved. So try this. And it works. So having this solution we can write, for example, that U of t t0 is going to be e to the minus iHt over h bar. back here what U0 is and finally obtain U of t t0 is e to the minus iH over h bar t minus t0. And this is for h time independent. There's very little to add to this. We discussed that in recitation on Thursday. This unitary operator you've been seeing that from the beginning of the course in some sense, that you evolve energy eigenstate. If this acts on any energy eigensstate, h is an energy. is just the function evaluated at the eigenvalue. A little time dependence is an idea, the sign to make it possible for you to solve the equation. So you could have Hamiltonians that are time dependent, but still have a simplifying virtue. So H of t is time dependent. But assume that H at t1 and h at t2 commute for all t 1 and t2. So what could that be? For example, you know that the particle in a magnetic field is minus gamma B dot the spin. You could have a time dependent magnetic field. The magnetic field is time dependent, but its direction is not time dependent. And the Hamiltonian at different times commute because Sz commutes with itself. So if you have a magnetic field that is fixed in one direction but change in time, you can have a situation where your Hamiltonian is timedependent. And you will discuss such case because it's interesting. But later on as we do nuclear magnetic resonance, we will have the more interesting case in which the magnetic field isn't time independent. a magnetic field rotates and therefore it's not that simple. So what happens if you have a time dependent Hamiltonian that actually commutes? Well, the claim is that U of t t0 is given by a natural extension of what we had before. You would want to put exponential of minus iHt, but the reason this worked was because the derivative with respect to time brought down an iH over h bar. So one way to fix this is to put t t 0 H of t prime dt prime. So this is an answer to try this. the derivative of this quantity with respect to time. Well, when you differentiate an integral the upper argument, you get just the integrand evaluated at the time. So this is H of t. And now here comes a crucial point. This U is really e to the R. And you're trying to differentiate to see if the equation holds dU dt. Would be d dt of 1 plus R plus RR plus 1 3 factor RRR. You, would have one half R dot R plus R R dot. And then 1 over 3 factorial, but three factors. R dot depends on H, and R is an integral of H as well, but the H at different times commute anyway, so this must be true. Since the Hamiltonians are assumed to commute, R dot commutes with R. And this becomes like a normal derivative of an exponential in which you can move the R dot to the left everywhere. So actually that means that we've got pretty much our answer, because R dot is minus i over h bar H of t. And e to the R is U, so we got dU. dt equals this, which is the same as this equation. The only reason a derivative with respect to time will not give the usual thing is if R and R dot fail to commute, and they don't. So you could put the R dot here. You can put R dot on the other side, because it commutes with R, but it's better here. And therefore you've got this very nice solution. So the solution is not that bad. So that's case-- there was a 1, a 2, a 3 H of t general. something that makes sense. So here it is. U of t and t0. I'll write the answer and explain how it looks, and then you will see that it's OK. It's interesting. But it probably is not the most practical way you can solve this problem. There's an acronym for this thing. T it's called the time ordered exponential. This operator does something to the exponential function. So I have to say what this time ordering exponential is, and it's the following. You take the exponential and just begin to expand. and call this t2. So t1 will always be greater than t2, because t2 is integrated from t0 to t1. And as you integrate here over the various t1's, you just integrate up to that value. So you're doing less of the full integral then you should be doing, and that's why the factor of one half has disappeared. This can be continued. I can write the next one would be minus i over h bar cubed integral. of this, you will get H times that thing. So since it's a power series, you'll differentiate the first term, and you'll get the right thing. Then the second term and you will start getting everything that you need. It's reassuring that something like this success, but in general, you would want to be able to do all these integrals and to sum them up. So it's of limited usefulness. But when you have a practical problem, generally that's not the way you solve it. We will try to figure out the solution some other way. But in terms of completeness, it's kind of pretty in that you go from the exponential to the time ordered exponential. And I think you'll see more of this in 806. So that's basically our solution for H and for the unitary operator U. And what we're going to do now is turn to the Heisenberg picture of quantum mechanics. Yes, questions? AUDIENCE: Why does R dot [INAUDIBLE]? PROFESSOR: Because that's really a property of integrals. T is not an operator in the usual sense of quantum mechanics or anything like that. It's an instruction. Whenever you have an exponential of this form, the time ordered exponential is this series that we've written down. So at this stage, this is a definition of what t on an exponential means. If we have operators in differential equations, do we still get unique [INAUDIBLE]? Yes, I think we do. I think that's a good question. Yes, it is. solutions? PROFESSOR: Yes, pretty much. Because at the end of the day, this is a first order matrix differential equation. So it's a collection of first order differential equations for every element of a matrix. It's pretty much the same as you have before. If you know the operator at any time, initial time, with the differential equation you know it at a little bit time later. So I think it's completely analogous. It'm just that it's harder to solve. Nothing else. function out of this. What really is happening is that you have learned how to calculate this operator given H. And therefore now you're able to evolve any wave function. So you have solved the dynamical system. If somebody tells you a time equals 0, your system is here, you can now calculate where it's going to be at the later time. So that's really all you have achieved. You now know the solution. If you know it at any time, you've solved problem. OK, so Heisenberg picture of quantum mechanics. picture. So basically the Heisenberg picture exists thanks to the existence of the Schrodinger picture. The motivation comes from expectation values. Suppose you have time dependent states, in fact, matrix elements. So you could ask what is the matrix element of A between these two states. So it all begins by considering a Schrodinging operator As hat, which is s is for Schrodingers. And the motivation comes out of expectation values, which are the same as the time dependent state alpha of t. two time dependent states, a matrix element. But the time dependence has already been found, say, in principle, if you know U dagger. And then you can speak about the time dependent matrix elements of the operator As or the matrix element of this time dependent operator between the time equals 0 states. This operator is sufficiently important that this operator is called the Heisenberg version of the operators s. Has time dependence, and it's defined by this equation. So whenever you have Schrodinger operator, whether it be time dependent or time independent, whatever the Schrodingers operator is, it has time dependence. I have now a definition of what I will call the Heisenberg operator. And it is obtained by acting with a unitary operator, U.S. And operators always act on operators from the left and from the right. If you have an operator that's on another from theRight only or from theLeft only, I think you have grounds to be suspicious that maybe you're not doing things right. And as you can imagine, there's a lot of things to be said about this operator. the Schrodinger operator? PROFESSOR: You have to speak louder. AUDIENCE: Is the Schrodingers operator related to the Hamiltonian [INAUDIBLE]?PROFESSor: Any Schrodings operator. All the operators you know are Schrodinging operators. At t equals 0 A Heisenberg becomes identical to A Schrodinged. When t is equal to 0, U of t-- of 0 0 is the operator propagates no state, so it's equal to the identity. C Heisenberg is just A Heisenburg times B Heisen Berg. So if you have C Schrodinger equals A Schrodingers, B Schrodingen, C Heisenber is a commutator equal to C He Eisenberg. If the Hamiltonian is time independent, does that work for any operator that commutes with the Hamiltonians? If this is happening, the two Hamiltonians are identical, and we'll have the chance to check this today in a nice example. So we will have an interesting question, in fact, whether the Heisen Rosenberg is equal to theSchrodinger Hamiltonian. whole thing is the same. So this is something very useful and we'll need it. One more comment, expectation values. Comment number four on expectation values, which is something you've already-- it's sort of the way we began the discussion and wanted to make sure it's clear. So we say that the Schrodinger expectation value is equal to the Heisenberg expectation value. We right it in the bottom, but we mean the top equation. And we use it that way. difficult. So what we try to do in order to simplify that is find an equation that is satisfied by the Heisenberg operator, a time derivative equation. So finding a differential equation for the operator is useful. We want to calculate ih bar d dt. And so what do we get? Well, we have several things. Remember, the Schrodinger operator can have a bit of time dependence. And even if you know U, you have to do this simplification, which is hard. So we have three terms. ih bar dU dagger dt As U plus U dagger As dU dt plus-- with an Ih bar-- U dagger ihbar dAs minus dt. dAs dt and U. Well, you have these equations. Those were the Schrodinger equations we started with today. The derivatives of U, or the derivatives ofU dagger. so what did we have? Well, we have that ihBar dU. dt was HU-- H Schrodingers times U. And therefore ih Bar dU Dagger dt is equal to U dagger Hs with a minus here. Time dependence of expectation value. How does the expectation value of a Schrodinger operator depend on time? You're faced with that expectation. value of As, and it changes in time, and you want to know how you can compute that. Well, you first say, OK, ih bar d dt. But this thing is nothing but psi 0 A Heisenberg of t psi 0. Now I can let the derivative go in. And using this, assuming that A is still no time. dependence, A has no explicit time dependence, then you can use just this equation, which give you psi 0 Ah Hh psi0. The Heisenberg operator is actually time independent. It just doesn't depend on time. A Schrodinger operator, it's a funny operator. It doesn't have time in there. It has X's, P's, spins, and you don't know in general, if it's time independent in the sense of conserve of expectation values. But whenever As commutes with Hs, well, the expectation values don't change in time. But as you know, this d dt can be brought in, because the states are not time dependent. minutes to do an example and illustrate much of this. In the notes, there will be three examples. I will do just one in lecture. You can do the other ones in recitation next week. There's no need really that you study these things at this moment. Just try to get whatever you can now from the lecture, and next week you'll go back to this. So the example is the harmonic oscillator. And it will illustrate the ideas very nicely, I think. Professor: X and P are time independent Schrodinger operators, so that equation that I boxed holds. Heisenberg equations of motion look like ordinary equations for dynamical variables. Professor: It's going to simplify your life quite dramatically when you try to use these operators. This time the operators change, and you will know what they change like, so you have to write this then you have this solution of sine cosine t plus sine sine omega t and B are some time independent operators. variables in, it just becomes identical to the Schrodinger Hamiltonian. All right, so that's all for today. I hope to see in office hours in the coming days. Be here Wednesday 12:30, maybe 12:25 would be better, and we'll see you then. [APPLAUSE] We'll be back at 12:50 on Wednesday, and be here at 1:30 on Thursday. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from.