Rebecca Sae: I was supposed to go before Ken, and thank goodness Ken insisted he went before me. "It articulated deeply why social intelligence should pervade our thinking about the mind and brain," Sae says. "I think that when people talk about social intelligence, they mean the range of phenomena that people mean in social intelligence," says Sae. "From extremely complex phenomena that govern the interactions of large groups of people, like war, to incredibly minute phenomena, like whether you can get your hand to a target in 100 milliseconds or less" social cognition they do actually mean all of those things. And that is both thrilling-- when you work in social cognition-- and also terrifying, especially when people are hoping for a coherent theory of all of that. I think that trying to get a coherent account of everything from your hand motions and your perception of other people's hand motions all the way to politics and sociology is daunting and, frankly, deeply unlikely. And so, by contrast to Ken-- who starts with, let's look at social interactions and see what's there, which I think is a very awesome approach-- I'm going to take almost the opposite approach, which is say, there's one thing that's probably there a lot. is not the only thing I work on-- is this ability that we have. OK, so a little demo of the problem that I work with-- and because it's early in the morning and everybody needs to wake up, I'm going to get you guys to do this as a task, so as an experiment. So in this experiment, we're going to ask you to make a moral judgment of a character. Her name is Grace. And the more wrong it was, the higher your hand goes. Psychologist David Frum: What matters most for the moral blame that we assign is not what happened, but what Grace thought she was doing. He says that in scenarios like the one he gave you, what matters most is not how bad the outcome was, but how much blame Grace deserves. Frum says the scenario isolates one important feature of our moral judgment and also an important feature. of a lot of the rest of our social cognition. He asks: How much blame does Grace deserve for putting the powder in the coffee? And how much do you think she deserves? been studied from kind of relatively simple perceptual phenomena like assigning intentions and goals to simple moving characters in an animation. This ability has been studied all the way to understanding some of the most complex, abstract ideas that we ever encounter. So to the degree that our minds let us make any sense of that at all, we're using our ability to make sense of other people's minds. And I'm almost exclusively going to talk about the first one, so how we think about what other people see, think, and know-- but not want or feel. This problem was set up as kind of a litmus test for our ability to think about other people's minds, starting in the late '70s. So the origin of this problem for psychology is, everybody knows humans could do this. What about animals? And actually, the debate about whether this capacity for thinking about other person's thoughts is or is not shared with which other animals has gone on continuously since the late 1970s and has not been resolved. And so here's what a false belief task is. false belief task looks like. This is being given to a five-year-old human child. Do you know what pirates really like? CHILD: What? REBECCA SAXE: Pirates really like cheese sandwiches. So Ivan puts his sandwich over here on top of the pirate chest. And while Ivan is away, the wind comes, and it blows the sandwich down onto the grass. And now, here comes the other pirate. This pirate is called Joshua. And Joshua also really loves cheese sandwich. So which one do you think Ivan's gonna take? The task became so famous is that not all participants perform the same way. One class of participants who've become the focus of intense scrutiny is slightly younger kids. This is a three-year-old. He's paid equally rapt attention throughout the entire story. And we come to the crucial moment, and he's asked again the same question. And Ivan says, I want my cheese sandwich. Which sandwich is he? Which sandwich does he want to have? He wants his cheese sandwich, of course. The traditional read of what just happened there is that's a kid who gets wanting, right. But he doesn't get believing. He doesn't understand that because Ivan left his cheese sandwich on top of the pirate chest and he didn't know that it's been moved that he'll believe that that sandwich is his. His actions depend on his own beliefs, rather than the true state of the world. And that's the source of both this wrong prediction-- why does he say he'll take this one? Do you think he's going to take that one? take his cheese sandwich-- and the wrong explanation. So when he goes to take the other cheese sandwich, the one that's actually Joshua's, then we say, why did he do that? And again, this is typical performance that the little kids confabulate. So in this case, it's that his fell on the ground. He doesn't want his anymore. That's why he's taking Joshua's sandwich. And that pattern of performance was interpreted as evidence of conceptual change and development. The capacity to bring to bear a conception of the other person having beliefs, perceptual history, knowledge, an internal representation of the world that guides actions. And so that is what I'm going to call thinking about thought. The idea that this is a domain that you could study on its own-- well, there's two questions here. One is can you study this at all. And the second one isCan you study it separate from the whole rest of cognition? Both of those are related to Liz, and indeed Nancy, and many people's worries. How do we think about other people as containing internal mental lives, mental representations? I'm going to talk about just fMRI, although I do use other methods to study this problem. I think fMRI has been both an incredible gift to our ability to understand the human mind and also imposes a huge number of limitations on what we can discover. And so what I want to tell you about is just a tiny bit of my phase one investigations using the early strategies that fMRI allowed us. And then a more in-depth look at how I'm using more modern techniques in fMRI to try to get further. belief. This is a very simple encapsulation of our ability to represent what somebody else thinks and separate it from the state of the world. While you were doing that, you were clearly using your theory of mind. But you were also using many other capacities of your mind and brain. So we're using everything from your eyes to your fingers and most of the brain in between. And then the question is, the part that required is, what part of the mind did you use? In a control condition, you similarly read stories that involve something that was true and becomes false. You need to think about those two and respond using a button press. The idea is that in this comparison you need the ability to see the stimuli, read English, put together your logical and cognitive capacity of your brain. In this case, what it is is a state of the world. So this is an island and a photograph taken of it. Then the photograph, of course, stays the same. But the world changes. So there's a volcano that erupts. And now we can ask you either about the photograph. thoughts, and choose a button press in both cases. But only in the first case do you also need to think about other people's thoughts. And so that comparison would let us look for brain regions where blood oxygenation or metabolism is higher if you're thinking about others' thoughts. The signal is ridiculously strong and reliable, according to the researchers, who found a whole group of brain regions with higher metabolism if you think about people's ideas in the stories. The difference between thinking about somebody else's thoughts and other logical problems-- in terms of logical problems -- can be huge, the researchers say. of how significant, how reliable, how similar across individual subjects-- is comparable to the difference between looking at gradings and not looking at gratings in V1. That's crazy that something this complicated and abstract would have an unbelievably large, robust, reliable signal in individual subjects. But everyone who has ever come through my lab says that they never believe me until they see it in their own data. And you can do this in any individual subject. You need to read only between 10 and 20 total stories in literally five to 10 minutes. not possibly be true on any a priori story, except for maybe the story Ken just told you about how social cognition is the fundamental basis of everything. When you look inside this brain region, this is in one of them. It's one of five cortical regions. I'm going to talk a lot about it, because the data from the right TPJ are particularly clean. So in the rightTPJ, that's average percent singal change in some of our early experiments to stories about beliefs. story, and the signal starts to go up. This is just showing that difference in how much you think about thoughts contributes a lot of variance across many different individual stories. And if you look within the story, it's the time when you're thinking about a thought that you get activity in this brain region. We showed that after TMS to the right TPJ compared to a control brain region, people use the beliefs of the character less in making their moral judgments. But "involved in"-- that's a euphemism. stories in the scanner, and we record activity in the brain region while you're reading those stories. And so what we do with that is we make arguments about selectivity and these kinds of things that we've been talking about this entire time. Those measures, called univariate measures, measure the amount of activity in that region, on average, as you read a different story. So you get something that looks like this. And what you show is that this brain region responds a certain amount. Both stories involve thinking about thoughts. And one of the things we showed early on is that activity generalizes in the sense that many different stories about many different kinds of thoughts all illicit activity in this brain region. And I told you that I think that that is related to this idea of involvement. This brain region is involved when a story describes thoughts. OK, what's wrong with that for making theoretical progress on theory of thought? That's what we're trying to find out. We want to know what's going on in the brain. mind is that, with respect to the representation of other people's thoughts, that doesn't tell us anything about how our brain does it. So the things that would make something a theory of mind-- a representation of who thinks what, why, and with what consequences-- we can't see in the univariate signal. So what I would like to make progress on, what I think we're starting to makeprogress on using MVPA, is getting beyond that this brain region is involved in theory ofMind and trying to ask something about what is represented in this brain area. analysis-- the things that we were doing mostly for the first 15 years of fMRI-- are called now univariate analyses. What was most effectively revealed by these analyzes are differences in the cortex at the scale of regions, what one region as opposed to another region does. And that turns out in many contexts-- especially in the back half of the brain, the representation regions-- to correspond in some sense to the stimulus type. The answer at the end is-- given that I got this pattern, what can I figure out about the stimulus? Conversation that I would have got to at the end. All the mathematical techniques of MVPA could be used to rediscover all of the things Nancy already discovered using the traditional analyses. And in fact, if you use them uncarefully that's what you're most likely to do, because those are huge signals in the brain. If you're not careful, what you will do is just re-go over old territory with new math. I am more interested in these techniques when they let us see things we could never see before. So when, instead of telling us about region level differences or centimeter scale differences, they're tell us about much smaller and more interleaved populations. for a given type of stimuli, what are the key dimensions of representation. The intuition here is that-- think about a region, like the right TPJ, or the face area if you think about faces. Or V1 is often where I start, because we know enough about V1 that I can use it to imagine what we're talking about. So you can think about within-type dimensions of importance-- and MVP I think is letting us do that in its most interesting applications. V1 is called V1 because information goes from your eyes to the LGN of your thalamus. It's the first cortical stop of visual information. One way that we know that it's very involved in vision is that if you're seeing visual stimuli, you get a big response in V1. That's a selectivity type measure. What we want to know about V1 is what transformations over the information coming from LGN is V1 implementing. And that's why theories like Marr's theory-- which say that there are receptive fields-- are important. V1 as a whole will activate to big images regardless of the orientation of the content of the image. So you need to be able to get to something more fine-grained than V1. You need to say there are different subpopulations of neurons inside V1, some of which will be responding when a line is like this, and some ofwhich will be responses when a lines is like that. And that's the decoding perspective that says, if we wanted to. that V1 has an orientation map, that neurons in V1 have an orientation preference. In fMRI, the unit of measurement is the blood oxygenation in 100,000 neurons. It seems potentially really unlikely that you would be able to tell from the fMRI signal whether the neurons that prefer bars like this are more active. And so it's not stupid that we used to focus on things like how much activity. The neural populations, like orientation preferring neurons in V1, were too spatially mixed to tell the difference between them in fMRI. The traditional way of thinking is to look at V1 and know is the line like this or like that. There's so many things that could cause fine spatial patterns that we don't care about. Where the blood vessels happen to be is another thing. There's a key intuition underlying MVPA. So there's the big signal which is the regional signal-- V1 and vision-- and there's lots of noise. But there might also be inside there a tiny bit of spatial pattern that says something like-- well, this voxel happens to have more neurons that prefer one orientation. And this vauxel has more neurons. that prefer a different orientation. And so from the relative activity in those two voxels, we could still tell you the orientation. That was the intuition behind multivoxel pattern analysis when it was first proposed. And it's now sweeping the fMRI world, many different versions of these analyses. But to give you a more concrete sense of what this is and how it works, I'm just going to show you two different ways MVPA is done concretely in my lab. when we do MVPA. The first dimension or potential feature that we wanted to look for we chose because it really matters to human judgments. And it's the one that you guys did in the very beginning of my talk-- telling the difference between somebody who knowingly or unknowingly commits murder. That, as you saw, makes a huge, huge difference in behavior. And also, we know it's represented in the right TPJ because of the TMS experiment. If we mess up the signaling in the TPJ, we change that judgment. ask how much blame you should get. This is in the second person and doesn't matter. We change on average two to four words in this whole long scenario. So we can make these tiny interventions. It's a complicated stimulus, but the change we make is very small and totally changed the meaning of the whole. We make, for example, a change from you had no idea to you knew. And those stories are different in many, many,. many ways. In this experiment, we make one tiny change. story by just changing your mental state. Whether you knew or you didn't know about your cousin's peanut allergy is really important to the moral judgment of what happened. The right TPJ is tracking the important information about what you think. And so it's activated for both of these kinds of stories. So that's a univariate analysis. Now what's a multivariate analysis? So here's the key intuition behind a mult variables analysis. The idea is, think in a very abstract similarity space. And the intuition is, because in both cases it matters what you Think. person who wrote the essay was in the room when you said that publicly shaming thing? A different story is about demonstrating your karate skills and knocking out your classmate-- again, totally new moral scenario. But again, this one feature-- did you know or not know that your classmate was there when you did the kick? Now here's the idea. Even though each of those new scenarios is completely different, if there are different subpopulations within your right TPJ responding when you knew you were going to cause harm, then a little part of that response will be the same. same way, right, because the same cell population will be more active for all the stories that have knowing harm. And the other population would be relatively active in all the story that have the unknowing harm. OK, so this is the central logic. Take any two stories within the set. They're all unique. So those two stories that are different, you're representing a new mental state of a new person. And so the logic is that if we could look in the right TPJ and measure the pattern of activity-- and hope that reflects something like the relative activation of different cell populations. You have a new pattern in your right TPJ. But if they share the feature that you knew you were going to cause harm, that would be something a little bit similar. Does that logic make sense? And so what you get is a spatial pattern of activation. So the amount of activity in the rightTPJ is a big signal. The relative activity between one voxel and another is a tiny signal. And it's superimposed on a lot of noise. If there's anything there at all, then you'll still still be able to see it. be able to pick up a little more similarity for pairs that are matched on the feature of interest. That's the logic behind a Haxby style analysis. And so literally what you do is, you take the vector of responses across all the voxels inside a region. And you ask whether the correlation in space is more similar for. pairs that share the feature you're interested in compared to pairs that don't share. the feature that you'reinterested in. The first question is-- is that real, or is that a coincidence? That is the first thing you want to know when you do an analysis. you see data like this. Afterwards, we can ask what does it mean. But let's start with is that real. And so the way that you ask is it real is, you just make sure that it would replicate, that in independent data you'd get the same answer. We had actually already run this experiment two times before-- because we were studying this process of representing accidental and intentional harms for a long time before we thought of using MVPA. And the other thing is that we had manipulated this distinction in different ways across the stimuli. did it is, we said you knew about the allergy or you didn't know about the allergies. And what you want to know is, are you decoding the abstract thing-- that she knew she was causing harm or not? Or something less abstract, like whether the story has negation in it. That's an alternative possibility. And so in experiments B and C, we had done it this way. It's also in the third person, not the second person. So if we find the same result, then it generalizes across all these incidental features of the way the experiment was conducted. There's something more real about it than if you knew the hypothesis before you ran the experiment. There's just this experience like, if I had the hypothesis in my head, maybe it somehow got from my head to the data. But when the data were already there and then you went back and analyzed them and the effect was hiding in the data that you'd had on your server, there's something way more real and magical about that. So anyway, because it was there in all of our old data, I just believed it. MVPA is not a technique for collecting better data, it's a technique to get more information out of the same data. It's a way of thinking about data, not a way to get data. The other thing to notice about this is, to get an MVPA signal, we didn't change anything about the fMRI. You can know that for sure, because these are our old data that we had before we started doing MVPA. Was it true that two unrelated stories are about a case in which somebody kills somebody? It was true. right TPJ more similar, suggesting that which part of the right TPJ is more or less active contains information about whether or not the person who committed the murder knew what they were doing at the time. This is specific to the rightTPJ. So these are a bunch of the other brain regions involved in theory of mind and social cognition. And none of them contain any information about this dimension at all. So this dimension is represented in theRight TPJ and not represented anywhere else. Some people think that basically what you thought you were doing is all that matters in these stories. than it is for other people. And the pattern difference in your right TPJ accounts for 35% of the variance in your moral judgment. So it's quite amazing that those are that correlated. But that's what's cool about the data. But we'll get to the method. So Haxby style correlations-- these are these are Hax by style correlations. So the more that you represented knowing harm as different from unknowing harm in yourright TPJ, the more you judged them as different when we asked you for moral judgement. MVPA was introduced by Jim Haxby in 2001, so actually a long time ago. The idea is, take a region you care about and ask this basic question. Is the correlation across neural responses more similar when the stimuli share that feature than when they don't? So that gives you a pretty robust measurement, because you're using all the voxels in the region to get one number out-- the correlation. And you're doing it over partitions of the data, often halves of thedata, so many trials are going into both the train and test. case we're using halves of the data, even halves and odd halves. And so each of the things we're correlating is a relatively less noisy neural measure because it has many trials averaged into it. In this case, it can be sensitive to pretty minimal stimulus variations. So it's sensitive to small distinctions in the stimuli. Here we showed that it generalizes. It gave us a measure that was stable within a participant in the sense that the measure in each individual related to that individual's behavior. it differs across regions. So we could show that this was present in the right TPJ but not present in other regions. That's a whole bunch of extra information than we ever were able to get before. And I'll give you one more example of the way that Haxby correlations can be used. So in this case I showed you, we hypothesized one dimension. And we tried to decode that dimension. Obviously, you don't only have to do one. And so another way to do this is to build stimulus sets that, for example, have two orthogonal dimensions and ask about both of them. stories vary. So here's a bunch of stories. Leslie has just been in a big, important interview. And he sees himself in a mirror, and he sees that his shirt has a big coffee stain down the front. Another one is-- Eric gets to a restaurant to meet his fiance's parents. So that's two completely different stories. And then the third story-- Abigail is painting her dorm room, and she hears somebody's footsteps down the hallway. And the footsteps sound like her beloved boyfriend's. So these stories are all different. But, as you may have noticed, the stimulus set had another distinction in it, which is whether the thing is good or bad that's happening to you. And so we could ask in the same dataset, what about stories that share this feature of valence? The pairs of stories that are matched on valence, do they have a more similar neural signature? And in the right TPJ they're not. We've actually found this a whole bunch of times. The rightTPJ doesn't care about valence. Other regions do-- don't worry, we don't. There's a whole bunch of limitations of Haxby style correlations. All the tests are binary. The answer you get for anything you test is that there is or is not information about that distinction. There's no continuous measure here. And so once people started thinking about this method, it became clear that this is actually just a special case of a much more general technique. It's just that two things are different from one another or they are not different from each other. And that's the way to look at it. more general way of thinking about fMRI data. This particular method, using spatial correlations, is very stable and robust. But it's a special case of a much more general set. It's a very stable, robust method, but it's not a very general way to look at fMRI. It doesn't work for all fMRI patients, but for some, it could be a very useful tool. It could be used in the future to help people understand their brain's responses to stress.