In this video I'm going to be going over lung oscilation specifically the sites of where you osculate. We're going to go over normal breath sounds versus abnormal breath sounds. You can access the quiz and the notes over here or in the description below. In the next video I'll be performing an assessment on a patient and show you how to listen with your stethoscope to these sides. I'll also show you where you should hear bronchial versus bicular. chest in this illustration you have your right lung and your left lung and how I set up this illustration is that I wanted you to be able to see what is over the lungs. Whenever you're listening with your stethoscope you need to know where your clavicle is and certain intercoastal spaces because they correlate to which lobe of the lung you are listening to. It's really important you find C7 to T10 whenever you're assessing which we'll go over in the oscilation sites because this will help you know. Listen directly on the patient's chest with the diaphragm of your stethoscope. When listening on women you want to have the woman raise up her breast so you can get underneath those sights. The tissue will muffle the noise and you won't be able to hear that. Remember that whenever you're listening to the chest you're going to listen to the both the front and the back side and note a full cycle of in inspiration and expiration and what's the sound quality. give you trouble because as we went through the anatomy you have your spine here and you have the scapula here. Whenever you're having the patient breathe you want them to breathe in and out through their mouth slowly so you can hear those lungs inflate and deflate. A lot of patients who may have breathing difficulties you'll have to take your time with them because they can hyperventilate easily and and make sure your patient doesn't get dizzy and just taking your time. the chest first and what I like to do is I find the clavicle and um we're going to start at the apex of the lungs the top of the lung and we're Going to get our diaphragm which is the big part of your stethoscope and you are going to place it right slightly above that clavicles where the Apex is. Then you'reGoing to listen there for a full inspiration and expiration and then you're going over and compare on the other side. you will listen here compare your side and then just go a little bit lower maybe into the third intercal space and just keep listening to those upper loes. We're going to start from top to bottom and compare sides and work our way down and we're Going to start right above the scapula right where the Apex is and we'll go over to the other side and compare and then we're done now let's look at our sides on posterior just like with anterior in the posterior. remember to get the best sound quality so you can hear so you're not listening over the shoulder blades because that will muffle your sound and you won't be able to hear. Just stay in between where the scapula and the spine is and we will just compare sides and inch our way down and you want to move around almost mid aill where you were moving before on anterior. There's three different types a tip for whenever you're trying to learn these normal breath sounds is to get a stethoscope listen to yourself or listen to others and get a start. rhythm down for how long inspiration expiration is and where these are located because that's the key with these three different sounds because they're heard in different areas throughout the lung field so let's go over them the first one is bronchial this is heard anteriorly only you're not going to hear this posteriorly anteriorly why because they are mainly hurt over the tracheal area with the stethoscope so up here in this area they are high pitched and loud and you will notice when you listen to them that the inspiration will be slightly shorter than the expiration. and discontinuous now first let's go over continuous what does continuous mean this is a extra sound that you're hearing that is lasting more than 2 seconds with a full respiration. The first type is called a high pitch polyphonic whe let the name help you okay so what is it it is mainly heard in expiration so when the patient's breathing out but it can be in Inspiration as well. The third type of continuous adventitious breath sound is called stri spider and this is heard on inspiration because what's happening is that the airway is being obstructed. sound and this is what Strider sounds like now let's go over the second type of breath sounds abnormal breast sounds called discontinuous This is an extra sound that you're hearing that is La lasting less than2 seconds okay first type um is coarse crackles crackles for nor Al has been known as rails so if you hear that that's what it means crackles rails they're interchanged just like ronai and Weis so course crackles they are mainly heard in Inspiration when the patient's breathing in. patient's breathing in and breathing out so that's why you're hearing it on inspiration and expiration now it can sound similar to a parac cardial friction rub how do you tell the difference um if you are wanting to know is this the lungs or is this this the heart just listen have the patient hold their breath. If you can still hear that harsh grading sound it's the heart because they're holding their breath their lungs aren't moving so you've rolled out the lungs. That is lung occultation and normal breast sounds versus abnormal breast sounds.