Professor: The configuration of a particle is given by, or described by, a wave function psi of x. In 3D, the wave function would be a function of all three positions x, y and z. Professor: We're currently in our one dimensional tripped out tricycles. If we had two particles, our wave function. would be of the position of each. Each particle would have its own wave function, which would be the same in both 3D and 2D. The meaning of the wave function is that the norm squared psi of x, norm squared, it's complex, dx is the probability of finding the particle- There's an n in their.particle. x1, x2, and so on. So we'll go through lots of details and examples later on. But for the most part, we're going to be sticking with single particle in one dimension for the next few weeks. Now again, I want to emphasize this is our first pass through our definition of quantum mechanics. there are two possible configurations the system can be in, which in quantum mechanics means two different wave functions that could describe the system given psi 1 and psi 2. It's also possible to find the system in a superposition of those two psi is equal to some arbitrary linear combination alpha psi 1 plus beta psi 2 of x. OK? So some things to note-- so questions about those before we move on? No questions? Nothing? Really? You're going to make he threaten you with something. This is not trivial stuff. of x norm squared is equal to 1. This is just saying that the total probability that we find the particle somewhere had better be one. If it's less, then the particle has simply disappeared. And basic rule, things don't just disappear. So probability should be normalized. And this is our prescription. So a second thing to note is that all reasonable, or non stupid, functions of x are equally reasonable as wave functions. OK? So this is a very reasonable function. It's nice and smooth. It converges to 0 infinity. properties you might want. This is also a reasonable function. It's a little annoying, but there it is. And they're both perfectly reasonable as wave functions. This on the other hand, not so much. For two reasons. First off, it's discontinuous. And as you're going to show in your problem set, discontinuities are very bad for wave. functions. The second is over some domain it's multi valued. There are two different values of the function. That's also bad, because what's the probability? It's the norm squared. equally reasonable as wave functions. All states corresponding to reasonable wave functions are equally reasonable as physical states. There's no primacy in wave functions or in states. However, with that said, some wave function are more equal than others. And this is important, and coming up with a good definition of this is going to be an important challenge for us in the next couple of lectures. So in particular, this wave function has a nice simple interpretation. If I tell you this is psi of x, then what can you tell me about the particle whose wave function is the psi of X? What do you know? the Fourier theorem. Take any wave function which is given by some complex valued function, and it can be expressed as a superposition of plane waves. 1 over 2pi in our normalization integral dk psi tilde of k, but this is a set of coefficients. e to the ikx. We're saying pick a value of k. There's a number associated with it, which is going to be an a magnitude and a phase. And that's the magnitude and phase of a plane wave. functions. So this is a plane wave with a definite wavelength, 2pi upon k. We know what its momentum is. Its momentum is h bar k. Any function, we're saying, can be expressed as a superposition by summing over all possible values of k, all possible different wavelengths. That make sense? Fourier didn't think about it that way, but from quantum mechanics, this is the way we want to thinking about it. It's just a true statement. a definite position? AUDIENCE: Delta. PROFESSOR: A delta function, exactly. So I claim that any function psi of x can be expanded a sum over all states with a definite position. So is this true? Is it true that I can take any function and expand it in a superposition of delta functions? Absolutely. We're going to find this is a general statement that any state can be expressed as a superpositions of states for any observable quantity you want. question I want to ask you. Is that a superposition? Yeah. I mean every vector can be written as the sum of other vectors. And it can be done in an infinite number of ways, right? So there's no such thing as a state which is not a superpositions. Every vector is asuperposition of other vector. It's a sum ofother vector. So in particular we often find it useful to pick a basis and say look, I know what I mean by the vector y, y hat is a unit vector in this direction. And now I can ask, given that these are my natural guys, the guys Iwant to attend to, is this a superpose of x and y? Or is it just x or y? There's nothing hallowed about your choice of basis. There's no God given basis for the universe. But any given vector can be expressed as a superposition of some pair of basis vectors. So this somehow is about finding convenient choice of based. Whereas x hat itself is not.a superposition. So there's no natural choice. of basis, but it's sometimes convenient to pick a basis. This is the direction of the surface of the earth, and this is perpendicular to it. This would be slightly strange if you're leaning. this is an expansion of a function as a sum, as a superposition of other functions. We'll talk about that more. Quickly what's the momentum associated to the plane wave e to the ikx? AUDIENCE: [INAUDIBLE]. PROFESSOR: h bar k. So now I want to just quickly run over some concept questions for you. So whip out your clickers. OK, we'll do this verbally. All right, let's try this again. How do you know whether the particle is big or small by looking at the wave function? Professor: Which particle has a larger momentum? Think about it, but don't say it out loud. If it has higher momentum, what do you just intuitively expect to know about its energy? It's probably higher. OK next one. Compared to the wave function psi of x, it's Fourier transform, psi tilde of x contains more information, or less, or the same, or something. So let's vote. A, more information. B, less information. C, same. OK, good you got it. of length l, 0 outside of that region. f has a single well defined wavelengths. Or f is made up of a wide range of wavelengths? Think it to yourself. OK, now before we get talking about it, I want everyone to close their eyes. Or close the eyes of the person next to you. That's fine. And now and I want you to vote. A is f has one well defined wavelength. B isf has a wideRange of wavelengths. It's closer to true. The sine wave is an infinite, and it cancels out past minus l over 2 and positivel over 2. You need to add a bunch of wavelengths to actually cancel it out there. If you only had the thing of a single wavelength, it would continue with a single wavelengths all the way out. If yo you take a superposition, the sine is continuous and differentiable everywhere, because it's a cosine, right? So if yo you Take a Superposition of a Sine Wave, the Sine is Differentiable Everywhere. of sines and cosines, do you ever get a discontinuity? No. Do you get something whose derivative is discontinuous? No, you don't. So it's going to take an infinite number of sine and cosine to reproduce that little kink at the edge. So how would you ever reproduce a thing with a discontinued thing? Well, you'd need some infinite sum of sines & cosines where there's some technicality about the infinite limit being singular. question. That's a very good question. The question here is look, there's two different things you can be talking about. One is arbitrarily large and arbitrarily short wavelengths, so an arbitrary range of wavelengths. And the other is an infinite number. But an Infinite number is silly, because there's a continuous variable here k. You got an infinitenumber of wavelengths between one and 1.2, right? It's continuous. So which one do you mean? So let's go back to this connection that we got a minute ago from short distance and high momentum. That thing looks like it has one particular wavelength. But I claim, in order to reproduce that as a superposition of states with definite momentum, I need arbitrarily high wavelength. To construct or detect an arbitrarily small feature you need arbitrarily large momentum modes. I want the connection between momentum and the length scale to be something that becomes intuitive to you. So when I talk about something with short. distance, I emphasize you to think and encourage you to conflate short distance and large momentum. It's really about the range, not just the number. And I want you to be able to do the same thing with something with long. distance. I hope that this will help you. features, I'm going to talk about it as something with large momentum. And that's because in a quantum mechanical system, something with short wavelength is something that carries big momentum. What should be true of the Fourier transform in order for this to reasonably function? And among other things, being able to have a Fourier. transform where you don't have arbitrarily high momentum modes is going to be an important condition. That's going to turn to be related to the question of whether a wave function can be Fourier transformed. to the derivative being continuous. That's a very good question. So that's the optional problem 8 on problem set 2. Other questions? PROFESSOR: Cool, so that's it for the clicker questions. Sorry for the technology fail. So I'm just going to turn this off in disgust. that's really irritating. So today what I want to start on is pick up on the discussion of the uncertainty principle. The certainty of the momentum seems to imply lack of knowledge about the position and vice versa. So in order to do that, we need to define uncertainty. The probability that any given person in this group of 16 has a particular age? I'll call it a. The sum over all possible ages of the probability that you have age a is equal to 1. So what's the most likely age? If you grabbed one of these people from the room with a giant Erector set, and pull out a person, and ask them what their age is, what's most likely they'll have? AUDIENCE: 22. PROFESSOR: 22, just by eyeball roughly. be 19.2 for this. But if everyone had a little sticker on their lapel that says. I'm 14, 15, 16, 20, 21 or 22, how many people have the age. 19.4. That's what I got. So in particular how did I get the average? I'm going to define some notation. This notation is going to stick with us for the rest of quantum mechanics. The average age, how do I compute it? So we all know this, but let me just be explicit about it. It's the sum over all possible ages. The average value of a squared is equal to the sum over all possible ages of a times the ratio of Na to N. The average of the square of ages is the same thing. The expected value of some function of a is equal-- and this is something you don't usually do-- to the value of f of a, times the probability that you measure that value in the first place. It's a very useful relation. And so, again, does the average have to be measurable? No, it certainly doesn't. average value of a squared is not equal to 0. And that's because the squared has everything positive. So here we have a distribution where its average value is 0, but its width is non-zero. So how do we define the width of a distribution? This is going to be like our uncertainty. How happy are you today? Well, I'm not sure. How unsure are you? Well,. that should give us a precise measure. So let me define three things. First the deviation. So we always get something that's centered at 0. So deviation is not a terribly good thing on average, because on average the deviation is always 0. But we can get a nice measure by getting the deviation squared. So the mean of the derivation squared, mean of a minus the average value of a squared. This is what I'm going to call the standard deviation. Which is a little odd, because really you'd want to call it the standard deviations squared. But whatever. We use funny words. standard deviation is 0, as long as there's no width, which is why the standard deviation is a good measure of width or uncertainty. So standard deviation squared is equal to the average value of a squared minus twice a times the averagevalue of a plus average valueof a quantity squared. But if you do this out, this is going to be equal to a squared plus 2 average value. That's just minus twice the average values of squared and squared. So this is an alternate way of writing thestandard deviation. in this fashion or this fashion. And the notation for this is delta a squared. Different probability distributions are going to give me different delta a's. So one thing that's sort of annoying is that when you write delta a, there's nothing in the notation that says which distribution you were talking about. Sometimes it's useful to just put given the probability distribution p of a. This is not very often used, but sometimes it's very helpful when you're doing calculations just to keep it simple. Professor: The average value of some x, given a probability distribution on x where x is a continuous variable, is going to be equal to the integral. And similarly for x squared, or more generally, for f of x, or the expected value of f of X given this probability distribution. So this is all just mathematics. And we define the uncertainty in x is equal to. the expectation value of x squared minus the expectedvalue of x quantity squared. And this is delta x squared. All of that is just straight up classical probability theory. couple of ways to improve this notation. One of which is to write the expected value of x in the state psi, so you write psi as a subscript. Another notation that will come back-- you'll see why this is a useful notation later in the semester. And we will give meaning to this notation later, but I just want to alert you that it's used throughout books, and it means the same thing as what we're talking about the expectedvalue of x given a particular state psi. The probability of having that momentum times momentum, right? Everyone cool with that? This is what you mean by probability. But we need to know if we have a quantum mechanical system described by state psi of x, how do we get the probability that you measure p? Do I want to do this now? Yeah, OK I do. And we need a guess. We made a guess at the end of last lecture that, in quantum mechanics, this should be dp minus infinity to infinity of the Fourier transform. This is a thing with dimensions of what? Length, right? But over on the right hand side, we have a length and a probability, which is a number, and then another length. So why are we getting something with. dimensions of length, not something with Dimensions of length squared? And the answer is this is not a probability. It is a probability density. So it's got units of probability per unit length. This has dimensions of one over length. The probability to find the particle between x and x plus dx. So that was our second postulate. In quantum mechanics, the expectation value of x.dx squared is the probability of finding it in this domain. So what we're doing is we're summing over all such domains the probability times the value. This is the difference between discrete, where we didn't have these probability densities, we just had numbers, pure numbers and pure probabilities. Now we have probabilities densities per unit whatever. Yeah? The psi is just to denote that this is in the state psi. And it can be pronounced in two. ways. You can either say the expectation value of x, or the expectation of x in the state psi. And this would be pronounced one of two ways. It's the same idea, but they have different flavors, right? So whatever your native language is, you've got some analog of this. This means something in a particular mathematical language for talking about. And so I could see he's a nice guy, I could say he's [? carinoso ?], and they mean different things in different languages. quantum mechanics. Why is there a double notation of psi? Roughly speaking, it's because in computing this expectation value, there's a psi squared. And so this is to remind you of that. Other questions? Terminology is one of the most annoying features of quantum mechanics. Yeah? AUDIENCE: So it seems like this [INAUDIBLE] variance is a really convenient way of doing it. How is it the Heisenberg uncertainty works exactly as it does for this definition of variance? have chosen some other definition of uncertainly. So why this one? And one answer is, indeed, the uncertainty relation works out quite nicely. But then I think important to say here is that there are many ways you could construct quantities. This is a convenient one, and we will discover that it has nice properties that we like. There is no God given reason why this had to be the right thing. I can say more, but I don't want to take the time to do it, so ask in office hours. we're going to derive it twice soon and then later. The later version is better. So let me work out some examples. Or actually, I'm going to skip the examples in the interest of time. They're in the notes, and so they'll be posted on the web page. By the way, the first 18 lectures of notes are posted. I had a busy night last night. So I want to go back to this and ask a silly-- I wantto make some progress towards deriving this relation. in terms of the wave function the following way. Are we ever in a position to say intelligently that a particle-- that an electron is both hard and white? AUDIENCE: No. PROFESSOR: No, because being hard is a superposition of being black and white, right? It's not that we don't get too. It's that it doesn't make sense to do so. In general, being in a definite position means being in an extremely complex superposition. having different values for momentum. They claim that any function can be expressed as a superposition of states with definite momentum, right? Well, among other things a state with definite position, x0, can be written as asuperposition, 1 over 2pi integral dk. But in particular, it's clear that this is not-- this quantity can't be a delta function of k, because, if it were, this would be just e to the ikx. And that's definitely not a deltafunction. this doesn't work. We want some good definition of p given that we're working with a wave function which is a function of x. We have a couple of hints. Hint the first is that a wave-- we know that given a wave with wave number k, which is equal 2pi over lambda, is associated, according to de Broglie and according to Davisson-Germer experiments, to a particle. So having a particle-- a wave, with waveNumber k or wavelength Lambda associated particle with momentum p is equal to h bar k. a wave, a plane wave e to the iks, how do I get h bar k out of it? Note the following, the derivative with respect to x. Multiply by h bar, divide by i, derivative withrespect to x e to ikx. That's suggestive. And I can write this as pe to the ikX. So let's quickly check the units. What are the units of h bar? Momentum times length divided by length number momentum. question slightly differently. We've followed the de Broglie relations, and we've been led to the idea that using wave functions that there's some relationship between the momentum, the observable quantity that you measure with sticks, and meters, and stuff. So if this is supposed to be true in some sense, what is momentum have to do with a derivative? Momentum is about velocities, which is like derivatives with respect to time, right? Times mass. Mass times derivative with respectto time, velocity. And this ties into the most beautiful theorem in classical mechanics. discovered it, Emmy Noether. Noether, incidentally, was a mathematician. Ville went to her and was like, look, I'm trying to understand the notion of energy. And this guy down the hall, Einstein, he has a theory called general relativity about curved space times and how that has something to do with gravity. But it doesn't make a lot of sense to me, because I don't even know how to define the energy. So how do you define momentum and energy in this guy's crazy theory? algebra, looked at the problem and was like I don't even know what it means in classical mechanics. So she went back to classical mechanics and, from first principles, came up with a good definition of momentum, which turns out to underlie the modern idea of conserved quantities and symmetries. Noether tells us the following statement, to every symmetry-- and I should say continuous symmetry-- to every. symmetry is associated a conserved quantity. OK? So in particular, what do I mean by symmetry? Well, for example, translations. x goes to x plus some length l. This could be done for arbitrary length l or translation by this much. Professor: If the system has the same dynamics at one moment and a few moments later and, indeed, any amount of time later, if the laws of physics don't change in time, then there must be a conserved quantity called energy. So this is the first step, but this still doesn't tell us what momentum exactly has to do with a derivative with respect to space. We see that there's a relationship between translations and momentum conservation, but what's the relationship? So let's do this. translate by L. And what translate by L does is it takes f of x and it maps it to f of X minus L. So this is a thing that affects the translation. And why do I say that's a translation by L rather than minus L? Well, if you have some function like this, and it has a peak at 0, then after the translation, the peak is when x is equal to L. OK? So just to get the signs straight. So define this operation, which takes a function of X and translates it by L, but leaves it otherwise identical. This is a series that you should recognize, a particular Taylor series for a particular function. It's a Taylor expansion for the AUDIENCE: Exponential. e to the minus L derivative with respect to x f of x. Which is kind of awesome. So let's just check to make sure that this makes sense from dimensional grounds. So that's a derivative withrespect to x as units of 1 over 6. But I'm going to write this in the following suggestive way. This is equal to 1 times f of X minus L. Professor: We're going to do this all the time in quantum mechanics. We'll talk about it in more detail, but we're always going to define it in this fashion as a formal power series. Can you transform operators from one space to another? Professor: Oh, you totally can. But we'll come back to that when we talk about operators next time. But from this what is a derivative with respect to x mean? What does a derivative of x do? Well a derivative is a function of length, so this is dimensionless, so we can exponentiate it. to x is something that generates translations with respect to x through a Taylor expansion. If we have L be arbitrarily small, right? L is arbitrarily small. What is the translation by an arbitrarily small amount of f of x? Well, if L is arbitrary small, we can drop all the higher order terms, and the change is just Ldx. So the derivative withrespect to x is telling us about infinitesimal translations. But through Noether's theorem translations, in x are associated to conservation of momentum. So you shouldn't be so so. shocked-- it's really not totally shocking-- that in quantum mechanics, the derivative with respect to x is related to the momentum in some particular way. Translations are deeply connected to conservation of momentum. Transitional symmetry is deeply connected with conservation momentum. An infinitesimal translation is nothing but a derivative withrespect to position. Those are deeply linked concepts. But I didn't derive anything. I gave you no derivation whatsoever of the relationship between d dx and the momentum. Instead, I'm simply going to declare it. a priori did the world have to look like. Physics tells you this is a good model. And to the degree that it doesn't fit the data, it's wrong. This isn't something we derive. This is something we declare. We call it our model, and then we use it to calculate stuff, and we see if it fits the real world. Out, please, please leave. [LAUGHTER] I love MIT. I really do. [APPLAUSE] A state with a definite momentum has the property that, when you hit it with the operation associated with momentum, you get back the same function times a constant. This is a state which is equal to all others in the sense that it's a perfectly reasonable wave function, but it's more equal because it has a simple interpretation. If we have a state that's a superposition of different momentum and we act on it with a momentum operator, this gives us h bar k 1. So it changes which superposition we're talking about. We don't get back our same state. the momentum. And these coefficients are going to turn out to contain all the information about the probability of the system. This is the probability when norm squared that will measure the system to have momentum k1. So I think the current wave function is something like a superposition of 1/10 psi pirates plus 1 minus is 1/100 square root. To normalize it properly psi no pirates. And I'll leave you with pondering this probability. See you guys next time. [APPLAUSE] eyes, of foot, of eye, of brow. I see the antique pens do but express the beauty that you master now. So are all their praises but prophecies of this, our time. All you prefiguring. But though they had but diving eyes-- PROFESSOR: I was wrong about the probabilities. [LAUGHTER] CHRISTOPHER SMITH: But they had not skill enough you're worth to sing. [APPLAUSE] It's not over. You wait. your memory. Gainst death and all oblivious enmity shall you pace forth. Your praise shall still find room, even in the eyes of all posterity. So no judgment arise till you yourself judgment arise. You live in this and dwell in lover's eyes. May your day be filled with love and poetry. Whatever state you're in, we will always love you. Signed, Jack Florian, James [INAUDIBLE]. [LAUGHTER] PROFESSOR: Thank you, sir.