Ka-Yen: "I walked into MIT not knowing a single thing about nuclear energy" "I was like, I wish someone could have told me these things" "We're just kind of like-- it's a refresher. A couple of fun facts" "You guys are going to be starting up full cycle on Friday with really cool topics like stopping power" "There won't be a lot of crazy intense math because we just want to give you guys a break" "It's a very brief history in a nutshell" between 1895 to 1945, that's really cool people were developing nuclear science. So people like Madam Curie or like Fermi, et cetera. They were all designing this nuclear science, like they were developing it, which is pretty cool. Most of this development happened between 1939 and 1945. They've entered a phase of like, well, the war is over. Now what do we do with ourselves? So luckily we decided to redirect this science into using it for energy. In 1951, the first nuclear reactor to produce electricity was the experimental breeder reactor, the EDR1. The first nuclear powered submarine, the USS Nautilus, was launched in 1954. The real heyday of nuclear was actually between 1960 to 1975. People like Westinghouse were creating nuclear reactors. Currently, China, India, and South Korea, they are the main players in this game. They have 32 operate reactors operating at the moment, and have 20 more commissioned, like literally right now. Nuclear creates 75 times less carbon emission than coal does, and 35 times less than natural gas does. Nuclear power is able to provide a good baseload source. That means it can provide conserve energy at a really high level all the time. Other alternative forms of energy might be better for the environment, it might be safer, and things like that, but it's not really able to do this, right? Right? So this is why we kind of want to replace coal and natural gas with nuclear. About 21% of the reactors that are located and working in the United States are boiling water reactors. Light water reactors, or LWRs, are mostly broken up into two subcategories: boiling water reactor and pressurized water reactor. So how you guys can think about reactors is that honestly they're just kind of glorified steam turbines. So it's a really, really simple mechanism and we can walk through that right now. About what I've mentioned? Awesome. So now we'll talk a little bit about reactor types. the fuel core. So the fuel core is basically just a bunch of rods of uranium, sometimes it's clad in something like zirconium, and there's also control rods to help slow down the process. So uranium undergoes what? AUDIENCE: Fission. TA: Yes, fission. So what gets released during fission?AUDIENCE: Heat. TA. And? AUDience: Neutrons, awesome. So those three things are all flying around inside the reactor core at the moment. The heat obviously goes to create power. a second. But the neutrons come flying around. So those other neutrons can simulate other fissions, and the control rods are there to make sure that there's not too many fissions happening in the fuel core at a certain time. So this is just one loop of water, basically. So the water flows through the core and heats it up. It creates steam so the steam goes and spins a turbine. The turbine creates electricity. And it comes back and gets recondensed. That's literally it. The chances of leaking nuclear material into the environment exists. With BWRs there is a higher chance of leaking radioactive material. So that's one of the downsides of B WRs. Do you have a favorite nuclear power plant? Share your photos and videos with CNN iReport. Share your stories and videos of nuclear power plants at CNN iReporters. Visit CNN.com/sources for more nuclear news and stories from the U.S. and around the world, and follow us on Facebook and Twitter. The next kind of reactor that falls under the light water reactor category is the pressurized water reactors. So remember, BWRs comprise about 21% of the reactors in the United States. PWRs are actually more important, if you will, than B WRs. But they are functionally essentially the same, and it's just slightly more complicated. So over here we have our fuel core again, and here's the underside of a BWR. Like look at all those wires. I don't even know what they all do. But it's kind of insane. and again all it's doing is heating up water with its fission reactions. But this time this water is pressurized. So does anyone know why you would want to pressurize the water? Yeah? AUDIENCE: So it doesn't boil? TA: Yeah, exactly. So when you increase the pressure, you're also increasing the boiling point of the water. That allows you to function at even higher temperatures than if you're working with a BWR, which gives you more energy efficiency. the higher efficiency. But also the chance of leaking nuclear material into the violent becomes mitigated. Because you have two separate loops with the nuclear fuel being more isolated from the environment, if there is a breach between the condenser loop and the secondary loop, not a big deal. Nothing really bad happens. You'd have to have breaches in both the loops, which is very unlikely to happen. Yeah? AUDIENCE: What's the standard like operating temperature of these kinds of reactors? TA: I'm not completely sure, but if you Google it you should be able to find it very easily. OK. here is basically just showing that there are a lot of redundancy systems inside these reactors. We don't just have one single primary loop and if it fails, it fails. We actually have four at the same time, and this is just called the n minus two redundancy, something like that. So the next kind is something much cooler. It's got a heavy water reactor. Actually it's just a little bit cooler. But the main heavy water reactors that everyone can kind of think of on their minds is CANDU, which is the one that's located in Canada. Heavy water has a much lower absorption cross-section than light water does. This means that when neutrons are flying around in the reactor there is a chance of it hitting a fission product. But there's also a chance that the water that surrounds it will absorb that neutron. So if that neutron gets pulled out of the system you're not able to create any more fissions. This is actually kind of a bad thing because the whole point of nuclear reactors is to create heat and fission. So we don't want that neutron in the system. those neutrons to be absorbed. Because it's absorbing less-- because it has a chance of absorbing less neutrons as it undergoes its processes, you're actually able to use a lower enriched uranium. But the main downside is that, even though you're lowering your fuel costs, deuterium is really expensive. It's about 1,000 or so dollars per kilogram, which is kind of ridiculous because a kilogram of water is really not much at all, you know? So even though you're counteracting the lower fuel costs with higher water cost. Also, because you're using your reactor with lower enriched uranium, you actually have to change out your fuel more often. That fuel gets spent more quickly and I'll describe that in just a second, and therefore you just have to keep replacing it more often than you would for a normal light water reactor. Oh, I forgot to mention, but aside from that, everything else with the heavy water reactors and the PWRs, they're the same mechanisms. mentioned you guys before. But instead, now there's two little chunks of extra material. So do you guys know what the difference is between fissile, fertile, and fissionable material is? Cool. All right, so all right, let's start with fissiles material. Fissile material is basically just the material that is willing to undergo fission with a thermal neutron. So basically when the thermal neutron gets absorbed by this fissable material, it's going to undergo a fission. Makes a lot of sense, right? plutonium 239. There's four in total, but those are the two most important ones. So this is the main fuel that is inside a nuclear reactor, but it's not all just U235. So an example of fissionable material that's inside the other reactors at the same time is U238. If a U238 absorbs a thermal neutron, it is not going to do much. But if it absorbs a neutron of about like, I would say, like 2 meV, then it's more willing to undergo fission. U238 absorbs a neutron, becomes U239, undergoes a beta decay to come neptunium. U238 then undergoes one more Beta decay to become the beautiful plutonium 239. If we start with thorium 232 instead, becomes thorium 233. This is another fissile material by the way, through a series of beta decays. So that's what breeder reactors are doing. They're adding extra chunks of uranium 238 andextra chunks of thorium232 into the reactor. If one of the neutrons-- so imagine-- if you're looking at the little fuel core, there's a bunch of neutrons that are flying around and heat and other isotopes and things like that. Some neutrons will go and create other fissions with the material that's hanging out in the red. But other neutrons might escape, and when they escape, instead of going into the water dissipating, they instead create more fissile material. So you can understand why this is a kind of an attractive idea, is that you're creating your own fuel. In the 60s we discovered that we have a lot more uranium ore than we thought we did. And after that discovery, people were not nearly as interested in breeder reactors. The primary objective for these new designs of reactors is to make them cleaner and safer and more cost effective. Keep them robust yet sustainable, and also make them more resistant to people being able to divert materials into creating nuclear weapons. So yeah. Here are the six kinds of generation four reactor types that were deemed to be the most promising. fast reactors, very high temperature gas reactors, and supercritical water-cooled reactors. "I don't know all that much about these and I don't want to like spew out information that might potentially be false," he says. "A lot of people in Mike's group are working on molten salt reactors so you guys can go ahead and ask them about that" "Hopefully he will post the slides online and you guys just click it and there's a awesome source all about these different kinds of reactors" it all just theory? TA: I'm pretty sure that they were just kind of proof of concept stage right now. Like there aren't any that are producing electricity in the United States, at least. In the rest of world, there's only about 440 reactors spread around 30 countries and produces only 14% of the global electricity. The main players are still, you would imagine, coal and natural gas. So this is actually even worse in the rest-of-the-world. The main reason why we're a little bit hesitant to start using more nuclear power is because of safety issues. None of us can argue that nuclear is like 100% safe. It actually does have some dangers associated with it. After a nuclear accident you can see a pretty steep decline in the amount of nuclear reactors that are being commissioned. And again Fukushima, once again, with the number of reactors being commissioned after the accident just declines dramatically. The main things that are holding us back is just social, economic, and therefore like government hesitance to use nuclear power. The Three Mile Island reactor is a PWR located in Pennsylvania. During this time it underwent a core meltdown. The cause of this is just the fact that there was some kind of mechanical or electrical system that prevented coolant water from being pumped into the primary system. So because there wasn't enough water coming to cool up the core, the core began to overheat. So as the temperature of the core rises, the pressure also rises. So they notice this and they're like, oh, shoot, we got to fix that. A valve in a nuclear reactor became stuck. The valve was open and water was leaking out of the primary loop. When the water leaked, the pressure dropped and the reactor shut off coolant pumps. The reactor continued to operate again but the valve was still open and there was still water leaking out. It became stuck and they didn't realize that it became stuck because their equipment and their instrumentation wasn't able to detect that. So they shut the valve down and the pressure was released. But the valve remained open. the core is getting hotter, but then they also took out the water that is usually used to cool the reactor core, so again it's also getting hotter. So this combination of events led to a core meltdown. So the core melted down, the reactor wasn't able to operate anymore. But luckily at Three Mile Island there was containment that prevented radioactive isotopes from leaving the system. But they realized that they didn't get much dose at all. They collected about a total of 1 milligram more dose than usual. So to put that in perspective, an x-ray is six milligrams. quite realized this, but the coolant pumps in the reactor were also powered by the nuclear reactor being generated. So that was unfortunate, and they realized that this is a bad thing. So the reactor starts to go supercritical. So when they realize that the reactor was creating a lot more fissions than it should have been creating, they decide to insert the control rods. So thank goodness we have these high absorption control rods to slow things down, right? For some reason, I'm not completely sure why they did this. that caused the first explosion. Then, for some reason like a couple of minutes later, there's a second explosion. They're not completely sure why the second explosion happened. It could have been like building up helium or just a ton of other fission reactions. There was a lot of radioactive isotopes being spread into the environment. So that kind of stunk, but it did stop the whole reaction. Because a super critical mass was all blown apart, it was no longer super critical. It was fine. 28 highly exposed reactor staff and emergency workers die from this radiation or from thermal burns during this time. Officials also believe that there is about 7,000 cases of thyroid cancer that occurred because of Chernobyl. They're pretty sure it was Chernobyl because these are all cases that happened in people who are less than 18 years old. No one really lives near Chernobyl at the moment. It's kind of been deemed unlivable because these radioactive isotopes literally went everywhere in this environment and it's not safe to live there. we see that there are animals coming back now now. If you look on NationalGeographic.com there's like little deer roaming around Chernobyl. But it's been about-- how long has it been, like 30, 40 years? People aren't advised to live here still. So Chernobyl was terrible. Questions? Yeah? Audience: What does it mean for a reactor to go supercritical? TA: Oh, yeah, sorry. When I say supercritical it just means that there's way too many fission reactions happening. Next reactor accident that we were alive for, which is cool, was Fukushima Daiichi. This is a very similar problem, as you can see that in all these instances of the reactor incidents, it's just kind of like the fuel core was misbehaving and we weren't able to get enough coolant water to it. So following the earthquake, these coolant pumps broke. They're like, oh, that's OK. What we can do is we have backup generators to continue running the pumps. We're all good. The reactors at Fukushima Daiichi began to explode. There was radioactive isotopes being spread out all around the country. No one was directly hurt by burns or radioactive exposure. Reactor accidents are actually pretty rare. If you think about it, it's been over 100 years since the first nuclear reactor was built in the United States. It's been a long time since there's been an accident at a nuclear power plant in the U.S. since the mid-20th century. That's the last time there was a nuclear accident. about 60 or 70 years, we have 440 reactors operating around the country. There's three main accidents that have happened. But because these are the things that people get ingrained into their mind, people think that nuclear reactors are incredibly dangerous. And that's why we have this social hesitance, which is why we aren't able to get enough government funding and why there's all these bureaucracy loopholes to jump through. Makes sense? Yeah. Another issue that's associated with nuclear power is nuclear waste. So what in the world do we do with it? The main issue is, what do we do with all this material? So this material that comes out is pretty radioactive and it's also incredibly hot, so it can be dangerous if someone decides to come and eat it. The primary way of disposing of the spent fuel is putting it into spent fuel pools. This is an OK solution, except for the fact that, again, we just have way too much spent fuel to be able to do this. So the next solution was something called dry cask storage. Yucca Mountain is the primary push by the U.S. to find a deep geological repository somewhere in the United States. People in Nevada weren't happy about this, they're like, why are we getting tossed on nuclear waste? We don't even have nuclear reactors in Nevada. There was a lot of opposition. And because of the social opposition there was government opposition and many loopholes we had to jump through, and so it was just becoming a huge disaster. It's been abandoned, as you can see from this lovely Google picture. figured out all that well. There is one other kind of way of dealing with nuclear waste, which is repurposing. So basically you take the spent fuel and you chemically separate out any material that could be continued to be used. This is actually something that France and other places in Europe, and Russia and Japan, they use repurpose quite a lot. For some reason the United States doesn't do it. It's not economically sound. So yeah. You guys have any questions about anything I've mentioned, about deposition of nuclear waste? Almost done. The economics of nuclear power is actually a really complicated topic and it changes depending on who you talk to. Building reactors takes billions of dollars. It also takes tons of time. The main reason why we can't get nuclear up and running is because it's a huge chunk of money, like I mentioned before, it takes a while to get your profit back. If you look at this chart over here, which is breaking up the cost of nuclear, you can see that nuclear is not nearly as economic of a source of electricity generation as any other of these ones I mentioned. energy per kilowatt hour, I believe-- gigawatt hour? Kilowatt Hour. You can see nuclear, coal, and natural gas. So this giant white chunk over here refers to fuel. So if you can look at nuclear power, the majority of cost actually doesn't come from nuclear fuel at all. It's just about $0.01 per kiloatt hour. As compared to natural gas, which the majority. of the costs of electricity actually come from the fuel. other forms of electricity. People buy the electricity that's cheapest, not necessarily the Electricity that's best for our grandchildren or something like that. Yeah, so that's why nuclear power isn't more of a thing, and that ends my pretty lengthy slide show. So do you guys have any questions about anything I mentioned? If you guys are interested about any of these topics, I recommend going to NRC.gov. They have a lot of really cool information. That's basically where I got the majority of my information for the slide show, and it is a reliable source. NRC.gov with less grains of salt than usual. Or if one of these things really piqued your interest, you guys can take 22.04, which is really cool class that's offered here I think this spring, and if not next spring. But basically it's called nuclear power society. It's taught by a guy named Scott Kemp. He talks about all these things and in a lot of detail and slower. So yeah, cool. So thank you guys so much for coming. I know you guys could have slept an extra hour.