Michael Short picks up where he left off in 22.01. He talks about radiation damage and nuclear materials. The course is available for free on MIT OpenCourseWare. To make a donation or to view additional materials from hundreds of MIT courses, visit MIT Open CourseWare at ocw.mit.edu. Your support will help MIT Open courseWare continue to offer high-quality educational resources for free. Back to Mail Online home. Back To the page you came from."What's all this nuclear materials?" asks Michael Short. into things like voids or loops and super structures that have end up having macroscopic effects on material properties. The amount of energy it would take to actually cause this material to fail is a measure of toughness. The strength of the material is how much stress you can put in until it starts to either plastically deform or it hits its UTS, ultimate tensile strength. And finally, stiffness is more of a response function, so it's how much does it deform in relation to how muchstress you put into it. So the basic mechanism of radiation damage is like you might imagine. Let's say this green particle is a neutron or a heavy ion or a proton or an electron or anything. Anything that's energetic enough to cause atomic displacement. So as that neutron or whatever enters, it will strike some of the atoms in this perfect crystal, creating what's called a primary knock on atom, or PKA, for short. And then that neutron and the released PKA will go on to hit more and more atoms, resulting in what we call a damage cascade. A measure called DPA, or displacements per atom, is a simple measure of how many times has every atom left. It's not actually a unit of damage, and I'll be giving a talk at MRS, the materials research conference tomorrow, railing against this DPA unit. What is a DPA? A DPA measures the number of times that each atom has moved out of its original site, but it has nothing to do with how many time it stays. That's it, though. The DPA is a simple formula that I think you guys may recognize. It's an energy dependent flux times another type of cross-section that we call the damage displacement cross- section, or sigma D. So with what you know 22.01, you can understand the basic unit of radiation damage. But it says nothing about where they end up, and that's the really interesting part about radiation material science. Even though they were displaced, and would be counted as part of the DPA, or the radiation damage dose, the net effect on the crystal material is nothing. energy E and imparting kinetic energy T to another struck atom? That comes right from-- remember our treatment-- I think I've drawn this probably 50 times now. Our hollow cylinder treatment of a charged particle with charge little ze interacting with a particle a big ZE at some impact parameter B. We wanted to know well, for all possible approach paths, the area of this hollow circle, or the probability that this particular approach path is taken, is just the area here 2pi b db. the number of displacements done, for each one of these reactions. And there are simple models, there are mostly linear models for-- if a particle comes in with energy E, leaves with energy T, how many displacements happen? It's a pretty simple linear piece-wise model. But I want to get the idea of DPA versus damage. They're two very different things, and they're often equated. Much like the material properties of strength, ductility, hardness, and toughness are equated in colloquial speech, but that's absolutely wrong. damage cascade to happen. What sort of factors would affect the speed at which these different defects end up finding each other? What could you vary about a material or its environment to change the speed of these atomic diffusion jumps? Temperature. The dose rate, The temperature determines diffusivities. It also can change phases or crystal arrangements, like for the case of anything iron-based. It can take years for these defects to diffuse, to cluster up, and to form these super structures, and end up causing the damage that can lead to material property degradation. Grain boundaries, dislocations, all of those defects that we talked about last time, just to refresh your memory of what those are. We have been talking about zero dimensional defects like vacancies. We saw an example of a two dimensional defect, known as a grain boundary, where you can see this line. And then micro structure. Things that are bigger than on the order of atoms. The rate at which those neutrons come in can change the rates at which the defects cluster up. between different arrangements of atoms. And there can be three dimensional defects. Like inclusions of some separate face sitting in the material. Like the manganese sulfide we found in the Alcator fusion reactors power rotor. The movement in clustering of those defects can be quite strongly influenced by the presence of all those other defects. So again, the DPA actually tells us this part of radiation damage. What it doesn't tell us is everything else, and it's the stuff that happens here that can tell us will our materials fail in nuclear reactors? A 30% difference in the rate at which neutrons arrived at the nickel, and they get the same result in void swelling, at two and a half times the DPA. So if you want to answer the question, well, how much dose does it take to reach 3% swelling in nickel? Can't. Not just ranting against it, no I am, but I'm doing so with evidence, so it's justified. It's a very strong dose rate effect for material damage. answer that question, you don't have enough information. Even if you say, how much dose does it take with one of the neutrons at 600 Celsius in this one reactor? You can't answer that question. And a lot of the rest of nuclear materials data looks something like this. Now, I don't want you to worry about what the axes say. They're not readable because they're not important. What I do want to know is what's the quality of this data set you see? The best we can say how long it will take to get materials to the end of their useful life is anywhere from 10 DPA in light water reactors to 500 DPA for TerraPower's traveling wave reactor. So the trick is doing these experiments is extremely difficult and expensive. Just throwing something near the MIT reactor for a month, because we did this, we took a few hundred milligrams of copper, aluminum, and nickel. That cost $40,000, and that did about 0.002 DPA, or about the dose that you'd receive in a normal power reactor in one day. do right now is to stick them in a reactor called BOR-60 in Russia. Russia's got a fleet of sodium cooled fast reactors that can get you 25 DPA per year. And if your reactor is going to go to 500 DPA, you have to know whether or not your materials will survive. So what investor isgoing to be like, all right, here's $10 billion, but I can wait 20 years for a return on investment. No. I can. wait 20 years to start building the reactor, which means 40 years for a return on investment. Chances are, if someone's got $10 billion to give, they're going to be dead by the time they get a return. So what we really need to know is what is the full population of every single type of defect in an irradiated material? That's what I mean by damage. Did I show you guys this movie yet? The orange one? We've talked about vacancies in an abstract sense, but this is a movie of one of them actually moving about on the surface of germanium. You can see it in real time. The only reason these slides aren't up yet is because they're 300 megabytes, and I didn't have the bandwidth to upload that from my house. Now that I'm on campus, I can get a 300 meg presentation up there because it's full of movies. What sort of things could happen to these defects? So radiation produces all these crazy defects, then the DPA description is over. What could happen next? [INTERPOSING VOICES] MICHAEL SHORT: Sorry, Jared, and then-- yeah. case scenario, but that is indeed what happens in the end, and I'll show you some pictures of that actually happened. A void is nothing but a bunch of vacancies or a pocket of vacuum or gas in a material, and it all has to start with these single vacancies. As they cluster together, they reached this threshold in terms of free energy where putting a few of them together is not quite energetically favorable. We've actually seen these clusters or voids diffusing, so it's not like vacancies alone are the only thing that moves. diffusing, mostly in one dimension, but what you're seeing here is a TEM, or transmission electron microscope image, of one dimensional diffusion of a vacancy cluster. If you get a little bit of gas to stabilize that pocket of vacuum, then that pressure differential goes down and that void becomes a bubble, and that bubble is more stable. The other problem too is that most materials generate helium when you irradiate them with neutrons. Did we go over the what's called the N alpha cross-section? Does that sound familiar to anyone?  helium atoms have nowhere to go, they find the easiest place to sit, that happens to be pockets of vacuum. And what that actually does is stabilizes those voids so the curve I showed you back here. This is the case of free energy for a vacuum pocket of void, and that free energy gets lower and lower as you start to fill that void with gas. So as the voids fill with gas, they become more and more stable, and a lot of materials generate their own gas. Dislocation buildup can be caused by radiation. Normally, you would have to deform a material to create and move dislocations. But when you apply radiation, you can just create dislocational.direction. This is kind of cool. You've got a dislocation source right here. Every one of those lines you see is a dislocated, and you can see it's spiraling out and ejecting dislocation from this one little spot. Any combination of any combination of. small clusters can collapse into dislocations or the stress induced from irradiating things can cause more stress that can move more dislocation. You create what's called this network forest of dislocational that makes things a lot harder to deform. The trick that we didn't talk about yet, is when dislocated from different directions collide, they get stuck. And when they get trapped, you shift. And so all the time, you're creating dislocatives that are being emitted from different places and colliding with each other. the balance from slip to fracture, which means, like Jared said, it's easier to just break something, rather than plastically deform it. An increase in the Young's Modulus. Because if you remove some of the compliance from the material or make it stiffer by injecting all sorts of different defects, it takes more stress to impart the same strain. That might not be a bad thing on its own. Your materials get stronger, that sounds like a good thing, right? Not always because it doesn't just come as stiffening. Dislocation movement is irreversible. You can't just snap it back when you relieve the stress. By making something stronger and stiffer, you make it more difficult for those dislocations to start moving. And you can do that by throwing any defect in their way. Since radiation creates pretty much any and all defects, it's a great way to stiffen and strengthen the material. If something is stiffer and stronger, then the stress strain curve would be drawn more like that. goes up by one atomic position. Then you've got pieces of this dislocation that are not in this preferential slip plane, and they get stuck. So all of a sudden you go from a completely gliding-- or what we call glissile dislocation-- to one that's stuck, or sessine, those are the actual material science words that we use. And what it ends up leading to is a strong loss in ductility. At the same time as things get stronger and stiffer, they tend to get much less ductile. The fuel stayed down in the reactor with no way to pull it out. This is the reason why radiation damage is such an important field of study. You might not know anything has happened until you shut the reactor down and go to take out the fuel and realize that you can't because everything is as brittle as glass. And the scientists were freaking out, because only they knew that all of the radioactive materials came from a reactor that shut down in 1999 on one side of Kazakhstan. So they hired the cheapest truck drivers to go on the bumpy roads. the metal that all those guys thought was going to be ductile like metal was more brittle than glass. And any sort of bump would cause just complete shattering of this metal and catastrophic release of radioactive material. So this took them-- let's see-- I think Kazakhstan is smaller than the US. So who here has done a cross-country trip? How long it take you? AUDIENCE: Six days from Seattle to here. MICHAEL SHORT: OK, so this trip took them 13 days because they went slow. problems and no release of radioactive material. Pretty cool. What you want to happen is for dislocations to move on the easiest planes. And so you actually end up getting deformation in what's called slip plains, or the easiest directions for things to deform. And without going into any of the math or atomistics, I just want to show you some examples pulled out of, again, the fusion reactor. So this is a bar of some metal, some face-centered cubic metal, as you pull on it, like this, it will actually deform at about a 45 degree angles. is a piece of rotor steel from the same Alcator rotor where we found that inclusion. We were pulling it in this direction, and look what formed. All of these slip bands at 45 degree angles, showing you that just because you pull in something in one direction, doesn't mean it deforms in that direction. It deforms and little slices in the direction that dislocations can move the easiest. You get a mixture of bending and rotation to make it look like the bar is bending uniformly straight, but on the microscale, it's not. way to the outside of the material, which is pretty cool, and this is the process that you want to happen. Anything in the way of those dislocations, you don't start forming these slip bands, and you'd make it more preferable that the thing will just break and fracture. To show you some extreme examples of slip, that's when you have to go nano. So these are some pillar compression test that used a focused ion beam, which we will be using to top off our study of electron interactions with matter. and very weird compression. Not actually weird, if you know what's going on. There's lots more neat examples of this. If you don't push too hard, you can actually see these perfectly symmetrical slip planes at 45 degree angles to the axis of compression. And this is what you want to happen to nuclear materials because you're really trying to balance this between slip and fracture towards the direction of slip. That means that something will deform a little bit before it just shatters like those channel boxes from the Russian reactor. A phenomenon called pileup occurs when dislocations get in each other's way. This happens both near otherdislocations and near any other defect that gets in the way, like a grain boundary. For smaller materials you end up with more of this pileup, and they tend to be of a fair bit stronger, and a fair lot-- they can be less ductile, with some exceptions. And this ends up shifting, and this is called a pileup. It's like a traffic jam. what we call the ductile-brittle transition temperature. This is the property that people worry about for reactor pressure vessels. You would want the pressure vessel, which in cases the entire core of the reactor, to always be ductile. The worst possible situation is on the absolute last day of operation at the coldest temperature it could possibly be. So normally you'd be able to bend a coin, or if it's a one yen coin, you can bite through it. Not when immersed in liquid nitrogen. that it's got a certain amount of energy absorption capability, toughness, at a certain temperature. The way you test ductile-brittle transition temperature is what's called a Charpy impact test. It's probably the highest tech, lowest tech test I've seen. You simply hit things with a hammer. A very well calibrated, precise hammer. You have these little bars with a notch in them. The notch is to make sure that acts as a stress concentrator, and you know where the breaks going to happen. these out and you hit them with a very well calibrated hammer. And you can measure by actually turning this dial and letting the hammer turn it as it moves through the material. So it breaks right through thematerial, in this case, it's in a quenched or brittle condition. So what you can see is that if the hammer were to move through air with absolutely no drag, it would come back to the zero position. If they had encountered some resistance, like with a piece of steel in the way, it then measures the amount of energy in joules that piece of steel absorbs from the hammer blow. The larger that is, the better. By doing this test at a number of different temperatures, you can recreate this ductile-brittle transition temperature curve. So they'll take a few Charpy coupons, they will test them at, let's say, every 25 Celsius, get a bunch of points, draw the line through the points, and decide where is the material brittle. At what temperature will it become brittle? done by the same awkward feller who likes to stand there and not breathe, but you'll notice a very different result of this test. Doesn't look like it, but if you actually look at how much energy was absorbed, much, much higher. So something like 18 times more energy, and you can qualitatively see the difference between these two conditions by looking at the fractured surfaces. Something that's ductile would tear more like taffy, where something that's brittle would cleave or break in half much more smoothly. temperature curves, is this not just this part that you're worried about, it's that part. So even at high temperatures, things get less ductile. So it's a combination of temperature and number of defects. And if either one of these criteria fails, if you become too brittle at low temperature, or your total ductility at high temperature goes down too much, that's the end of life of your reactor vessel. This is one of the biggest problems in life extensions of light water reactors. is why. You have to be absolutely sure that your vessel, your primary containment, will survive. And we're not so sure because well, we jump to the part of the video that's got the Charpy coupons. We ran out. We only plan to put these vessels in service for 40 years, and folks put 40 years worth of these coupons, plus some extras, in the reactor vessel. What do you do when you run out of coupons? Anyone have any ideas, because I'm sure the industry would love to hear them. Vessel is made of thick carbon steel with a very thin liner of stainless steel. Stainless steel is there to prevent corrosion from the reactor water. If you were to take something out from the inside of the vessel, the part that gets the most damage, you'd be taking out some of the stainless steel, which is a problem. Any sort of chunk that is missing is where a crack is going to preferentially form, so you would weaken that vessel by taking a piece out. Michael Short: Can you make Charpy coupon or coupons that are similar to the status of the ones most recently taken out of the vessel, and then just put them in? That's what they're doing. So that's absolutely right. You've just probably recreated a year's worth of licensing work and ideas and in a class. But I just want to get back to Charlie's idea because that's what I think has to happen is you'd like to be able to take a piece out from the actual vessel and run a test on it. Every kind of defect takes energy to create. You either have to raise the temperature of a material or in our case, irradiate it. The energy of those incoming neutrons that bounces around different atoms and creates all these different types of defects. So those defects are storing energy in the material. And so if you think about how much energy does it take to destroy something, it would have to be the energy it's already stored plus the energy that you put into it during the destruction. The test can reach the failure energy. What if you could measure the stored energy? What if there was a way to know how many of each of those defects there actually were in a material? Well, we know there is. It's called differential scanning color imagery. It is a way of measuring the change in heat capacity of a material, where you take two small furnaces and apply a lot of heat to both of them. And you look at the difference in the amount of heat you have to put in to keep the two at the same temperature. can extort per degree Kelvin. If this material's got a bunch of defects already in it, then you should release that defect energy by heating it and that would take a little less energy to heat it up. There's a lot of problems with calorimetry, so we're actually using what's called nanocalorimetric. We're doing this process on nanograms of material and seeing if you can irradiate something and measure its stored energy. If you could, you could take a tiny little razor blade, take out the smallest sliver of the vessel-- smaller than a grain of sand. Not enough to cause a crack-- enough to measure its storage energy. Snipes are real. You pretty much have to be British to know it, because they hunt them there for sport, and apparently, they're delicious. That's actually where we get the term snipe because the actual size of the sniper compared to the sniper is about that. If you can shoot that bird, if you can get that shot, you're a snipe hunter. You're not looking for a bird that doesn't exist. It's what we call the ultimate snipe hunt. with a gun, you are an expert marksman and deserve the delicious and tiny treat that you've then blown apart with your bullet. So you can you know rain bird dust on whatever meal you've already prepared. That's what I like in finding these radiation damage defects too. Most defects are very, very small, and it turns out that-- first of all, the resolution of the screen is funny. I think I know how to fix that. Clone the screen and then jump back to presenter mode. Eugene Wigner and Leo Szilard said radiation stores energy by neutron collisions like cold working and amorphization. So we've dug up this original memo from the 40s, and said, let's do this for everything. Every defect has its unique amount of energy that it stores and creating it in some different amount of eV per defect. We've done some molecular dynamics simulations to show that this amount ofenergy stored is pretty pretty. It's a pretty big deal. When you irradiate something, we predict that it stores about 2% of its energy in radiation defense. So if you know the number of neutrons that hit, and you know that the amount of energy per neutron, you know how much you're looking for. You know what your signal should be. And to jump through to the whole idea of differential scanning calorimetry, it's like what I drew here, but a lot more legible. You simply heat two materials, one of which contains your sample, measure their temperature. The researchers used a DSC, or nano differential scanning calorimeter, that can heat about 10,000 times. The problem is that DSC induces a lot of artifacts in the signal that we couldn't separate from the noise. The bad news is that when you normalize all these curves, you get something that you can't tell if I drew it or my son drew it. Looks suspiciously like the doodles that he does, not scientific data, the researchers say. times faster than a traditional DSC. So you can get your energy out from smaller materials way faster than these artifacts can manifest themselves. Every one of these peaks here is going to correspond to one type of defect that's released at a certain temperature. And by extrapolating to a zero heating rate, you should know which type of defects they are. And if you know which defects you have and how many of each one, you know the full defect properties and material,. You should know it's material properties. Because we already know if you have this many dislocations, it's this brittle. It actually fits on a chip. There's one that we put our material on, and one as a reference that we both put in the accelerator being irradiated at the same time. This is what they actually look like. The scale bar here is 100 microns, and that transparent spot is a little bit of aluminum that we vapor deposited onto the calorimeter. Right there. That whole thing just went from zero to 450c. That pulse right there. It slowed down by a factor of 1,000. And so the way this process works, is we take our DSC chip, we put a mask over it. a millisecond. And the reason it took a second is because I've slowed down the video by 4,000 or by 5,000 times, and that little pulse of heat actually released some of the defect energy. We were able to see very clearly, the first time we heated the sample, this extra area corresponds to some sort of energy release. We then heated that same sample a whole bunch of times and made sure that it was always the same, which meant we had a fully relaxed material. The heating is so fast that the defects don't even have time to show up. We can go much, much smaller and just take out tiny pieces of the vessel and get the same information as you would from a Charpy test but on the nanoscale. So the question then is, where is the defect fingerprints? Where are those individual defects that we were looking for? Well, I think they're just popping up right here. The reason for that is we picked a very fast heating rate for our experiments. to find each other, annihilate, and release their stored energy. We need to repeat the experiments at some lower temperatures, see what the peaks are, but if you go too low, you end up getting a lot of noise in your signal. So we're just at the very first experimental stage of trying to see can we extend reactor lifetimes. But for now, it actually shows some sort of a trend, so it's just enough justification for us to buy one of these nanocalorimeters and start looking for real. we keep our reactors running in about two hours. I think that's the most compact introduction to nuclear materials I can possibly give you. As far as is it actually a line? Is it a curve? I am not as brave or stupid as some of the other folks that will draw an arbitrary shaped line through a single data point. So I'm not drawing a trend line yet. Yeah, any other questions? Yeah? AUDIENCE: Is it-- or I guess you're making the assumption that one little spot in the reactive pressure vessel to say what the rest of the vessel has been exposed to? MICHAEL SHORT: Oh, not at all. doing Charpy coupons of one place, which is what we do now, you can get a map. We don't have that information now, but if you take pieces from all over the vessel, then you get an actual 3D map. When some type of defect gets high enough in temperature that it goes from stuck to mobile, and as that moves, it encounters anything else. How do you know? You don't. You make measurements like these. Any other questions? Yeah? The properties of the vessel are highly dependent on, not just its composition, but the heat treatment that went to make it. If you heat that vessel, you both remove the radiation damage and remove the strengthening put in by the forging and heating process. So you would have, if-- again, if you let's say, replace the vessel you have a new reactor. It will react with all the other defects nearby, decimating the population of that defect and slightly depressing that of the others. the vessel too much, it's no longer a code stamp vessel. Pretty tricky spot that we're in, huh? But we're trying to science our way out of it. I don't want to keep you longer, but I'll open on Thursday with a little story about how mass attenuation coefficients can get you out of apartheid South Africa. I'm serious. And then we'll move into dose and biological effects. It's a couple minutes after. Well, it was just a few minutes.