Chess has been known as a tool of military strategy, a metaphor for human affairs, and a benchmark of genius. Our earliest records of chess are in the 7th century, but legend tells that the game’s origins lie a century earlier. Supposedly, when the youngest prince of the Gupta Empire was killed in battle, his brother devised a way of representing the scene to their grieving mother. Set on the 8x8 ashtapada board used for other popular pastimes, a new game emerged with two key features: different rules for moving different types of pieces and a single king piece whose fate is decided by the king. The game was originally known as chaturanga– a Sanskrit word for "four divisions" After the 7th century Islamic conquest of Persia, chess was introduced to the Arab world. Medieval trade along the Silk Road carried the game to East and Southeast Asia, where many local variants developed. In China, chess pieces were placed at intersections of board squares rather than inside them, as in the native strategy game. And historian al-Mas’udi considered the game a testament to human free will compared to games of chance. By 1000 AD, the game had become part of courtly education. Chess was used as an allegory for different social classes performing their proper roles. The relatively weak piece of advisor was recast as the more powerful queen– perhaps inspired by the recent surge of strong female leaders. This change accelerated the game’s pace, and the 15th century saw it cohering into the form we know today. In Japanese shogi, captured pieces could be used by the opposing player. With the Enlightenment era, the game moved from royal courts to coffeehouses. Chess was now seen as an expression of creativity, encouraging bold moves and dramatic plays. The emergence of formal competitive play in the late 19th century meant that strategic calculation would eventually trump dramatic flair. Today, chess software is capable of consistently defeating the best human players. But just like the game they’ve mastered, these machines are products of human ingenuity. And perhaps that same ingenuity will guide us out of this apparent checkmate.