Professor Donald Kagan: We were examining Sparta, the most important, I think, of the early poleis. And I was describing the formal constitution of the Spartans, having mentioned the kings and the gerousia. The council of elders consisting of twenty-eight elected men over sixty and the two kings to create a body of thirty. Then there is the Spartan Assembly which consists of all the adult male Spartan citizens, and as in most states, it really originated from the idea of having the fighting men participate in decisions. mentioning that that assembly--you want to distinguish that assembly from what I'll describe shortly about the Athenian Assembly. In this assembly, it is true that all adult male Spartans were participants, and let me also say that they came to the meeting dressed in their military uniform. When a question was put to the Spartans, the way they responded was by shouting and banging on their shields. Whereupon, the presiding official would try to determine which side had the loudest noise. It's like a voice vote in one of our own meetings, only a little bit more colorful. It looks as though the debates in the assembly were probably infrequent. Some scholars go far too far in suggesting that there never was a debate. There are debates reported to us in Thucydides, which make it perfectly clear that they did. But it is worth pointing out that there is no evidence that there was ever a debate at the assembly in the first century BC, as some scholars have suggested. It's possible that the gerousia and the kings, in other words, the upper groups in society, if they agreed there would be no need to go. that so far as our information goes, the only people who spoke at those assemblies were the kings, the gerousia, or a group of people I haven't mentioned to you yet. In short, the average Spartan did not ever speak in the assembly, it appears. So it's not a democratic assembly, even though every single citizen is there, if he wants to be. Let me turn now to the ephors. These, according to Spartan tradition, were invented somewhat late in the development of the Spartan constitution. They were, in a certain sense, the overseers. was to keep watch on the kings and to see that the kings didn't do anything improper, illegal, irreligious, or anything of that kind. Some scholars have focused on that and suggested that, at least originally, that was what their main function was. I think by the time the Spartans appear to us in history, let us say late in the sixth century and fifth century, the ephors don't do that. I mean, they still have the technical constitutional requirement to do that, but that's not what they're up too. might be an offer of an alliance or it might be an order to do something or else war would follow, or a negotiation for peace, any of those things, first they would come to the ephors, of which there were five. I would say, in most cases, they would, unless it was very, very serious, give some sort of answer to it. But when it involved something fundamental like war and peace or alliances, then they would have to go to the assembly to get their approval. Aristotle tells us that the ephors were just any Joe Spartan, that they were ordinary people, not distinguished in any way. The idea was to sort of have a representation of the ordinary Spartan to carry on the functions that I have talked about. On the other hand, they were given the responsibility of seeing that the kings were in line and they had various techniques or various policies and processes which had them make judgments. They could go to Delphi and ask the god, if they were right in thinking something was wrong. If they came back the kings would be put on trial. about this accidental element in who becomes an ephor. All the Spartiates that there are, whether they are ordinary citizens, all the way up through king, are a small minority of all the people who are under the control of the Spartans. So, whatever the mixed character of the constitution was, when you look at the whole of Laconia and its possessions, it is very much an oligarchy. The Spartans normally will like to see other states oligarchically governed. They won't like democracies or any form of autocracy which in Greece typically took the form of tyranny. ancient Greeks referred to as the Spartans and their allies, which modern scholars have come to call the Peloponnesian League. It's an imprecise term because some of the members of the--let me say a better term for it would be the Spartan alliance, which is what pretty much the Greeks called it. Well, how did it come to exist? Again, as in most things in Greek history, the beginnings are shrouded in legend and are not absolutely clear, he says. Around 570 B.C. the Spartans suffered a defeat in the region of Arcadia. They defeated the town of Tegea, which is located just to the north of Laconia. It looks as though at that point, that somebody in Sparta came up with a bright idea which changed the nature of the Spartan situation, and also introduced something new into the Greek world at the same time. The Spartans had been successful apparently in turning around, to some considerable degree their defeat back in the seventh century. It's a very important state for the Spartans, not just because it's the neighbor right to the north of them, but because remember what I told you, if you want to get to Mycenae from Sparta you can't go across those mountains. So, its strategic importance is very great. The Spartans got into this war with Tegea and they claimed to have discovered the bones of the great Homeric hero, Orestes and taken it away. Also, there was a legend that maybe they propagated that showed up in some poetry we have. connect these Dorian Spartans with the legends of the great men of the Achaean world described by Homer. King Cleomenes who was one of the aggressive Spartan rulers who expanded the power of Sparta, said on one occasion, "I am no Dorian, I am an Achaeans." What's this all about? Well, it looks like as the Spartans begin to extend this league that I will be telling you about in a minute, they want to reduce the amount of resistance that they're going to get into. what the Spartans wanted them to do. But we have many occasions in which states refused to do so and even get in the way of the Spartans. So great was their respect in which they were held that not only did they command the armies, even though they had no navy and no naval tradition. They were even put in charge of the fleet, although they often had the brains to use other people who had more experience to do the actual leading. And so that will explain, in my opinion, some of the reasons for calling it a Peloponnesian League meeting. According to Thucydides, the fear of the Helots was at the core of it all. Their feelings towards the Spartans were as you might expect. If we take our whole army, leave town, go three days march away, how do we know we'll find anybody alive when we get back? That's always on their minds and Helot rebellions, although they don't take place every day, take place very sparsely, but they keep happening so that the Spartans think. the fear is never irrational. To that is added the permanent enmity of Argos, which never gives up the idea of returning to the great days of Pheidon with Argos as the dominant state in the Peloponnesus. So, the Spartans, of course, have a need of a collection of states that stand between them and their potential enemies of whom the Argives are the most important. Another thing that corrupts is the search for power beyond what is appropriate in the Spartan system. What they focus on is discipline and the state versus freedom, individuality, and even family. try to enjoy these things in spite of their being barred. Why? Because in a way, necessity becomes a virtue. That's what the Spartans did. Their way of life was imposed upon them by the decision to maintain their command of the Helots. After that it all makes perfect sense. Look what they had to give up, to do it. They said, of course, we gave that up, because that's what makes us the great people we are. It's the way we cope. Athens is located in the southeastern portion of the Greek peninsula. The city is Athens; the region in which they live is Attica. The people are Athenians and that's an important point I think I made too. Everybody who is a citizen who lives in Attica is an Athenian, no matter if he lives sixty five or seventy miles away from the city. He's still an Athens. And that's the system that was the Spartan way of life. I remind you again that even though this is very extreme and other Greeks say that they're not going to live that way. in the early days to grow wheat and other grains, but more to the point, it was very good for olive trees and for grapevines. As we will see when the Athenians begin to exploit all of their land, not just the bottom land that works for grain, but also the less desirable land and produced wine and olive oil, that was a source of agricultural wealth. Now, their own story about their past was something like this. They, unlike the other inhabitants of southern Greece, according to their story, never experienced a Dorian invasion. There's a tradition in Athens of an event called synoikismos. These exiles, we are told, were brought into the Athenian people and lived among them as Athenians. Similarly, there is nothing like the helot class in Athens. There are no serfs, there's no suppressed population waiting to get at their rulers, so that there's a kind of a historical good fortune, which says Athens is going to be without internal strife. I don't mean totally but to a great degree compared to the other Greek states. There is no set of local rebellions against the major city, no need to go to war. But in neighboring Boeotia, the chief city of Thebes, traditionally was at war trying to subdue the other major cities. Compare that to Sparta where it's obvious Sparta gained control of the Peloponnesus through war and that many of the people there were very unhappy with them, not to mention the Helots. It really, if you take the word apart, it means the bringing of households together. of Boeotia, in order to make themselves the boss and they never were fully successful in this. So, Boeotian is torn, to some degree, by this internal conflict, which makes it harder for Thebes to achieve the kind of power in its own home territory. Let's take a look at the earliest society of Athens as first we come to know it. The society we're talking about, this earliest society, is aristocratic. Aristocratic implies means ruled by the best, and best in that time means simply best by birth. and that means if you're going to be in the ruling group, in a dominant, aristocrat--the only way to get there is if your father was an aristocrat. Doesn't matter how rich you are, doesn't matter what a magnificent warrior you are. All that matters is birth and that is different from oligarchy which gives rule to a few but that usually means, I would say just about every case, that wealth plays a role. I don't mean that they didn't have aristocrats within an oligarchy, I'm sure that they did. as we see Athens move out of the aristocratic condition and into one that is more based on wealth, than it is merely on birth. Well, we are told that in the earliest times, Athens was divided up; the people of Athens were divided up into four tribes just as were all the other Ionian cities and the Athenians of course were Ionians. Most Ionians lived on the coast of Asia Minor or on the Islands of the Aegean. They sort of were an interesting middling group between the Dorians of the Peloponnesus and the Greeks of other types elsewhere. tribes contained, according to this tradition, three subdivisions that were called phratres. An easy way to translate phr atres is brotherhood. Notice it's again about family and birth. You are in phratre; you're in that phratrs, because so is your father and you inherit it. These phratmes were very important. I should have mentioned that the tribes had important religious functions that also the army consisted of four regimens, one for each tribe. These tribes had great reality for the Spartans. did have priests, but it didn't have a separate priestly class and during the aristocratic period, and I would say probably throughout its history, Athenian religion had the priesthoods. The chief religious places in the state were held by aristocrats, which in a primitive society in itself, gives them tremendous prestige and a lot of clout. Probably, although I'm not sure we have hard evidence on this, probably the phratres fought side by side in the tribal regiments as well. chief jobs in religion, they were the government, because as early as we can tell that there was a regime after the legendary kings are gone. The number one governmental organization, you might call it, is the council of the Areopagus; gets its name from the place where it meets. We don't know enough to know whether it was all noblemen or just the leaders of the clans or whatever, but that's where decisions were made. It's important though to realize that in these early days of the polis they probably had very little power. Little to decide and very little to do. Most of the real life of the state in the earliest days would have been out in the countryside where the overwhelming majority of the people lived. These noblemen would typically have held a lot of land and have been well to do, have had all the powers I've described, and were looked up to and were listened to. They would have led the military units into battle when that was necessary. If there was a quarrel between a couple of guys, they would bring it to a court. There was nothing like a written law code until the seventh century. Before that, if you wanted to get justice you went to a nobleman. If you want to go beyond that, you go to the Areopagus, which is made of noblemen. That's the picture in the earliest polis as best we can reconstruct it. It was pretty clear that it was right to have the noblemen do it, not just because they're aristocrats but because they would know what the law was. early seventh century, the date he gives us, of course we shouldn't put too much credence in it, it's too precise, but it's 683 B.C. On that occasion, we are introduced to a new thing, magistrates are chosen from the aristocracy to do various jobs in the city. In Athens, the magistrates were called archons, it means, in the most technical sense, rulers. One of these was called the War archon, polemarch, presumably he led the army. Next came the archon who was actually the most important archon and gave his name to the year. after these three major figures that I have mentioned to you, there was established a body of men called thesmothetes, which were six men whose functions were apparently strictly judicial. They presided over courts that you could to for specified purposes. Every one of these nine archons--they are sometimes referred to as the college of nine archon. They had a secretary which would have brought them up to ten, but only nine were true archons. They were elected from the aristocracy by the assembly of all Athenian adult males. than a year. The only thing in town that has continuity, that can develop power and influence over a period of time, is the council of the Areopagus. Aristocracies love equality; equality among aristocrats, and then tremendous inequality between them and everybody else. Yalies are very nervous about anybody sticking his head up above the crowd, because the question is always why not me? You have high expectations of yourself and so sometimes unless you're invaded by later religious ideas that the Greeks didn't have, you's not humble, you're vying for honor. what we have, not a monarchy, but a republic. Dominated insofar as it's dominated by anybody but individual aristocrats, by the areopagus. At some point in the history of that institution it consists now of men who have been archon. The year after their archonship they automatically go into the areOPagus and remain areopagites for life. Well, that gives the counsel of theAreopagus even more power and influence, because they consist now, exclusively after awhile, of people who've been chosen for their individual qualities. power of the Areopagus must have been enormous in this system. So the rich and the well-born, because they are pretty much the same in the early days of the polis, run the state in this official constitutional way. Then it comes to Athens as it did to every other Greek state, a little bit later it looks like in Athens, all of the change and turmoil that we've seen in Argos and Corinth and other place. If we are right in talking about something like a hoplite revolution, it occurs in Athens too. begins to engage in commerce to a greater degree than before, and in ancient handcrafted manufacturing. It leads to new wealth and new class distinctions, which are now based not on birth but on wealth. We hear new terms, not all of them new, a couple of themnew that come into the picture. The Eupatridae, the well-born, that's the old story and they were really only two, those who were and those who weren't. Now we hear about people called hippeis, and it means horseman, cavalryman. Hippeis are people who are not necessarily aristocrats. They are the poor; they don't own land. They live at the mercy of chance; they work for other people. The new thing, people called zeugitai, means yoke fellows. These were men who were sufficiently well off that they could own a team of oxen, two oxen who were yoked together to pull the plow. That would make them respectably well off farmers. We are talking about people of the hoplite class. Another theory is that they were indeed named that, because they were hoplites. It hardly matters which of the stories you prefer or whether you choose both; we're talking about the same people. This new class of independent family farmer has arrived in Athens, and as in other states is not satisfied with his position in the state, as his own importance to the state becomes greater and greater. We will come back to this story when we talk about Solon, but think about these changes as happening, as the next change that I want to tell you about occurs. in the year 632, an Athenian nobleman who had married the daughter of a very wealthy and powerful tyrant in Megara, right next door to Attica. Cylon, attempted a coup d'état trying to establish a tyranny in Athens, just as his father-in-law had established one inMegara. Well, as the story goes, he tried his best to gain control of the city. But he couldn't, he was resisted by enough of his. opponents that he was defeated. The leader of the resistance was the family known as the Alcmaeonidae. They went up there, locked up Cylon and his supporters in the Acropolis, in a temple. You couldn't go into the temple for the purpose of killing somebody, that would be sacrilegious. Still if you're inside that temple and trying to avoid being killed, you still need food and drink. So, how could they manage it? Well, they took a cord, tied it to the temple, held onto the cord, and went down to the well and got their water. The Alcmaeonids were declared accursed and driven from the city. Later on we will hear they're back again and they're very important. But the curse continues to be attached to the family, and as we get to the last end of the last third of the fifth century and the Peloponnesian War is about to break out, the enemies of Pericles will pull out the curse of the AlcMAeonidae to use against him. For the moment, what we're talking about here I think is here's the first sign that we see of trouble in paradise. that there are the kinds of discontents that we have been talking about which find the leader in the form of a man who is an outstanding figure for some reason, who is willing to try to establish a tyranny. That it fails, I think, is an indication that the same forces haven't reached the power in Athens that they had reached in Megara, Corinth, Sicyon, and places like that. It's a warning about troubles ahead and I'll turn to those troubles in the next hour.