An independent set in a graph is a subset of vertices with no two adjacent. An important question in graph theory is given a graph, what can you say about the size of its independent sets? The following theorem, due to Caro-Wei, says that every graph G contains a large independent set. It contains an independent set of size at least the following quantity, summing over all v among vertices. For example, if the graph is this cycle on four vertices, an example of anindependent set would be two vertices like this. G, 1 over the degree of v plus 1. So let us prove this theorem first, and then we'll see an application and some ways to interpret this result. The proof of this theorem applies the probabilistic method. So we are given this graph G. And the first thing we'll do is order the vertices of G uniformly at random. So the edges are 1 to 2, 2 to 3, and 4. And let's consider the set I of vertices defined as follows. I claim that I is always an independent set. It will be impossible to have two vertices in I that are adjacent to each other. But in more complicated graphs, it can pick up additional vertices. I would pick out is a set of vertices such that-- so let's see if each vertices would belong to I. The first vertex appears before all of its neighbors. So we put the first vertex in I. But the second vertices do not appear before one of their neighbors, 1, so we do not put it in I as well. And the third vertices here also does not appears before its neighbor. And we don't put them in I, either. because one of them would appear before the other in the order, and that would violate the condition on how we chose I. Next, let's think about how large I is. Well v has D sub V with degree of V neighbors. And all the ordering are chosen uniformly at random, so this probability is 1 divided by V plus 1. And thus by the linearity of expectations, the expected size of this set I is equal to the sum over vertices V in G of the probability that this V lies in I. that induces an I so there is some I with the size of I at least the quantity that we just produced. So that finishes the proof of the Caro-Wei theorem. Again, it says-- the way to think about this theorem is that if you are given a graph g such that typically one does not have large degrees, then it must contain a large independent set. By considering the complement of this graph G-- by considering the graph complement, we switch, flip the edge and non-edges. Turan's theorem says that every n-vertex. graph G contains a clique on at least this many vertices. The biggest clique you have comes from taking one vertex. Turan's. theorem gives us some bound on the maximum number of edges that a. graph can have if it doesn't have a large clique. And furthermore, this bound here is best possible in the following sense. When n is not divisible by r, you need to do a similar construction, turns out to be best possible. G has a clique of size, at least sum over the vertices in G, 1 over n minus the degree of v. And here, let us use the convexity. of the function, sending x to 1 overn minus x. So this is a convex function, which allows us to lower bound the sum by n over n plus the average degree of G. And putting this into the expression, we can have a final expression strictly bigger than n overN minus 1 minus 1 over r times n.