hey everyone it's sarah with registerednessrn.com and in this video i'm going to be covering sinus tachycardia. As always whenever you're done watching this youtube video you can access the free quiz that will test you on this content. Let's get started what is sinus Tachy Cardia? Well first let's take its name apart sinus tells us that we're dealing with a heart rhythm that originates in the sa node this is also known as a sinoatrial node and it is found in the upper part of the right atrium. The electrical conduction system is to stimulate your heart muscle cells so they will be and pump blood throughout your body so it all starts here with the sa node. The sa node is located in the upper part of the right atrium. If it's working like it should it should cause your heart to beat at about 60 to 100 beats per minute and its goal is to really stimulate these atria to get them to contract so it leads to atrial depolarization which is going to lead to the contraction of your atria. refer to this as sinus bradycardia and i have a whole lecture on that if you want to check that out but on the flip side let's say that this sa node is firing rapidly like for instance the sympathetic nervous system is really causing this to just fire electrical signals fast because maybe you're exercising or you're really stressed out you're in a fearful event well we would refer to that as sinu tachycardia. sinus tachycardsia is a rhythm that meets the criteria for normal sinus rhythm but it's going to have a fast rapid rate greater than 100 beats per minute. With sinus hack the atrial rate is going to be greater than 100 beats per minute and then whenever you're looking at the p wave take your calipers and go from p wave to p wave and make sure there's the same distance between those because that means it's occurring at a regular interval. With sauna's bradycardia the qt interval was a little bit longer and then after each qrs complex you should have a t wave present as well so now let's analyze this rhythm together using this criteria we just went over here. waves we want to make sure that there's a p wave one p wave in front of every qrs complex. We want to look at those p waves is because they tell us about the atrial rate. Then i want to check the regularity of these qrs complexes just like i did with the p wave so i'm going to go from r wave to r wave with my calipers and i'm just going to confirm that they are regular and they're regular just like with thep wave. the end of the t wave so just take your calipers go at those positions and then count the blocks and here we have about seven blocks so our qt interval is about 0.28 seconds. Usually the reason that the heart will start beating this fast is because it knows that the body is in dire need of oxygen. There's something causing the body to use up oxygen that theBody is trying to replenish by increasing the heart's beat. Now let's talk about the causes of sinus tachycardia so we've already established that the reason this rhythm is occurring. the heart rate now this can be disease related or it can be non-disease related. We want to increase our heart rate whenever we exercise because that gives us a good workout so in that case sound attack isn't really that bad. If we're in a fearful stressful situation let's say you're about to be robbed your sympathetic nervous system is going to kick into gear and it's going to increase your heart rate so it can help hopefully protect you from danger and that's a good thing. can all increase the heart rate so whenever we take those things away remove the maldives and whatever the sinus tack will disappear and hopefully their heart rate will go back to normal. Then there are disease-related issues that can cause sinus tac this can be for instance let's say your patient has anemia so with anemia they have a low amount of red blood cells. Red blood cells carry oxygen throughout the body so if we don't have a lot of those red blood cell hanging out we have low amounts of oxygen our body can increase that heart rate to try to compensate for those levels. whenever a patient develops sinus attack and they have a disease it could be that their disease is worsening and it's a warning sign that hey this needs to be investigated more so anytime you have a patient and they're going in to sinus tack you want to investigate it. You don't want to just write it off. You want to see okay what could possibly be going on with my patient why they went into this so for instance let's say that you're caring for a patient who just suffered a myocardial infarction and they go into sinus tachycardia well this could be a warning signs that they may be going into cardiogenic shock. compensate for what's going on but in the end it's going to fail and the patient'sGoing to have cardiogenic shock and you'd want to report that to the doctor. Be looking for those other signs related to that be checking out the respiratory system are they having shortness of breath whenever they breathe in. Are they having chest pain that's getting worse or are they developing a cough so you'd also want toReport that as well now to help you remember those major causes of major causes. sinus tachycardia let's remember the word tacky hearts t is for temperature elevation and this could be if your patient has infection leading to sepsis a is for aerobics this is exercise and we already talked about why that can occur c is for cardiac disease and this can be in patients who have congestive heart failure or who have suffered a myocardial infarction leading to cardiogenic shock h is for hyperthyroidism and sinus attack may be the only symptom for some of these patients. period of time and it's going really fast this puts extra stress on that heart and it increases its demands for oxygen. If a patient has coronary artery disease where there's fatty plaques in those coronary arteries that's going to limit how much fresh oxygenated blood gets to that heart muscle. So patients who have an underlying problem of that we want to make sure that we keep the heart rate slower. If heart muscle doesn't get the oxygen it needs it can die it becomes ischemic so that could lead to a myocardial infarction. also sustained sinus tachycardia can actually decrease cardiac output in your patient. As a nurse you want to make sure you're monitoring their bottle signs closely and you're looking at your patient making sure they're not showing signs of decreased cardiac output. The reason this can occur is because that heart is beating very fast and whenever we're getting up to rates of 150 or greater the heart's not really pumping as efficiently as it should. If you're pumping so fast those ventricles don't have enough time to fill completely especially that left ventricle. it's going to limit the amount of blood that's going into the body so your patient can start presenting with a very low blood pressure that's the salt getting less than 90. With this heart is just literally failing so you'll get the backup of blood blood will start backing up into the lungs so whenever you listen to their lung sounds you'll start to hear crackles where they're developing pulmonary edema. You also want to look at their extremities how do they feel are they cool check that capillary refill is the time increase that could mean you definitely have decreased cardiac output. very important whenever a patient is in sinus tachycardia that we monitor them closely and if their heart is going too fast we need to look at that possible underlying cause report it so it can be treated and we can get their heart rate down now let's look at the treatment and the nurse's role for sinus Tachycarda. The treatment as i pointed out earlier is going to deal with identifying the cause and treating that cause because hopefully this will help decrease the rate so the healthcare provider can order some tests like an ekg. that and see what's possibly going on with the patient assessing blood levels like the thyroid level making sure they don't have hyperthyroidism looking for anemia or maybe infection they have a white blood cell count that is high and looking at that medication history making sure that they're not on any medicines that could be increasing their heart rate. This leads me to medications that can be ordered to help slow down that heart rate one group of medications are beta blockers and one type is called metoprol beta blockers. can be ordered to bring down the fever and then the nurse's role so as a nurse we want to assess for any potential causes for why our patient is running this rhythm. If all of a sudden you start seeing sinus tack you want to analyze hey why are they in this do they have untreated pain are they having a fever are they hemorrhaging what's going on? You want to report the rhythm change to the physician and let them know about it obtain an ekg if you get an order for that so we can further investigate their heart rhythm. cool extremities and then you want to teach the patient if you're able to avoid any activities that could further increase their sinus tag like if they're smoking or drinking caffeine or using any other stimulants because we don't want their heart rate to get up any higher okay so that wraps up this review over sonos tachycardia. If you'd like to watch more videos on this topic you can access the link in the youtube description below. Click the link below to access the video.