According to the Chinese zodiac, your shēngxiào is the animal assigned to your birth year. The most enduring one is that of the Great Race. As the story goes, Yù Dì, or Jade Emperor, Ruler of the Heavens, wanted to devise a way to measure time. The first twelve animals to make it across the river would earn a spot on the zodiac calendar in the order they arrived. Because the rat was small and couldn't swim very well, he asked the bigger animals. for help. While the tiger and horse refused, the kind-hearted ox agreed to carry the rat across. Just as they were about to reach the other side, the rat jumped off the ox's head and secured first place. The ox came in second, with the powerful tiger right behind him. The rabbit, too small to battle the current, nimbly hopped across stones and logs to come in fourth. Next came the dragon, who could have flown directly across, but stopped to help some creatures she had encountered on the way. The traditional Chinese calendar is made up of two overlapping systems. Each year is associated with one of the animals in this order, with the cycle starting over every 60 years. The animals of the zodiac are associated with what's called the Twelve Earthly Branches, or shí'èrzhī. Another system, the Ten Heavenly Stems, or tiāngān, is also associated with the animals of this zodiac. We hope you enjoyed the video. We'll be back with more from China in the coming weeks. The twelve animals of the Earthly Branches are matched with the five elements plus the yīn or the yáng of the Heavenly Stems. This creates 60 years of different combinations, known as a sexagenary cycle, or gānzhī. So someone born in 1980 would have the sign of yāng metal monkey. Someone born in 2007 would be yān fire pig. In fact, you can also have an inner animal based on your birth month, a true animal based in your birth date, and a secret animal based upon your birth hour. reflect their communities. So if you consult the Vietnamese zodiac, you may discover that you're a cat, not a rabbit. If you're in Thailand, a mythical snake called a Naga replaces the dragon. So whether or not you place stock in what the zodiac says about you as an individual, it certainly reveals much about the culture it comes from. The zodiacs of Vietnam, Thailand and the U.S. can be found at www.zodiac.com.