Professor: We're going to be taking this IV curve that we've so laboriously set up and understood-- sorry about that. And now we will subject it to illumination. So that's the essence of our lecture today, the diode under illumination. And as part of today's lecture, we have some wonderful little kits over there in the corner where we'll actually be testing IV curves of solar cells. So I hope some of you brought the computers today, and if not, we've some extras up here as well we can use. So again, just to situate ourselves. We're here in fundamentals. We're approaching the end of our fundamental section, but we still have a few really important lectures to get through. After we get through the fundamentals, we'll be in a good position to understand the different technologies and finally the cross-cutting themes. And our goal is to, at least for the basics, to understand solar cell conversion efficiency. For most solar cells, this breaks down to the following progression, from the solar spectrum to charge collection. And we're going to be focusing on charge separation, incorporating elements of either side. Photosynthesis is the process of converting sunlight into chemical energy. The total system efficiency in blue is somewhere, depending on the plant, somewhere around 1%, maybe as high as 7% or 8%, depending on very specialized plants. And that, in part, is largely due to optical losses. If you can see the pie chart, the efficiency of each individual part can be broken down to this little pie chart up here. And just like a solar cell, the photosynthesis conversion efficiency of the entire system is dictated by the efficiency. Each of you should have on your desk these sheets. We laboriously filled this out last class. We're just going to refresh ourselves to make sure we're all on the same page and redo it this class right at the beginning because it's that important. For those who are still struggling, let's make sure that you get this sometime between now and, say, the next two weeks because this will feature prominently on the exam. So if you would not mind working directly with your partner, the person who's sitting directly next to you. Let's walk through the diode in the dark. and understand how drift and diffusion currents come into being in the first place and then being able to bias your diode under different conditions is a really important fundamental skill for understanding how a solar cell works. Question. On the forward and reverse bias, does the Fermi energy actually continuous, or does it actually [INAUDIBLE]? PROFESSOR: So the Fermani energy, which we defined here as the chemical potential, notice we're avoiding talking about what's happening here in the middle until a couple of lectures from now. That gets into a gray zone where we talk about quasi-Fermi energies. absolute energy scale. So there is an energy difference when you're driving the electrons from one side to the other. And this is why we have current flow coming from this side into that side. And it's happening because we're using that battery in the dark to change the chemical potential on either side, which, in effect, reduces this barrier height. So you can think about it as forcing carriers up the junction. In a real device, when we you have a two-dimensional device within homogeneities, the current will travel through the weakest point of that pn-junction. let's try to imagine what will happen under illuminated conditions, and let's start out in a very simple case. We'll assume that the principle of superposition applies here, that the photo-excited carriers-- in other words, when light shines into our device-- and light's coming in and generating electron-hole pairs, essentially exciting electrons across the band gap. What will happen to those electrons now that they're in the conduction band? Where will they want to go? To the right. When you start illuminating your solar cell device and you start injecting carriers into it, what will happen is, very naturally, this band alignment that you see right here will begin to shift toward the forward bias condition. To get the solar cell to go into reverse bias, you really do need to bias your device. So that shifts the entire thing down. And we would add illumination current, an arrow pointing to the right right here, which would mean that we would have current flowing through our device, but there's still no difference in the chemical potential on either side. in the p-type and the n-type, which means our voltage is equal to 0. So it's really just a superposition. OK. Now what happens if we forward bias our device either because we're adding a resistor in series to our solar cell? So instead of a battery there, you would replace that with a resistor. Or if we're applying a bias voltage as well, we could also do that under illumination. So we'd still have the illumination current, right? And we, through superposition, shift this entire curve down, we'd be operating somewhere in this quadrant. battery there, we have a resistor, the electrons will travel from the n-type material through that external load. And so this entire curve shifts down. You have your red x somewhere in the quadrant over here. And power is flowing out of the solar cell across that External load. So in the next slide, pretty much everything is right, except that, mea culpa, I forgot to replace the battery up there with a little resistor. So you'll want to correct that in your notes. replace those with resistors or a resistor in series with a battery, if you prefer. Since depending on the illumination condition, the intensity we may have natural for a bias condition, we may need to apply a bias voltage. OK. So we have our IV characteristic like this. We have our red x under forward bias conditions in the IV quadrant, denoting that power would be flowing out of this solar cell device under these conditions. And now the bias is inverted. And notice that the current still has the same sign. device in the dark. But under illumination, now we have all of our carriers traveling from the p-type into the n-type. What's varying is the potential that the carriers have and, of course, the total amount of current. Eventually at some point, if you keep forward biasing here, the current will be 0. There will be no net current flow because there'll be no driving force for the carriers to go from the P-type to the N-Type. The voltage is such that we can power an external load. We have charge separation. The electrons are accumulated over here. And they have higher potential than they do on the other side. So the conditions are just right under illuminated forward bias conditions to drive power through our external Load. Under all other conditions of operations of the solar cell, we're putting power into the device, not getting power out of it. This IV quadrant over here, this forward bias illuminated case is the only case in which power is coming. with a superposition, which we call the illumination current, I sub L. And that's what shifts our entire curve down by this. What do we think will happen if our light intensity goes down by a factor of 2? So now if the amount of sunlight falling on our solar cell drops by 1/2, what will happen? And what do we predict will happen based on this right here? AUDIENCE: [INAUDIBLE]. PROFESSOR: The curve will shift, the red curve willShift up by about 1/1. be cut by whatever this would be here, a log of 2. So OK. So we're beginning to develop an intuitive understanding of where electrons are flowing inside of our solar cells. In the dark is important because we can test our devices in the dark, and we can still learn a lot about our solar cell device characteristics. As well, we can force carriers from one side of the junction to the other the wrong way and probe for weaknesses in the pn-junction regions. That's helpful. So what I'll ask folks to do now is to-- we'll begin passing around these little tools. David Berney Needleman is our lab guru. He's the one who helped build these, really was the driving force behind getting them built. These are IV testers that will allow you to measure the current voltage characteristics of solar cells. And he's going to-- well, we'll pass them out while maybe he comes to the front here and explains how they work. So modify the intensity of the light and see how this works. IV curve changes. Note the y-axis scale, which might change as well. It might rescale depending on the condition. Give that a shot. All right, folks. Why don't we circle back real quick. I am very much in favor of multitasking and browsing. So if you want to keep your experiment running over the course of the remainder of the lecture, I will certainly have nothing opposed to testing a few different illumination conditions. The I sub L, just to really recap here, we have this ideal diode equation, the illumination current coming in from our light source. see there? AUDIENCE: One. PROFESSOR: How many batteries do you see total in our set-up? Look especially at that light source. There's a 9-volt and a 1.5-volt. So one of them is powering the light source, and we have, as well, bias to the solar cell device, right? So we have a bit of a combination of the last two slides,right? In this case, in the dark, we were biasing our solar cell using the battery. And in the illumination conditions, the light itself was causing the solarcell to become forward biased. don't understand still why having a load would bias the device. Professor: It's more energetically favorable for these electrons to be on the other side. It's difficult for them to get back the other way. It could be more easy for people to get to the other end of the line, but it's not impossible, he says. "It's raised the chemical potential of this side," he says of the device's illumination. "I think that's a good thing," he adds, "because it means that the device is not biased." them to flow through an external circuit to get back to the other side. The biasing is because you have a shift in the chemical potential of this side up relative to the p-type side. That's a bias. And is the biasing because there is a voltage drop across the resistor? PROFESSOR: Yes. And as they flow through that external circuit, they're depositing their energy across that External Circuit. What energy? Well, it's the potential difference from this side to that side. your solar cell, you have a bias. Whether that's generated by light or a battery, that's a matter of detail. Photons are forward biasing the device. Can some ever reverse bias? That would be very difficult. What you could do, though, is have a bunch of solar cells connected in series with this one, right, that are producing forward power. You could shade this device, and then power it from the sun, for example. It's just photons. could be flowing backward through it, right? And you could be in a reverse bias condition just because of the way the other solar cells around it are behaving. So imagine a seagull lands and kind of covers up one of the cells. That will be under reverse bias, and that could present problems if the solar cell can't withstand the reverse bias. No, this is a very ideal condition. In the real world, you'll just have biased it so much that electrons will be able to tunnel through from the p-type into the n-type right here. what happens to this IV curve is it goes zoom, begins dropping. If the solar cell reverse bias. current, or the current at reverse bias voltage, is not low enough, you could have a catastrophic failure of your module by just shading one of your cells. Thankfully, this is one of the testings that are done with the solar simulator to prevent that failure mode. All right. I'll try to keep the lecture focused on the broader general topics. But if somebody is interested in learning more, I'm happy to kind of dive into there. far, and really tried to impart the wisdom of pn-junctions. You should be able to explain to your roommates exactly what is going on. Define parameters that determine solar cell efficiency. So now we have a qualitative sense about where current is flowing, where electrons are moving around, what defines the power output. Let's start putting some discrete variables to all of that. And there are a bunch of two-letter or three-letter acronyms with some subscripts here that we'll get to know. Most often, PV researchers will report a current density, in other words, a current per unit area instead of the actual current coming out of a solar cell device. So what you've been measuring here off of the DAC has been current, total current output from that device. We'll use current density J, and we'll call current I, right? So for calculating power, we'll have to use I. And that's essentially the ideal diode equation with a superposition term, this J sub L right there. There's no energy gain of the electron traveling through the external circuit, but there's a maximum current. And no power flowing through that external circuit because there's no potential to be dropped across the external resistor. The opposite happens over here at this point called Voc, which we'll call open-circuit voltage. That's the maximum voltage that could be supported by that solar cell device under illumination conditions. And somewhere in between these two extreme conditions, you have a maximum power point where there is a power being deposited on external load. a lot of it, right? That's the maximum power point. This is the point at which the solar cell is producing the maximum amount of power output. If I were to take current times voltage right here using IV quadrant data, my power would be a negative number. So I'd multiply a positive and negative number together, you get anegative number, and that just sounds weird. It almost sounds like power's going into the device. So this is another convention that you're going to have to get used to is looking at the IV curve in the I quadrant. have the right load. So the two need to be matched to each other. And that's where some of the power electronics come into play. And the rationale for that assumption is as follows. The open-circuit voltage, this point, is generally between 0.35 and 0.4 volts minus the band gap, or lower than theBand gap. So you have the band. So it's a very interesting question. Let me repeat it so that the microphone can hear it. The homework question in the last homework, there was one question that inquired. gap energy minus 0.4 volts. It essentially has to do, in part, with losses inside of the solar cell at thermodynamic limits of conversion. Then what we've done is we'vedone another additional discounting from the Voc to the maximum power point, which we've assumed is around 0.1, maybe 0.2 volts. Notice the shape of the IV curve right here. The maximum powerpoint is interesting because the voltage at the maximumpower point is almost the Voc, in a good device. And the current at themaximumpowerpoint is almost Jsc, but not quite. good device. In a bad device, this maximum power point here could be dragged all way down here. You could have an IV curve that looked something more like this instead, almost like a resistor, at which point the maximum power output would be a lot less. So we have efficiency here as well as the efficiency of the solar cell. Eta, this Greek letter eta, is our power out versus power in. Our power in is the illumination intensity given in units of watts per meter squared. power out versus power in, the power out being the maximum power point power and the power in being the illumination from the sun. OK. This is starting to get interesting because it's beginning to click. Pieces from lecture number 2 come together with what we're seeing now. So this is solar cell output power at themaximum power point and sunlight coming in. And that box looks like this blue one right here. The area of that is the area of the solar cell that is producing power. box is Jmp times Vmp. OK? And notice I have another box around here. I have this clear box that starts at the Voc point and the Jsc point. And now I have two rectilinear shapes, this blue one and the clear one right here, the bigger one. The bigger one has an area of Jsc times Voc. And I'm going to define a parameter called fill factor, which will be the ratio of these two areas. If this is 1, which is virtually impossible to do, but if this were 1, it would mean that these two boxes were the same size. point divided by the solar insulation, fill factor being defined as the ratio of Vmp Imp product divided by Voc Ioc product. These parameters right here are fairly easy to measure using the solar simulator that you just put together. And so from an engineering point of view, when we break the solar cell output down into these three parameters so that we can better understand what's going wrong with our solar cell, we can get a better idea of what's wrong with the device, the professor says. The conversion efficiency determines the area of solar cells needed to produce a certain peak power. Many costs scale with area, including glass, encapsulants, the absorbent materials within the solar cell devices. The aluminum and racking and framing materials that go into holding the panels up in the field either on a roof or out of the field. So efficiency affects pretty much everything but the inverter and possibly some of the soft costs of the project. The material costs might end up whopping you, but it might not. pay more for a high-efficiency cell because I'm using less area, you can use this type of calculation to get to the answer quickly. This is a really back-of-the-envelope envelope engineering approach to estimating costs of a solar system. So I think this is a great place to stop. And if anybody has an idea, a fun idea, for a class project, I'd invite you to give a pitch up here at the front of class, or you're welcome to send it on an email to the class listserv.