the Lord Byron George Gordon Lord Byron very interesting very outgoing very flamboyant personality he stood out I mean if you can't tell by looking at that picture you know he was a lot different than a lot of people his back history and such isn't necessarily testable stuff but look I mean it just really shows you how against the grain he was um you know we even saw Wordsworth even though he seemed very dignified such he was against thegrain with regards to his beliefs in his practices in in the literary world. sit back on his on his limits he was able to still push it and he was accomplished in many activities and sports the literary celebrity down at the bottom had spoken that he was a you know kind of born into not necessarily nobility like a monarch or anything but he was born into his title he didn't do anything to achieve it okay Hinda. He was an individual that you know probably was a bit of a celebrity to some degree he had the money he was wanting it he it said that he got in trouble because he had a lot of love affairs going on he kind of ran out his welcome. able to mention you know celebrity wise and so then he finally gets some fame get some popularity and he does a lot of good with it we see on besides kind of self exiling himself from England what things weren't going to also he leads and he travels and stays with the Shelley's that talks about Mary Shelley and Percy shot Mary Shelley wrote Frankenstein and we'll talk about Percy Shelley later this unit but you know so he travelled around I mean one of the most interesting features in this is one how he died really young just from whoo but when he died he was down in Greece training their soldiers helping them for their rebellion. was helping them fight and prepare them for revolution and preparing them for the battle and so we have this individual armed. He was a celebrity of his era probably more so than a lot of the individuals that we read and you can see when it talks about that he was you know his life as well as his literary accomplishments you know were um you know a mother laughter by you know PO on 8th annual Hawthorne Dostoyevsky, Herman Melville and other famous works of the 1800s. "Heath Ledger was a bold person he was rebellious you know in nature and such and you know he had a you know kind of a tragic end there" "He was a very bold and very dangerous individual okay if you look in the right-hand page and I want you to read this page when you have time" "A lot of times when the tragedy is somebody who is young and had some sort of accomplishments" "You know we're brilliant at whatever they did but you know they they died young" literary or you know in the world to some degree that those individuals are you know Byronic to somedegree so we see those qualities and characteristics portrayed in that individual back to his reading on a 8:45 from childe Harold's Pilgrimage gate. The title of the piece is called apostrophe to the ocean and if you remember apostrophes that's when you are directing a statement toward something that cannot reciprocate it remember. The piece is very short look at the title of it okay the right below the subtitle and this is from a larger work. when we did the poems and such Oh moon Oh sleep you know things of that nature you don't expect to be to have a conversation you're just talking to that individual or thing okay or idea I guess it could be like sleep on it so this one is directed towards the ocean okay our childe Harold's Pilgrimage ' to the ocean from childeHarold's Pil Grimage by George Gordon Lord Byron ' tothe ocean. There is a pleasure in the pathless woods there is a rapture on the lonely shore there is society where none intrudes by the deep sea and music in its roar. I love not man less but nature more from these our interviews in which I steal from all I may be or have been before to mingle with universe and feel what I can narak spread cannot all conceal roll on thou deep deep deep. in dark blue ocean roll ten thousand fleets sweep over the in vain men marks the earth with ruin his control stops with the shore upon the watery plain the wrecks are all thy deed nor doth remain a shadow of man's ravage save his own. For a moment like a drop of rain he sinks into thy depths with bubbling groan without a grave uh knelled on coffin and unknown his steps are not upon my paths my fields are not a spoil for him thou dust arise and shake him from thee the vile strength he wields for Earth's destruction. lay the armaments which Thunder strike the walls of rock build cities bidding nations quake and monarchs tremble in their capitals the okhla by Athens whose huge ribs make their clay creator the vain titled take of Lord of thee and arbiter of war these are thy toys. As the snowy flake they melt into thy yeast of waves which Mar alike the armadas pride or spoils of Trafalgar by shores our empires changed in all save thee Assyria Greece Rome Carthage what are they thy waters wash them power while they were free and many a tyrant since their Shores obey the stranger slave or savage. glasses itself in tempest s' in all time calm or convulsed in breeze or Gale or storm icing the pole or in the torrid clime dark heaving boundless endless and sublime the image of eternity the throne of the invisible even from out the slime the monsters of the deep are made each zone obeys thee thou goest forth dread fathomless alone and I have loved the ocean and my joy of youthful sports was on thy breasts to be born like thy bubbles onward from a boy I want. is addressing the ocean the water about how big and how timeless start you know he mentioned on that page and we'll get there. Leviathan is BC in Atlantis remember the cartoon movie Atlantis the Leviathan was the thing that protects it so big monstrous thing and so these ships that are like okhla vaya thens are really just like toys and if you think about it I mean just the sheer size of that water and those waves what they can do you know there are aircraft carriers that're like cities floating cities with tens of thousands of people. essence and a storm can just mess that thing all up if there's a hurricane coming that ship heads the other way tries to get around it okay because it would turn it into like a toy in a bathtub. The 100-year anniversary is coming up here next month of the sinking maybe not the there rerelease in the movie and I'm accessed off 3ds so that's just for you a little bit of extra stuff for today but the apostrophe on page 845 um. you know he's very pleased with the ocean he loves the ocean you know talking about you know there is a you know pleasure and rapture in this and I love man the less but I love nature more but ILove nature more and think back we've talked about this a lot in this particular unit about all of these nature elements okay nature and the nightmares and kids all those things that influence writing and here we have another individual as to why this particular piece is a good representation of that of that era. the man's ruined it stops at the shore okay because whether it's a million years ago a thousand years ago or two years ago we can go out you know thirty feet into the water and look straight out to the water. okay yes we can look at oil platforms now for looking in the exact rights okay man ceases to be able to control that. okay there are people would say you know we've spent more time at the bottom of the ocean or less time. at the body the bottom. is bigger than Mount Everest underwater underwater were you aware of that I mean that's just the scope and size of what's out there okay and just a little boat out there I could do a lot of damage okay a lotof damage could be thrust upon that and really that's kind of what is talking about the the rest of this about the shoe size of it the the ships and man and how nature Trump's all of that. I like the line forty four time writes no wrinkle on diners your brow so like with humans and a lot, it even animals and such that people age. coming in and the sound will be identical in conclusion at the very end he comes back from talking about all of the size in his love for nature and sums it back that you know and I have loved the ocean so just in case you forgot throughout these short two pages to whom he was speaking or addressing we see once again that it is nature and don't forget what an apostrophe is okay remember I told you when we learned it that's hey you're going to need to remember this and people tend to forget for some strange reason.