This morning we're going to carry on talking about Jeremy Bentham and classical utilitarianism. And I'm going to begin by making a few points about the measurement of utility, which we bumped into in a glancing kind of way last time. And then we are going to move from that into talking about utility and distribution in Bentham's theory. I think you'll start to see why classicalilitarianism became such an ideologically powerful doctrine in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. The idea being that if you think of, in this case, a very simple two-person society, and you Think of that as the status quo, A has that much utility, B has that many utility. rare case that you get it right about yourself. And it's the objective scientific calculus that's going to tell us what maximizes people's utility. So anytime you think this doctrine is crude or extreme, remember my point that this is a guy who takes every thought to the logical extreme. But if so you get one, it's a very rare case, but if so, it could be a very good one. It could be the beginning of the end of the world, as we know it. let's just for simplicity say, say one Standard International Util costs a dollar. Then I could make you indifferent between coming to class and not coming toclass by paying you two dollars. It could get you to come to class if I paid three dollars, and I would not get you  if I Paid a dollar, right? And so that's the second point. In the first instance we say that utility is quantifiable and expressible through money, but then related to that, and as indicated in the example I just gave you, we can work with a doctrine of revealed preference. utils of pain from coming to class, one experiences three utils of pain, and one experiences two util of pleasure. There's one perverse student in the audience who actually likes coming to the class. So then we would find that if we paid a dollar, one of you would come. If we increase it to two-fifty, two ofYou would come, and so we could vary the price to get information about your utility. And we could even influence your behavior without actually changing your preferences. Bentham allows interpersonal comparisons of utility. We can say that if you take one unit of utility from one person and give it to another person their utility will go up and the first person's utility is going to go down. If it turns out Leonid has a vastly superior capacity to experience pleasure than anybody else, then we could get a huge increase in total utility by redistributing things. But if the price is high enough you'll come anyway. But Bentham's system, classical utilitarianism, operates with numbers that attach to specific actions or policies. taking a lot from B and C and giving it to Leonid, so that we would say "allow," right? Or we could think of this change from the status quo-- we go to a more inegalitarian society and, again, the greatest happiness of the greatest number has increased. We have a world here where there are eighteen utils and a world in which there are nineteen utils. If the utility that the Aryans gain from practicing genocide and ethnic cleansing against the Jews exceeds the utilities that the Jews lose, there would be no reason under Bentham's doctrine not to do it. Econ 101: If you have no food and I give you a loaf of bread, your utility goes up a lot. Anyone know what the principle behind that idea is? Anyone want to take it? How many of you have done ECON 101, the first econ course? Yeah, so what is the principle that would tell you if you haveNo food? If you've got no food, if you're on the verge of starvation, you're going to be happier if you get some bread. If you're about to die, you'll be happier than if you don't get any food. If your utility is going to go up, it's going to make you feel better. Professor: Diminishing marginal utility is the principle of diminishing marginal utility of all good things. If you don't have a car and somebody gives you a Porsche Turbo, your utility's going to go up a huge amount. But if you already have a Porsche, you're going to get less new utility from the second Porsche than you had from the first. The new utility you get diminishes at the margin. Each new Porsche is less valuable to you than the previous Porsche. If we just kept giving you lots of right shoes, there'd be a problem. Professor: Does it mean that rich people will care less about money? just need more money to get the same amount of happiness. Prof: Exactly. So you got it exactly right to see that money creates some problematic examples for the principle of diminishing marginal utility. But the thing that follows from it is that, for Donald Trump to get more utility, you have to give him a huge amount of new money. So the more money you have, actually the moremoney you will want in order to get what you want. The way to think about the desire for money it's a bit like sort of a heroin addict needs more, and more. get the next marginal increment of utility. So we should expect rich people to be greedy by this theory, not to become more and more indifferent to money. Very important assumption and a lot of people get that wrong when they think about the principle of diminishing marginal utility. Are there any other examples of this doctrine that might make it seem problematic? Yeah, over there. If I had a second Porsche Turbo I would be just really reckless with it and I could do whatever I want. I wouldn't have to protect the first Porsche Turbo as much. up, but you really want to protect that little bit, but when you get more maybe it encourages you to save money, to not spend more. Prof: If you had one and I said, "I'll give you my one, it's right out there," you wouldn't want it? Student: It's not that I wouldn't. want it, but maybe the utility for the second one in some cases would be more than the utility of the first one so the curve would be thrown off. so you don't lose what little you have. Prof: Okay, so it's a possibility. Any other examples of where this becomes problematic? I mean, think about beer. One beer increases your utility a lot. If you have a lot of integrity, a little bit more is still worth an equal amount. Once you start putting values like that out there it, I think, threatens the idea that it's all reducible to a single index, right? Because you can't. Spitzer's integrity is blown it's not like there's some--it's a binary good. People either think he's either a hypocrite or he's not, it' a binary thing. So there might be some goods like integrity that are not easily capture-able in this logic. We should put that out there, but yeah, over here? Student: What about health? It's not quite binary because you can be in medium health, but I think it would be pretty useful to be healthy and then super healthy. some people are sighted and some people are blind and you could do eye transplants. Arguably the blind person would gain more utility from getting one eye than the sighted person would lose from losing one eye, so shouldn't we do that? So that can also give you some ways of proceeding that would make you queasy, right, if you allow the principle of diminishing marginal utility. What about the examples I threw out there, beer and aspirins? They're a bit like the sort of left shoe examples, right? Every serious economist since the eighteenth century has assumed that the principle of diminishing marginal utility is true, including Jeremy Bentham. So it's the best assumption you can make given that you've got to assume something. But now, and now I want to come back to the sophisticated point that was made in the middle at the back there a few minutes ago, when you talked about the fungibility of utility and its expressibility in terms of money. Other good that would give you increasing utility at a diminishing marginal rate. start to think about the utility that people at the bottom of the social order derive from a particular good, versus the utility of those at the top. Let's suppose a two-person society, again, and let's suppose it consists of Donald Trump and a homeless woman living out of a left luggage locker in Grand Central Station. And the question is, should we take a dollar from Trump and give it to the bag lady? What? Should we? Yes? No? How many think yes? Okay, yeah, almost everybody. of diminishing marginal utility we take the dollar from Trump up there, his loss of utility is negligible, but we give it to the woman who's starving down here, and her gain in utility is enormous from that dollar, right? So we should take thedollar from Trump. Let's assume there's no dead weight loss to the government and all of that for right now. We will just keep it simple. We should take that dollar from Donald Trump and we should give it. to the bag lady, and the greatest happiness of the greatest number will have increased. Professor Ian Shapiro: We're going to keep redistributing until they have the same amount. Bentham was a fairly radical guy. He was a supporter of democracy, which was a radical thing at that time. But he wasn't as egalitarian as he thought he was, Professor Shapiro says. Professor Shapiro: Bentham completely saw that this was an implication of his doctrine. The underlying logic says take it from Trump and give it to the bag lady, right? At the margin that's what you should do. as all that, and he wanted to temper the downward redistribution that flows from his principle, and so he makes a distinction between what he refers to as "absolute" and "practical" equality. He says, Suppose but a commencement made, by the power of a government of any kind, in the design of establishing it (absolute equality, that's redistributing to equality), the effect would be--that, instead of every one's having an equal share in the sum of the objects of general desire, no one would have any share of it at all. sticker, he's saying the rich will burn their crops before giving them to the poor. It's the sort of reverse of trickle-down, right? Trickle-down is the notion that you allow inequality because the rich create more wealth for everybody. This is the inverse claim. Bentham's saying, "Well yes, in principle absolute equality would maximize the greatest happiness of the greatest number, but in fact if a government set out to do that, the rich would rebel" you assume diminishing marginal utility, utilitarianism becomes a very radical doctrine. Bentham has this monomaniacal view of science. He's got his objective egoism. He can figure it all out, what will maximize social utility, and run around the world writing constitutions for people. But he can devise a whole public policy that's going to scientifically maximize the utility of society, but I'm not seeing a whole lot of room for rights in this doctrine. It seems to allow ethnic cleansing, even genocide. because it's where you start to see our old friend the workmanship ideal creeping by the backdoor into utilitarianism. Bentham says, "Law does not say to man, Work and I will reward you but it says: Labour, and by stopping the hand that would take them from you, I will ensure you the fruits of your labour" So another way of thinking about this is, that Bentham's idea of the state is essentially regulatory. It stays the hand of somebody else who would steal your goods, but the government cannot itself create utility. Bentham's utilitarianism comes into utilitarianism by the backdoor. He says, "Unless you respect individual rights you're not going to be able to maximize utility for the society as a whole" So that's the way in which we see that even a classical utilitarian like Bentham is going to resist dispensing with the doctrine of individual rights. But there's a problem, though, with his mode of doing this, and the problem arises because the claim is that the state is hands-off with respect to the utility creation in the society. that the rich will burn their crops before giving them to the poor might not be true. And even if we get to less extreme circumstances like South Africa before and after the transition, when we look at actual debates in contemporary politics in the United States, this is what we see. Ronald Reagan comes in and says, "If we cut taxes, the pie will get bigger for all and they'll be actually more revenue," and so utilitarianism says do it. And the Democrats say, "No, they won't," and it's an empirical argument. responsible for what happened, versus how much many other things that happened were responsible, nobody really knows. And so a lot of the problem in debating incentives, once you get into the real world of macroeconomic policy-making, is that (a) you never have the counterfactual; you can't go and rerun history without the stimulus, right, or without the Reagan tax cuts. And (b) the sheer complexity; so many other thing happened--the price of the stimulus. oil goes up, or commodities collapse, or the dollar, or this, or that. Do or don't change the value of their currency. So that when it gets down to it, you're never going to get a definitive answer to the question what is the point of practical equality. Are we close to it? Have we gone by it? Are we nowhere near it? There have been periods in our history when we've had top marginal tax rates of 90 percent, right? Reagan thought a topmarginal tax rate of 40 percent was beyond the point. Hobbes said, "For the things we don't make, we can only guess about the causes" We don't really know and there will be--the people who want either policy will be able to find a plausible set of experts to defend their view. So you're getting to this very messy world of macroeconomic prediction, if you want to put some limits on the radical edge of classical utilitarianism. As a matter of history, how it went was to rethink the analytical structure of utilitarianism in a way that completely defanged its radical redistributive edge. classical to what we're going to all neoclassical utilitarianism is a subject with which I will begin on Wednesday. See you then for the next installment of this week's Daily Discussion, which will focus on the role of utilitarianism in the development of the modern world. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from. Click here to read the first installment of the Daily Discussion. Follow us on Twitter @CNNOpinion and @jennifer_newton.