The subject of this lecture is really the core of what I got from William Klemperer. He showed me how to evaluate matrix elements of many-electron operators. Our goal is to be able to reduce the complexity of electronic structure, which is really complicated. The electrons interact with each other really strongly, and there are a lot of them. And it's very hard to separate the complexity into many-body interactions into separate parts. It's the key to being able to interpret-- not just tabulate-- electronic properties of atoms and molecules. things that we can put in our head and interpret. The whole goal of this course is to give you the tools to interpret complicated phenomena. When we go to molecular orbital theory, we take what we know about atoms, and build a minimally-complex interpretive picture. We have the vibrational problem as a way of understanding internuclear interactions-- nuclear motions. And we have electronic structure and the hydrogen atom as a ways of understanding what electronic structure is, and to reduce it to the things we learn about hydrogen. every pair of electrons, not just two. In helium we just dealt with two, and that wasn't so bad. But when we deal with n electrons, what we are going to discover is that in order to anti-symmetrize the wave function, we have to write a determinantal wave function. When you expand an n by n determinant, you get n factorial times. And when you calculate matrix elements, you haven factorial squared integrals. So you're not going to be handling these one at a time, and looking at them lovingly. happen. But this was something that nobody in the world was interested in because it was the breaking of the usual patterns. I was convinced that I had collected some stuff that told an interesting story. And I told Klemperer about this, and he said, well, have you thought about how to evaluate these integrals? And then he showed me, on a scrap of paper, how to do it. That has been the foundation of my career for the last 50 years. But he just gave it to me on a silver platter. least the rudiments of what it is you're up against, and how you reduce them to things that you care about, that you can think about. You can understand the hydrogen atom in rather complete detail. Or at least you can understand how one observable relates to another. And so the relationship between the effective quantum number and the ionization energy of a state then provides a hydrogen-atom-based structural model for everything you can observe. Now spectroscopists have the unfortunate habit of saying we're interested in structure. Structure is static. Dynamics is magical, and special, and hard. dynamics, which you can understand, as opposed to just saying, I'm going to tabulate the dynamics too. You don't know anything unless you have a reductionist picture of what's going on. And since the hardest part of dealing with molecules is the fact that they have a lot of electrons, this is really the core of being able to do important stuff. Now it's a horrendously complicated problem, and notationally awkward, too. And let me just try to explain it. We talked about helium. And helium has two electrons. And there's this 1 over r12 interaction between electrons, which looks innocent enough. You know, it's just a few symbols. But that's really a lie, because it's as big as it sounds. as almost everything else. We rely on n and l to get almost everything. But here we find that, in addition to this being that small, it destroys the foundation of our picture. And so how do we think that we can make any sense of many-electron atoms and molecules? Well it turns out we can hide most of the complexity by working out the rules for calculating these matrix elements. The matrix elements of operators that we care about, like transition moments, spin orbit, Zeeman effect. able to evaluate these matrix elements is the permutation requirement. And it turns out that there is a really simple way of dealing with the requirements for electron permutation, and that is to write the wave function as a determinant of one-electron orbitals. And that is the Pauli exclusion principle-- not what you learned in high school. What you learned is a small consequence of that. So if we can build anti-symmetric wave functions, we have aufbau, we can only put one electron in an orbital. can't-- just the question of indistinguishable electrons is such a subtle thing that you can't say, well, they have to be anti-symmetric. OK, so we know that the Hamiltonian has to commute with-- these capital letters mean, many electrons' angular momenta. And this is the spin, this is a projection of the spin. We know this is true because the Hamiltonians doesn't operate on spin. It's a trivial result, but it's a very important result. MIT professor in physics. He invented these things in 1929. So basically what Slater did is showed, yeah, you can do the necessary algebra to deal with any atom, and to be able to reduce an atom to a small number of integrals. And there are two ways of doing this. One is the truth, and one is the fit model. Now the truth is really boring, because you lose all the insights. And a fit model also tells you what are the import the actors. And maybe they're in costume, maybe not, but we can deal with them. when you go from hydrogen to helium, you can't solve the Schrodinger equation exactly. But you can do it really well, and it just costs computer time. And if the computer is doing the work, you don't really care. Once you've told the computer the rules, then it's off to the races. You can go have lives or you can goHave a life, and come back, and the computer will tell you whether you made a mistake and you're getting a nonsense result, or that you have the correct result. So what we know is this permutation operator, operating on any two-electron function, has to make P 2, 1, which has to be equal to minus. So there's only two possible eigenvalues. You can have minus 1 or plus 1. And the minus 1 corresponds to fermions, things that have half-integer spin, like electrons. The plus 1 corresponds, like photons, and vibrons, and other things. And actually, it's harder to construct a symmetric function than an anti-symmetric function. boson symmetry is less important in most applications. OK, so suppose we want to talk about something like this, the 1s, 2s configuration. A configuration is a list of the occupied orbitals-- not the occupied spin orbitals, which is a spin associated with an orbital. And so this two-electron thing can be expressed as a space part. And alpha 1, beta 2, and then we have minus or plus beta 1, alpha 2. And it doesn't matter, because you can permute rows or columns. write what is in my notes. OK, so this thing, this two-electron function, has two anti-symmetrized possibilities. One is a singlet, and one is a triplet. So s equals zero, s equals 1. We recognize this alpha beta minus beta alpha as the singlet spin state, and alpha beta plus betaalpha as the triplet spin state. And this wave function has the necessary spin symmetry and the necessary permutation symmetry. If, instead of two electrons, we have 1, 2 dot dot dot N, then Mr. Slater says we do this-- whoops. by N determinant. And the rows correspond to the electrons, and the columns corresponding to the orbitals. Now this, because of the properties of the determinant, is anti-symmetric with respect to permutation of any two electrons or any two orbitals, because it's really the same thing is permuting the electrons. And so this N factorial is a consequence of normalization, because when you expand an N by Neterminant, you get N factional, additive products of N functions. can reduce it simply by, instead of writing psi every time, just writing the state. But the best way to do this is simply to say-- this is just the main diagonal of the determinant. It conveys everything you need. Again, if you permute any two of these guys, any adjacent pair, the sign changes. And so you'll be dealing with the orbitals one or two at a time. And soon, you start to take this for granted. And it's a very simple thing, but it isn't. you're doing a huge number of tricks. Demonstrating that for a two by two, that what I asserted is correct, you can do that very easily. The goal is to be able to do the algebra in a way that maybe you can't describe to your friends because it's too complicated. But it is something that you can learn, and you can ask a computer to do it, and there are all sorts of intuitive shortcuts where you can look. And so we immediately know what our job is going to be. at a problem, and you could say, I understand. OK, so you're used to orbitals. And that's perfectly reasonable, because for hydrogen, we have orbitals, and there's only one orbital, and it could have either spin. We don't mess with that. But now we're going to talk about spin orbitals and that's just the combination of the name of the orbital with whether the spin is up or down. And the reason for this is it's easier to do the algebra. For every kind of orbital, an orbital that is a scalar, that doesn't depend on quantum numbers, that has a selection rule delta SO of 0. And the algebra for each is something you work out, and then you know how to do it. And I'm going to try to give you just a little bit of a taste of this. So we already looked at something like this. But we use a different kind of spin. We use a one-electron operator. And then we have our friend 1 over rij. That has aselection rule delta spin orbital of 2, 1, and 0. Stick diagrams are great, because it's easier to see on a picture, who are the actors, and have I included all of them, or have I left something out? And so now we're interested in the stick diagram for the 1s 2s configuration. And there are several kinds of 1s/2s configurations, depending on what the alpha and beta are. So there's four guys, and we can put our arrows on these things. And we know everything we need to know about these guys. It tells us what to do. Well, when we do this, the diagonal matrix elements of the 1 over rij Hamiltonian can be expressed. And we use this notation, J tilde minus K tilde. So for every two-electron thing, we're going to get this kind of-- now these are simple integrals, and some of them are 0. Because this doesn't operate on spins. So this tilde notation is a convenient thing, because you can use any Slater determinant, and you can express it in terms of J's and K's. In order to make an eigenstate of s squared or sz, you sometimes need two or more Slaters. When you have mismatched alpha and beta, the K's are 0. But when you have K, the 1 over rij matrix element between two Slaters, you can fix that. Now if you looked at 100 textbooks, I think 95% of them will have Hund's rules wrong. You're never going to get it right. But some things in life are worth suffering for. to make that mistake. And interpretive-- well, we want to be able to do something like what you did in freshman chemistry on shielding. Now you probably memorized some rules about what shields what. But I'm going to give you a little bit more insight into that. So we're going to talk about this for the rest of the lecture. OK, so you specify a configuration. And this configuration might be two electrons, two spin orbitals, two orbitals times e, or three, or 10. outside. And so you need some sort of a set of rules for how does that work. And that's shielding. So first, we specify a configuration. And you also learned-- in high school, probably-- how to determine the L, S, J terms that result from this configuration by some magical crossing-out of boxes. And if you didn't, I'm glad. Because it would have just clouded your mind, and caused earlier insanity than MIT causes. So anyway, so we have orbital angular momentum. And we can add the orbital angular momenta of the electrons following certain rules. the possible J's. Hund's rules is all about, of all of the states that belong to a particular configuration, which one is the lowest? One-- which one, not the second lowest. And why do we care? Because in statistical mechanics everything is dominated by the lowest energy state. And so if you can figure out what is the low energy state, you've basically got as much as most people are going to want. And mostly, you don't want to know the details. want details. OK, so Hund's rules-- you look at all of the L, S, J states that are possible for a particular configuration. And you can use the crossing out of ML/MS boxes if you want. And for example, if you had 2p squared, you're going to get singlet D, triplet P, and singlet S. If your friends tell you they want details, well, you tell them, this is what you have to do. But I'm an expert at that. well, here's the triplet. That has the largest S. The triplet P is the lowest energy state. Now if there were multiple triplets, as there would be, say, for 2p3d, then you'd have to decide which of those triplets was the lowest. And it's the one with the maximum L. And then the last step is, what's the lowest J for that LS state? And that's kind of cute. Because you have the P shell, there's-- for a P shells, you can have six P orbitals to fill the shells. L minus S, absolute value. If N is greater than 3, you have the lowest being. The highest possible value of J is equal to L plus S-- so for L, N greater than3. When you have a half-filled shell, the lowest state is usually an S state with maximum spin. But it doesn't matter. Hund's rules tell you how to identify, without knowing beans, what is the lowest. It doesn't have a spin orbit splitting, and it just has one value, which is whatever the spin is. energy state, and it's never wrong. Well, maybe sometimes wrong, but that's because of one of my things where you have a perturbation between states belonging to two configurations. But people get really excited when they discover a violation of Hund's rules. And it's just trivial. So there is this. What time is it? I have a few minutes to talk about shielding, and I will. OK, so we have a nucleus. and it has a charge of z. And so if we penetrate inside of it, what we see is only the plus z, minus the number of electrons inside this sphere. Z effective is a charge that is dependent on distance from the nucleus. It goes from the integer value that you know, from the atomic number, down to 1, because you've taken one electron away from a neutral atom, and taken it outside. And so beyond r0, the charge that you see is plus 1. Add 0, you see a charge of z, and so what ends up happening is you get z effective. And now we have this wonderful thing called the centrifugal barrier. we have a state that has a non-zero of l-- well, if we have a zero value of l, it can penetrate all the way into the core, to the nucleus. And the larger the l is, the less it can see this extra charge. So high l's are very well shielded, low l's not so well shielded. The shielding goes s least shielded, p, less, so on. Now there's some other interesting things. Which, you know, I hate to say this, but comparing 5.111 or 5.112 to 3.091, there is this business of what happens. shielding arguments are capable of explaining that. OK, so this is the end of atoms. And I've asked you to observe some complicated algebra which you're never going to do. Everything you need to know about atoms, you can tell a computer, and it can do it. Now molecules are much more complicated. And that's we're going to start on next time. We'll start with molecular orbital theory. I'm not going to be presenting the normal textbook approach. I'll present an interpretive approach, where you understand why things happen.