The two-level problem is one that's exactly solved. It's one of our favorite exactly solved problems, although it doesn't seem to have any physical relevance. So we can take a two by two Hamiltonian and exactly diagonalize it. And that's done using a unitary-- or actually, in the case that we looked at, orthogonal-- transformation. And so we have talked about the two- level problem. Now if you looked at today's notes, you'll notice that they're very long and very complicated. it's a rotation in state space. And the rotation angle is an explicit function of the parameters in the Hamiltonian. Now all good things come to an end. We cannot do this for anything more than a two-level problem. But we can describe a transformation that diagonalizes the end level problem. And it has the same property of being unitary. But the good thing about it is it's solved by a computer. You tell a computer what the operator is, and it will diagonalize it. by two and does transformations. And it keeps doing that until the off diagonal matrix element is small. So that means that it doesn't matter how big the problem is. You just have to have a computer that's patient or fast and it will crank out the results. Now you need to know how to use the t matrices, or the t dagger matrix. These things enable you to solve basically any problem in time independent quantum mechanics and a lot of problems in time dependent quantum mechanics. is another way, and that's going to solve an n-level problem. It's called non-degenerate perturbation theory. We could also be working in the time domain, and we could we could be looking at some kind of quantum beating system or some decaying system. We make these measurements. But this is not why we do it. All spectra have buried information about the physical parameters of the system. That's what's kept me going for my entire career. We're not allowed to determine the wave function by any experiment. But we are able to observe the energy levels and properties of the Hamiltonian. The Hamiltonian is a fit model, a model where there are adjustable parameters which are the structural parameters. And today's lecture is mostly going to be on the interactions between normal modes of a polyatomic molecule. And it's in your problem sets. You're going to do that in the next lecture. I might start using buried.word encoded rather than buried. word encoded. that. So we go from what we can observe to a representation of it, which we call the effective Hamiltonian. And from that, we can calculate everything, everything that we could possibly observe, including things we didn't observe. So it's really powerful. It's a way of taking the totality of observations that you're going to make and saying, yes, I have looked inside this molecule and I've determined everything that I'm allowed to determine. And I can calculate the wave function. This is amazingly powerful. you the tools to be able to take any arbitrary spectrum and extract from it the crucial information. In the last lecture, we talked a little bit about matrix mechanics, and that involved linear algebra. And there is notation. And the notation is unfamiliar, and you have to learn how to use it. And so we have for example-- the analogy to the Schrodinger equation in matrix language. So it's an eigenvalue or eigen vector equation. And we can use the standard approaches, but it's useful. to work in matrix notation. We use these t daggers and ts to diagonalize the Hamiltonian. And when we have this in diagonal form, we can say, well, this equation is just E1, 100 et cetera. So for any eigenvalue, we have an eigen vector. Now what we'd really like to know is, how do we get these eigenvectors from the unitary transformation that diagonalizes H? We don't calculate this unitary-- yes? T dagger c equals c. This is telling you that the columns of t dagger are the eigenvectors. They are linear combination of the basis vectors that correspond to each eigenvector. And so it's possible to show-- and I don't want to do it. I did it last time. And then it's completely transparent. It's really quite simple. But it's just this extra notation. And it's easy for you to wonder, what the hell am I doing, until you've done it. the most common, doable problem, and it's also something that one does in experiments. You can set up a problem so that, with a short pulse, you prepare the system at t equals 0 in something that's not an eigenstate. And I like asking exam problems like this because it's easy to get hopelessly involved in ordinary algebra rather than just using linear algebra. So if this is the transformation to the eigenbasis, then the columns of t are the transformation back to the 0 order bases. of t are the rows of t dagger. Now why should you care? Because you don't know how to calculate the elements of the t matrices yet. With perturbation theory, it doesn't matter that the computer could solve for the t and t dagger matrices. But there's no insight. You just get the numbers. And so depending on whether you're doing a time domain experiment or frequency domain experiment, you're going to want to use either the columns of T dagger or T dagger. bunch of problems-- I'll go over here-- that are related to the particle in a box. And so one of the things that you might do is round off the corners because physical systems don't have discontinuities. Well, that's going to be a very modest change to the energy levels and wave functions. Another thing you may do is have a barrier, and you could put the barrier anywhere. Or you could do something like this. So the particle-in-a-box is a whole family of problems that you could solve using perturbation theory. and eigenfunctions. Now, for the harmonic oscillator-- again, you could put a barrier in the middle or you could make it an asymmetric like almost all molecular potentials are, where this is dissociation and this is two closed cells colliding with each other. And so that is harmonic near the bottom, but it's not harmonic elsewhere. And the Morse oscillator is a cheap way of generating something with this shape and then doing the perturbation theory to understand how the nonharmonic aspect of the Morse can affect the energy levels. n atoms, there's 3n degrees of freedom. There's 3 translations and 3 rotations. And so that leaves 3n minus 6. And all of that is vibrations. So we have many normal modes, and it's not too surprising that, if you stretch one normal mode, it'll affect the frequency of another. And we'd like to know that. So perturbation theory is really valuable for polyatomic molecules. And that's the bulk of the examples that I worked in the non-lecture notes for this lecture. to know J, CJ eigenstates. Once you have this, then you know how to write the time dependent wave function. And then there's the origin of life. You need two particles to come together and start to condense into a liquid. That's the beginning. Perturbation theory explains the long range interactions by which all gas phase particles attract each other weakly. So that's important too. And so you'll be able to do all of this stuff. So here we have non-degenerate perturbation Theory. And it is important too, because it is just mechanical and boring. a mind numbing, formal derivation. So we start out with this rotary equation. We say, well, let us expand the Hamiltonian. And let's put a little thing here. This is an exactly solved problem. And we do the same thing to the energy levels. So these are the. energy levels for the exactly solved Problem. And these are. the first order corrected energy levels, and these. are the second order correctedenergy levels. Now we write the Schrodinger equation with these three term expressions. we do is now we write the full equation and we sort it into sub equations corresponding to powers of lambda. So the lambda to the 0 equation is really easy. It's just H0 psi 0 is equal to E0 psi0. We could put n's on this. And this is the exactly solved problem. It says, yeah, you build your foundation from the Lambda to 0 equation, and it's just what you know already. And what you're going to do is use the psi n 0 and en 0 to do everything else. psi n 0. So we're going to get a bunch of terms. We have integral, integral. And on the left hand side, we have E n 0 integral psi n 0 psi n 1. Well, this is kind of an ugly term. It's a psi 0 and a psi 1. But we know that H, when operating on psi 0, gives E 0. And so we get a simple equation that is just H1 n n is equal to E1 n. first-order correction to the energy. And we can continue. The algebra isn't beautiful, but we end up getting the following equations. We have E n 1 is H 1 nm. And then we get the second-order corrections to theenergy, which is m not equal to n h n m 1 H m n 1 over En 0. And when we do that, we endup with this formula. This is the mixing coefficient, and these are the state-- now why do I exclude n? Because we already have it. all we need. Now it does say non-degenerate perturbation theory. And so it's subject to the requirement that H1 n m over E n minus E m. So if the energy denominator is near 0, we know we're in trouble. But for the vast majority of energy levels, this term is much less than 1. So that means we can deal with all of the interactions among the non- Degenerate levels in one fell swoop. And then we're just interested in this little subspace of the Hamiltonian. energy levels that we're sampling in our experiment. So the molecule more or less tells you how to focus on the part that you care about. And it just contaminates the wave functions a little bit. And if you wanted to know what that contamination is, you could deal with it. So this is your handy dandy key. And you don't need a computer, although when you see the horrible complexity that will result when you start dealing with these sums, you will say, well, I do want to use a computer. But now it's up to me to organize the program so that you can ask the computer to do what you need in a sensible way and you still get good answers. So in the notes, I'm dealing with a two-mode molecule. There are no two- mode molecules. There's one-mode molecules, and there might be three or four or six or whatever. But the complexity is the interaction between two modes. And so we're going to talk about that. Well, we know these are just ordinary harmonic oscillator. And we've got to do some work on this. And that's where perturbation theory comes in. levels are that some of the energy levels for the two independent oscillators and the wave functions are the products. So these then turn out to be the zero order states that you use to evaluate all the integrals here. And we have these and A and A dagger operators, which are enabling us to-- we have the operator for coordinate x is proportional to A plus A dagger. And this has a selection rule, delta V of plus and minus 1. So we like these things because we don't have to do any integrals. sorts of things to deal with the most important terms beyond harmonic. And so there's a cubic and there is a quartic. And although you haven't really explored this, what happens when you make dimensionless coordinates? You factor out something. And if you have cubic terms, they're 100 times smaller than quadratic terms. And the quartic terms are 100 times bigger than the cubic terms. So you don't need to go much further. And you could have Q1 cubed, but we already deal with that in the single-mode problem. Q2 cubed, and those terms usually are not important because they mostly are dealt with under here. These are the parameters, and these are the things that you need in order to understand what this molecule is going to do when it's excited. Now when I was a graduate student, there was a great deal of excitement about doing what's called mode-specific chemistry. Ordinary compounds cost on the order of $1 a kilogram. But if you could do mode specific chemistry, you could make things that aren't makeable by ordinary, organic chemistry. talk about the primary paths for the energy to flow and the rates. And that was a major area of research for the last 30 years. But it started out being IVR, yeah, anything can happen. It's statistic or whatever. But no, only specific things can happen, and they're controlled by these specific coupling terms. And you could calculate them. Now there's an interesting other thing. I told you that the first-order correction to the energy is equal to a diagonal matrix element of the correction term to the Hamiltonian. Non-degenerate perturbation theory works when the energy denominator is large compared to the coupling matrix element. And accidents occur when you have, say, a situation where omega 1 is approximately equal to 2 omega 2. And so you want to really know how to do these sorts of things. So you want the algebra that combines all this horrible stuff according to selection rule that leads to simplification of the formulas. And then once you've got everything sorted according toselection rule, then you can calculate what happens. isn't just blowing smoke. This happens an amazing number of times because stretches are higher frequency than bends. And it's very common for the bending modes to be roughly half or one third the frequency of a stretching mode. And so you get a resonance. So this is special because now it's violating the fundamental approximation of non-degenerate perturbation theory. But it's a two-level interaction. And these resonances have names. There is a Fermi and there is a Darling-Dennison. level V1 minus 1 V2 plus 2 V3. Because of the energy denominators, these two guys are nearly degenerate. One gets shifted up, one gets shifted down a little bit. And it might also be that this state is what we call bright and this is called dark. This state might be connected by an allowed transition from a lower-- an initial state and this might not. So the levels repel because they're interacting and they're out of position. But because of the interaction between these two levels, the eigenstates have mixed character. This is called a spectroscopic perturbation. This is the core of everything I've done for the last 45 years. And so you can learn about some of these coupling terms because, instead of hiding in the forest of these small corrections, you get a big effect. And it's easy to observe. And the last thing I want to talk about today is a little bit of philosophy. Among spectroscopists or physical chemists, there are two communities-- communities that like small molecules and Communities that like big molecules. dark state. The width of this thing is related to the number of dark states and their average coupling matrix element. That's called Fermi's golden rule. And so in this case, you get the main transition in an extra line. And if you have high enough resolution, you see that there is a whole bunch of eigenstates under it. If it's a large enough molecule, you couldn't resolve them anyway. We'll talk more about this in a few minutes. There is this dichotomy between small molecules where the vibrational density of states is always smaller until you get to really high energy. And bigger molecules-- now they're not very big. Benzene is plenty big for this sort of thing. And there is the question.about that later. So I think there's a pretty good place to stop because what I try to do is to show you, yes, it can be really complicated. But it's something that you can do, and you can project out the coupling constants. says, well, tough luck. You can't do spectroscopy in emission. But you can still see the absorption spectrum because then your signal is the removal of photons from your beam. So there's a huge amount of photochemistry and interesting stuff connected with a large density of states. And again, when I was a graduate student, there was a huge controversy about non-radiative transitions in medium sized molecules. And that got resolved by two gentlemen called Bixon and Jortner. names that any educated physical chemist will know to say, oh, that's the Bixon-Jortner. And they're still alive. They're still doing beautiful stuff. But anyway, that is all I want to say today. I will do details on one mode and Morse oscillator in other sorts of things next time. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from. Back To the pageyou came from, Back to thepage you came From. Back into the page.