JUDY HOYT: What I'm showing up here is the schedule to orient us. This is lecture 22. We'll talk about silicides, device contacts, and I've added in a new material this year on novel gate materials. Part of this is covered-- the first two topics are covered in chapter 11. And then we have one more lecture, which is on strained silicon and silicon germanium growth and processing. There'll be four speakers in each. And those will be the oral reports and the student reports given on Tuesday and Thursday. On December 7th, we have these four speakers. We're going to hear short presentations, about 16 minutes each, from these four students on everything from high k going to diffusion and gallium arsenide. And then on the Thursday of the ninth we have four students scheduled. And I just want to remind people, if you're doing an oral report, you're expected to provide handouts, the same type of handout that I use during lecture. If you need help in making Xerox copies, contact my assistant. The notes for today's lecture are given in handout 36. If you have any questions about the final project, just please email me or contact me after class. We want to talk about the formation of silicides. How we make contact, how we make the structures and make good, electrical contacts and the device. And as I mentioned, I've added a new module this year on novel gate materials. So far, we've talked about how to get these insulating and doped regions inside. the device. We've talked about oxidation, implantation, diffusion, thin film deposition, and how we etch structures. But at this point in the device fabrication of the seam laws flow, we need some way to make a good electrical contact. The contact itself is still generally considered part of the frontend because you're contacting the silicon. And then beyond, that everything is in the 6.773, which is the backend technology. This is just a schematic I've shown a couple of different times to point out what I mean by the contact. doped drain. Here's the gate material. And I need some way of making a contact between this electrical connection here, this metal line, and the silicon itself. And you can see that can consist of several different materials. In this particular picture, these sort of dark regions contacting the silicon are going to be made of silicide. And we'll talk today about how you fabricate those silicides. Let me also-- I want to talk about local interconnect. Sometimes the contacts themselves are also used for something called local Interconnect. In the early days, if this was the drain, it was called a drain. But this is a local interconnect. It only extends over a very small distance. A very short metal wire locally on the chip to do interconnect from, say, one neighboring device-- in this case a transistor-- to another neighboring device, a resistor. Talk a little bit about historically about how contacts were made. And in fact, if you recognize that this is an NPN device, and this little n region right here is the emitter-- this is the P-type base as shown here in red. or the source of a transistor, a MOSFET, people simply used aluminum, which was the metal of choice, directly on silicon to make both the contacts and the interconnect material. So it was convenient. You could contact the silicon with aluminum, and then you could run wires along the chip. And that could interconnect the various devices. The advantages of aluminum has a low resistivity. It's the second lowest of all the metal candidates. And it has very good adhesion to silicon and to silicon dioxide. If you let it sit for a few minutes, an hour or so, you grow a thin, natural native oxide, SiO2, on silicon. The nice thing about aluminum is that it tends to reduce or eat up that oxide on the silicon, and it forms a very thin layer of Al2O3. But this layer is quite thin, and the aluminum itself can diffuse right through it. So this enables you to form a very good electrical contact without having an intervening layer of oxide. Slide 4 just shows you some of the basic properties of interconnect materials. Here is aluminum on the top. Again, one of the most popular for many years. The resistivity is listed in the second column, somewhere around 2.7 to 3 micro ohm centimeter for the resistivity. And the last column shows the melting point. So it is a low melting point material. The only other metal of consequence that has a lowerresistivity is copper, which is shown here, the third one. Copper is the material of choice for today's interconnect. Copper oxidizes very readily, even at room temperature. Copper is more difficult to deposit than aluminum. Copper was introduced in research in the mid 80s and in production about 10 years past that.it can cause lifetime problems. Contact their contact their at: http://www.electrical.org/electronic-science-and-technology/electrical-science/electronics-science andtechnology-and technology. contacts can, to a semiconductor, can be sort of divided into roughly two classes. There's an ohmic contact and a Schottky contact. A Schottki contact is a rectifier. It is when you apply a large voltage in one direction, the reverse direction, not much current flows. So that's not a very useful way to make a contact to a device. It's basically a diode. And the current transport is by this sort of thermionic or thermal emission over this barrier. is not considered desirable for making a good contact. An ohmic contact on the other side, or a tunneling contact, occurs when you can actually tunnel right through this barrier. And so if you do make high doping right near the metal, you can reduce this depletion layer width. And it enables this tunneling. So this is considered desirable. This is what we want. It tends to happen, particularly with aluminum and most metals, if you make the surface doping very high. A concept that is very new. we want to talk about that is shown here on slide 6 is called the specific contact resistivity. And we usually use the Greek letter rho sub C. The definition of it is given here. It's defined as being equivalent to the derivative of the voltage current density characteristic at a metal semiconductor contacts. So it's partial v, the voltage, by partial j, basically. And so we usually assume a structure where the current density is uniform across some contact area. Then you can calculate the contact resistance R in ohms. it's got a units of resistance times an area-- and divided by the area of the contact. So if I make a smaller contact area for a given specific contact resistivity, you're going to have a higher resistance. And this is a problem if I'm scaling devices. As I make the area the current goes through smaller, the resistance of that contact goes up. Unless we do something to make better contacts as we scale devices, just because of this geometric factor. And we'll see some specific numbers on this. A Schottky contact is governed by thermionic emission. So it's a thermionic process emitting carriers over this barrier. It's this barrier between the Fermi level in the semiconductor and the Fermanilevel in the metal. So that's going to tend to be a property of the doping in a semiconductor, and what kind of metal you put on it. So if we take this equation, which we know, the current voltage characteristic is e to the minus q phi B over kT. exponential in the applied voltage. And we just use the definition of roh sub C, you can calculate, as shown on the bottom here of slide 7, what the specific contact resistivity should look like for a Schottky barrier. And you see it goes exponentially, like the barrier height. So if we change that barrier height, we can change rho sub C. So what we do in practice is we try to get into a different regime. Instead of being in the regime where we're dominated by tunneling over this barrier by thermionic emission, rather, excuse me, over the barrier. in the limit of very, very high doping. So we form these-- you see we still have this barrier, phi B. But the distance, the depletion layer thickness in the semiconductor, is very small. And that happens when you make the doping high. So what people do in practice is you dope very heavily above, say, above mid 10 of the 19th, you get quantum mechanical tunneling. That's really what's dominating. And then you will get an IV characteristic that is essentially ohmic. this number, is about 10 to the minus 7 ohm-- that's ohm centimeter squared for an aluminum and silicon contact. So the question is if I change the doping from 1e19 to 1e20 by a factor of 10, how much does rho C go down? And again, this is an exponential relationship. So you expect a big change. It's a pretty big number, as it turns out, if you plug in a standard size of a contact on a silicon. chip. That's a 10 to the 19. At 10 of a 20, you do the same sort of thing, and now you get about 6 times 10 to. the -6 ohm centimeter squared. So that's about a factor of 9,000 lower. So it changed by almost four orders of magnitude, the contact resistivity, just by upping the doping by a. factor of 10. She got four order of magnitude. So this tells you, you need to have-- if you're going to get reasonable contacts in silicon technology. considered a little bit on the too-high of a side for a contact resistance. But it's just interesting to look at these numbers. And in fact, I've taken on the next slide figure 11-7 from your text. And you can see that these numbers are in pretty good agreement with what people have measured. And the theoretical curve is shown here with the solid line. There you cansee there's reasonable agreement. But you can also see the doping up on this scale here for two different metal systems. Notice here this is a log-log scale. So we're getting an exponential dependence in the heavily doped regime. The problem is we know that there are electrical solubility limits. We cannot just arbitrarily keep increasing doping. We're trying to find ways to do it. But you know if you do an implant and you do a certain anneal, you get doping up to a certain value, maybe depending on the doping, maybe in the 20s or the 30s. the low 20s. Maybe 2 to 4 times 10 to the negative. Beyond that, it's very hard to go much further. So the problem is that rho C is not really scaling because of the doping electrical solubility limit. The contact passivity doesn't scale as we shrink technology. And this is a major problem. People are looking for new methods, new materials, whatever, some way of getting the doping up, or a new method of making contact. That's kind of a fundamental issue. are going to be silicides, either cobalt silicides or nickel silicide. They're a contact between a metal and a heavily doped semiconductor, which is silicon. In 2003, they wanted to have about 2 times 10 to the -7th ohm centimeter square. But if you go to 2004, you want to lower it according to ITRS about 1.6 times10 to -7. That's all in yellow, and that's what we call rho C. which means their manufacturable solutions are known. They haven't yet been integrated. And when we get to 2008 in the red, to get down to about 0.8 times 10 to -7 ohm centimeter squared, there aren't any known solutions that are manufacturable. So we're coming up against the red brick wall here because the device scaling and the need to make the contact size smaller means that we need to drop rho C at this rate. And it's just nobody knows yet how to make a contact that has 0.9 times 10. silicide sheet resistance in ohms per square. That's not a problem. None of that-- that's all in white, which means people know how to do that. The real problem is making these really good low resistivity contacts to the silicon. I just want to show an example of how-- so you get a feel for how the numbers work of how one does a contact resistance calculation. This is for a MOSFET. It's shown on slide 12 of your handouts. I'm showing the dimension of the contact, so the region over which the metal is in contact with the silicon, in this dimension is 0.2 microns wide. OK, now into the page, or into the board, we're assuming that it's 1 micron. And in fact, this is a cross-section view of the device. If you were to look down on the device, a top view, this would be your source contact region. Here's your gate in the orange. And here's the drain. So that's the area. Assuming we go back to ITRS, assuming we are here roughly in 2002 and the contact resistivity is about times 10 to -7 ohm centimeter squared. Then can calculate the resistance of just the drain contact itself. The resistance is just that rho C divided by the area of that contact. And you get 100 ohms. So we're talking about 200 ohms of the total resistance of the device just being due to the contacts because of the size. large resistance. So we'll see that the contact resistance actually does dominate. And that's exactly why this number is dropping with time. People want it to drop because they want to be able to continue to scale the area of the device. But there's a fundamental trade-off here, unless we can get this rho C number down. And this is a classic structure to actually measure contact resistance. It's called a Kelvin structure. I took this particular picture out of your textbook. figure 11-35. There's a reference to it in your textbook, a paper that an article that talks about it in much more detail on how it's actually made. And what you do is you have these dark regions here that are funny shaped are considered to be the N plus region that you want to contact. The dashed lines represent the metal. So that would be the metal level. So this is going to take at least three masks to powder. And these little square regions with the X's going through them are the contacts. L-shaped brackets are made of metal. And basically you perform a four-point kind of measurement. What you're doing is this little region here that is square in the center that has a dimension of L in one dimension by L in the other. The current then comes through on this leg. So the current flows through the diffusion. Then it flows up through the square, the square contact. And then it flows out through probe number two on the metal. So you put an ammeter here. You put a volt meter between probes. 1 and 4 and you measure the voltage drop across that face. And then you just divide V divided by I, whatever you measure. And that's going to be equivalent to rho C divided by the area of the contact, L squared. So this is a very common way to do it. You might say, well, why do you go to the effort of having separate probes? Why don't you just measure the current and the voltage on the same probe points? And the reason you do this is because you don't want to have extra contact resistance, say, of your probes going down. the voltage. So that, therefore, you're only measuring, really, the voltage drop across this the contact face, the square face. So it's a very common structure, the Kelvin structure, you'll find on a lot of test masks and test circuits that people use to measure the contact resistivity. Here's an example shown on slide 11 using a cross-bridge Kelvin structure. You find that you get a current of 10 microamps through the contact, so that's I23, when you measure a voltage drop of about 320 microvolts. multiplying 32 ohms by the area of the contact. And you get 3.2 times 10 to -7 ohm centimeter squared. Still a little bit high. It's still about a factor of 2 too high. But it just gives you an idea. Typically you use several different dimensions. So you either use a 1 by 1, a 5 by 5, and a 10 by 10 square. You make sure you get the same specific contact resistivity number over all of those. Plus diffusion and things like that. So you want to use different areas. And for different size areas, you should get the same number. If you don't, then you probably have current crowding effects, and you need a more sophisticated two-dimensional model. So that sort of introduces the whole idea of scaling and why we want to do this. I want to bring up some other requirements. We said it's good, it's important to make a low-resistance contact. But there are other requirements besides that. that will kind of eat away, if there is any little native oxide, that will eat it away. You don't want a lot of excess carbon or other things at the interface because that's going to cause an increase in your contact resistance. That's one thing to get low-contact resistance. The second thing you want is good thermal stability. After all, there will be subsequent thermal processing. And those multi-level metal schemes involve annealing steps or deposition steps that could be in the range of 400 to 500 degrees. Aluminum has a finite solubility for silicon. The silicon actually gets sucked into the aluminum and causes this spiking effect. Today if you do this with any kind of reasonably shallow junction, when you go to heat the thing up to do the final forming gas anneal, you're going to spike the junction and you'll destroy the device. If you have a very deep junction that's many microns deep, it would never spike because it never gets that deep. But now the junctions are very shallow, they're 0.1 micron or less. This is sort of a classic case of junction spiking. You can see it's created all these voids because there's a solubility of silicon in aluminum. When you etch the aluminum off, you see all these holes. This is why you never put aluminum directly in contact with silicon unless you're making a really deep junction, like a micron-deep junction, you have some kind of device. In MOSFETs today, the typical source drain junctions are 0.1 microns. The silicon is soluble in the aluminum, if you put silicon in the metal itself, so when you sputter, you don't sputter pure aluminum. But it's still a bit of an issue is that the silicon itself can actually precipitate out of the aluminum. And you get these little silica precipitates, which can increase the specific contact resistance, especially in N-type silicon. So it's making an aluminum 1% silicon contact to silicon, which was, again, after pure aluminum, people did. in the 1980s or so, but again, it's still not something that people typically do because you're going to get a higher contact resistance. The way people go today is to form what they call a barrier layer. It forms a barrier between this aluminum and the silicon. The barrier has a very low specific contact resistivity. So it still makes a good contact, but it doesn't allow the aluminum or the silicon to talk to each other. So you cannot get this void formation. You can't get the spiking. silicide. So in between the heavily doped silicon, you now have an inter layer of this material that forms a barrier. So this prevents the chemical interdiffusion between the silicon and the aluminum. You pick a material that has good adhesion so it doesn't peel off. And of course, good electrical conductivity and low contact resistance silicon aluminum. So that's to satisfy all of these things. And these materials, titanium and tungsten, have reasonable contact resistivity. They are still not low enough to meet a lot of the ITRS requirements in the future, but today they're good enough. his book how he's saying titanium may work as a sacrificial barrier. May or may not exactly work this way, but it's one potential methodology. When you heat the structure, you may get formation of TiAl3 for some time and portion. And then here at this point in D, you can start to get the aluminum incursion. So the idea is you put down enough titanium that you're not going to end up with a spiking problem. And typically, if you want to anneal a typical forming gas, 450 or so, 1,000 angstroms of titanium seems to be adequate barrier layer. A lot of these materials for barrier layers. Ti-tungsten or Ti-nitride are very often-- they're polycrystalline, basically. And what can happen if you're not careful is the aluminum can actually diffuse through the long grain boundaries and can still make its way to the silicon and end up causing problems. So people often, when they deposit these material, they sometimes sputter them in an ambient that has some impurity. Could be nitrogen, is one of the most common. grain boundaries, it helps prevent the aluminum from diffusing down in and getting to the silicon. What ambient you use will determine whether it's a good barrier layer or a poor barrier layer and how long it's going to stand up. On this page 21, I'm showing a classic process that was developed a number of years ago called the salicide process. Salicide stands for-- the sal comes from self-aligned silicide process and you'll see when we go through it what we mean by self- aligned. So we start here with our naked device ready to be contacted. We just have N plus source and drain. And you have a heavily doped polysilicon layer. We then form our oxide spacers. So you know how to form sidewall spacers now. You deposit a conformal layer of SiO2, say low temperature oxide, and then you etch it back anisotropically. And here's your titanium layer that goes everywhere. And then you do a magic anneal at the right temperature. the metal, the titanium, is contacting the silicon, you form a metal silicide, say TiSi2. So it only forms where it's in contact with silicon, which is right here, this dark region, and on top of the gate. Everywhere else you have still remaining some unreacted metal. So we've created a material, a titanium di silicide or a metal disilicide, that because of the virtue of its chemical structure, it now stands up to the etch. I did not have to do any photolithography to pattern this metal. The metal was deposited over the entire chip. It was reacted with the silicon, and then it was just etched off in a blanket etch. So this kind of a salicide process was a big breakthrough in CMOS technology, say around the 80s or so. It's self-aligned because wherever there's exposed silicon, you will end up with a metal contact, a line to that exposed silicon. So it's very good alignment. easier to understand. It's the exact same process. You have an N plus source and drain. You form your spacers. You react the metal. It does not react. Hopefully it does not creep up the sidewall, which is a problem. You then selectively remove the unreacted metal form, put your dielectric down everywhere else, and put in your metal contacts. So that's a basic metal contact scheme that people use today. What do people use? Which materials are commonly used? Well, some of them are shown here on slide 23.  Ti-silicide also has a tendency to agglomerate when it's very thin at higher annealing temperature. Industry moved a number of years ago primarily from Ti-Silicide to cobalt bisilicide. Cobalt has a little less lateral encroachment over the oxide spacer. It's a little more sensitive to surface contaminants. The beauty of Ti is, again, the titanium eats its way through things, through oxides, sort of reduce oxides. So cobalt, you have to have a really clean interface. Nickel silicide has the lowest silicon consumption. It can be formed at very low temperatures. Big problem with nickel is you have to be careful of your thermal budget. Nickel contamination of equipment and of the wafers is a big problem. It doesn't have very bad narrow line effect for silicide in the gate. And watch out for nickel. Nickel is a very fast diffuser, remember, in silicon. And Nickel is also a deep level. So nickel contamination is a huge problem. Nickel silicide is becoming more and more prevalent in research and development. In the case of cobalt disilicide, the metal diffuses through the silicide into this interface here and then reacts. So you're going to form a reaction between the metal and the silicon. The question is, how does the reaction occur? Does the metal diffuse in and meet the silicon down at this interface or vice versa? Well, it depends on the particular type of silicide. And people need to deal with this. less likely to have creep up. In the case of titanium disilicide, in fact, what happens is the silicon is what's the fast diffuser through the Ti-silicide. It diffuses up and meets the metal. So if you do it long enough and if you have a short enough spacer, you can see the disilicides can creep and grow up from the source and drain down from the gate. And eventually you may actually bridge. And then your device is dead. you have titanium on silicon that's reacting. Here we have a certain thickness of Ti-silicide that's already formed. People do model this. There are silicide models in SUPREM-IV. Not necessarily perfectly accurate, but what people model is the diffusion of the silicon from the bulk through the titanium disilicide up here to this top interface. So this is what might happen in an inert ambient. Now, if you do the anneal in a nitriding ambient, so in an ambient that has nitrogen, at the same time, you're forming Ti- silicide at this interface, you can be reacting. The titanium is fairly reactive. Slide 26 shows you some of the different uses of silicide in silicon technology. So silicide are used, as you can see, to strap the poly. And finally, it can be used as a gate material. And I've actually updated it. I added a fourth one. So you form a little silicide during the salicide process. Well, what does that mean? Again, you're going to reduce the sheet resistance of this junction by forming a thin layer. It also forms a barrier layer, as we mentioned. There are two phases of Ti-silicide. There is a phase called the C49 phase. That forms at low temperatures. The modern silicide that I mentioned here is this nickel silicide, NiSi. It's formed at very low temperatures, 450 or 500. And it has a low consumption, only 1.8 nanometers of silicon consumed per nanometer of metal. But depending on how thick of a silicide you're trying to form, you may eat into your junction. work first. But what this is is a cross section of a MOSFET. And we've seen this cross-section a number of times now in our class. We now have enough ammunition that we can actually go sit down and calculate all these resistances or estimate them given a geometry of a particular device. So the resistance that we really, when we scale the channel length, what we're really trying to scale is the channel resistance, R chan. OK, that's fine. We make the channel shorter, we can reduce that resistance. But the problem is, what happens to all these other parasitic resistances, the net resistance of the device is really not going to go down by very much. with the source drain extension. It has a certain sheet resistance. It's doped to a certain level, it's usually very shallow. The second one is the resistance of this region here, R, that-- and generally, this region has been silicided. So it's going to have a lower resistivity. The third is the contact resistance from the current flowing through the silicon up into the metal. So all three of these are going to add up and give us different contributions depending on the geometry. There is another resistance called the spreading resistance. This first was discussed by Ming and Lynch back in the late 80s. It's a very, very high density of carriers. The current then spreads out as it goes into the source drain extension. This is such an important resistance that it can't be calculated by hand, but it's actually pictured on page 28 here, just to give you an idea. One of the reasons it's so important is that it allows you to control the flow of electrons. old paper. It's before they had source drain extensions. But you can imagine it then spreads out here into this region over certain distance. And how far it spreads out and exactly how it spread out depends on the doping and the geometry of the structure. You can't calculate it by hand. So this that's called the RSP here in this little diagram where he wrote down the different resistances. So our spreading is one that generally has to be computed either by a two-dimensional simulator or you have to get it out of test devices. those three resistances we can calculate by hand, that gives you the minimum series resistance of the device. There will always be a little extra, which is spreading resistance, which you have to simulate in a two-dimensional simulator. That's how we make contacts. I just wanted to go on and spend most of the remaining time of the lecture and talk about something else that's come up in the last three or four years. We can also use silicides not only for the contacts, but we can also fully silicide the gate and use it for the gate. classical older technology, the traditional technology. This is a photo from an Intel device. It's a somewhat older photo now. This was published back in about five years ago in 2000. And what it shows is what we've just exactly been talking about. Here's the polysilicon gate. These are the sidewall spacers. You know how to form them. And this is the silicide in the source. You can see it looks very dark because it's been silicide. depletion of the polysilicon at very high gate biases. So people are concerned. They want to get rid of poly as the gate material. But poly is an extremely easy material to integrate. People know how to etch it. It's not reactive with SiO2. That's not the case for metals. But people are thinking of replacing poly, but it's got a lot of complex process integration. An easier process integration that people are considering is rather than digging the poly out. only reacts to form maybe several hundred angstroms of silicide. People are saying, all right, we'll put enough metal on top of that, make it really thick metal, so that it reacts. And it reacted at a high enough temperature for long enough time that the metal reaction takes place throughout the entire poly. And you get a silicide all the way down to the gate interface. And here's an example of nickel silicide, fully silicided gate that was published about six months ago by annealing at 450 degrees. and drain. It's different from that. But it's not quite as complicated as completely replacing the gate in the etch-out process. In fact, I've got here-- showing here you on slide 30 some fairly recent results from the last couple of years of how people have made nickel silicide. FUSI is the acronym for fully silicided gate. How they've made this-- and this particular article came out two years ago from AMD. And what they're showing here is a method to form this. here, what they had to do is put a metal and maybe some other harder material-- no, sorry. They had to put, yeah, contact material, and then maybe a dielectric over the entire thing. And then CNP it down so it's planarized because you know they're going to get deposition everywhere. And they expose, then-- in the plane rising process, they expose the polysilicon gate. So here they have this very thick region where the entire gate has been silicided. This is an example of an electron micrograph of one of those devices. This gate has been fully silicided. So this is all nickel silicide. This very thin white layer is the gate oxide, very thin. And this layer here is the silicon channel. This looks like it's fairly stoichiometric, almost 1 to 1 silicon to nickel. Maybe a little bit nickel-rich. Again, we talked about Auger spectroscopy as being a means of measuring the composition of a device. using the types of techniques we talked about in our characterization lectures. This is a paper-- that last paper was from IEDM 2002 applied by AMD. IBM the same year also published at the same conference nickel silicide FUSI gates. This time they did them not only on fully depleted SOI. They also did it on a device, which is called a FinFET. We haven't had any time, really, to go into these new types of devices, but there are silicon MOSFETs these days that are not being made in a planar structure. The device has some advantages, although it's a little tricky to make. It's a double gate device. You end up getting two channels in this thin silicon film. So they may have FinFET and they demonstrated they could make a nickel silicide gate going all the way around that fin. An amorphous-looking region with Nickel silicide on the outside. And the reaction stopped right when it hit the gate dielectric. The source and drain are into the board. interesting thing that was also done in this paper, if you end up wanting to do research in this area, is shown here on slide 34. This is something called gate work function engineering. We hadn't really talked about it, but the work function between the metal-- I think we may have talked about threshold voltage control. The work function, which is a property of the metal material, to a certain extent. And the silicon, that determines the threshold voltage of the transistor, the voltage at which the transistor turns on. is, what work function do they have? Well, they have the work function, typically, of the metal. And there are only so many metals in the world. But what IBM has shown in this particular paper is that they can adjust slightly the effective work function of that gate stack. They said they could adjust it to a certain extent by how much they dope the polysilicon prior to the silicide reaction. And this is important because you need this flexibility in being able to adjust your threshold voltage. control the PT or adjust the PT a little bit. It's still a very tricky process. The reaction temperature or the thermal stability temperature is reasonably low. So you cannot take these and then take them to a backend process that is too hot. So they're very much a research. It was only published by IBM a couple of years ago. They're certainly not ready necessarily for manufacturing right now. Perhaps in the near future, but just to give you an idea of the types of things that people are concerned about. couple of days. It's not a homework assignment, but I think it's something you should do-- how to calculate these three resistances. And then we can talk about it and go through it next time. But what I want you to calculate is you're given everything you need to calculate the contact resistance. You're given the specific contact resistivity rho C. And you are given the area of the contact. You just do a simple division, and you can calculate this resistor. through. So you should be able to calculate this resistance of the silicided regions. And then the little resistor here of the source drain extensions, we are given their resistivity, and again, its thickness. So from that figure out-- so you get the ohms square and the number of squares. And you get a resistor. So one, two, and three resistors corresponding to this contact resistance, the resistance of. the current flowing through the sheet, and the resistance flowing through. theSource drain extension. In general, you want to get a high doping concentration of a silicon right at the interface. That will tend to lower the contact resistance by inducing quantum mechanical tunneling. However, there is a fundamental limit on how much doping we can activate in silicon. The so-called self-aligned silicide process, or also abbreviated salicide, has a limit on the contact resistances. It's really a big problem. If you look in the ITRS, there's a lot of concern about how to lower that. been the mainstay of technology for many, many years now. It has a lot of advantages. It's self-aligned. It reduces the sheet resistance of the deep source drain region. And it also provides a local interconnect layer. Silicides can also function as a barrier layer to prevent spiking. And the last thing, which isn't in the summary we just talked about, is that silicides are even being considered to be fully silicide purpose for the gate. And that's something that's in research right now, you may see in production over the next three or four years or so. about your oral report or whatever, please get back to me. OK, thanks. About your oralReport.com. About. Your oral report. About Your Oral Report. Please get. back tome. about your oralreport or whatever. about. your oral Report or whatever,. please getback to me about.your oral Report. about Your OralReport.org. OK. Thanks, thanks, thanks for your report. You can send it to me via e-mail at jennifer@dailymail.co.uk.