Santa Claus has come to town and you know Santa does with naughty kids Hees them finals he gives them finals. He gives them very evil finals is what he does okay so look out for Santa Claus he's really a really a bad guy. We have a couple surprises today one of which is standing in front of you with all this on and there's more surprises as well um let's see first of all uh this is not a surprise it's been announced on the web page but I'll remind you that we have a review session tonight at 6:30 in ALS 401 so I will videotape that and I will uh get it posted later this evening. sometime tomorrow okay um and that's there for those of you who had regrades on exams um they are available for pickup in the BB office and you can pick them up there so that's available to you. Last but not least we have a final exam I have heard and the final exam is in this room on Monday at 9:30 a.m. so uh get here in plenty of time remember to position yourselves with seating as I said before so we SE sit in theice odd-numbered seats. I've written the exam it has 150 points it has um the first section which is the short answer has 75 points that's half of the exam. One of those changes I'm kind of got to decide today is will we have an extra credit question or not I don't know so maybe you guys can help convince me today that we should have anextra credit question. I see well nodding yes doesn't do it it's got to be no that's okay I'm not. I think you know what I like to to have when it comes to extra credit right so we'll The format is the same as before the point changes are different. There are 25 questions in section one that tells you anything. I'm probably the last person you want to ask if an exam is hard or easy. I always try to write them in the same way I always do okay and there might be some music today I don't know so that's that's possible okay um let's see soThat's basically it uh the the format as I said is theSame as before. The points are different there are three questions in sections two and three. I think this looks like a like an average exam in that respect if you did not get a note card on uh Wednesday when I passed them out uh I don't have them here you'll have to come to my office to get them from me I will remind you that with the exam you have to turn in a note cards that you got from me. If you don't or use a different card or something you will lose points and again I need to make sure that you're using these cards and you're not passing them on to your roommates because that's that's important. Glycogen phosphor is U an enzyme that's regulated in several ways all right so when we talk about coent modification it exists in two forms. It exists in the form that has the phosphate on that people describe as the more active and it has the form without the phosphate known as the glycogenosphor B that is less active. Usually in the cell when it's present it'sPresent in the r State because only when glucose is present will it get converted to the t-state. ATP and glucose 6 phosphate convert it into the Tate quite readily. things all come together now again I'm not going to ask you to rank them or do complex scenarios with these that's not the point of telling you all that information but it is important that you understand all those different types of Regulation. Def phosphorilation involves a kise or phosphatase right the r&t involve allosteric affectors okay all right okay so that's uh where we start now um there's a couple things about regulation that we haven't talked about and you say my God it's already you know murderous right well there's an organizing scheme to it. has to itself be regulated just like everything else has to be regulated because if we don't regulate it then everything's going to be def phosphorated all the time and cells aren't going to have energy like they need okay so we need to think about that Def phosphorilation and that's the wrong slide okay here's what we're after okay now what you see on the screen is a um a scheme that shows the regulation of phosphoprotein phosphatase. That's the pp1 okay pp1. protein we've used the term G protein before to refer to proteins that bind to guanosine nucleotides this is not a g protein it's just holding on to phosphoprotein phosphatase phosph protein phosphat enzyme. Epinephrine is bound by the cell surface receptor all right so we've got an active pp1 and we're going to ultimately convert it over here on the other side to an inactive form this is the most active form all right well and again we're looking in muscle what happens is when we have epinephrine being synthesized we see that this protein GM gets phosphorilated. I said we do phosphorilation we want to favor the breakdown of glycogen right if we're putting phosphates onto things we sure as heck don't want phosphoprotein phosphatase one on taking phosphates off of things right because if this is active we put a phosphate onto glycogen phosphor a this guy is going to turn around and take it right off. So this one system protein kisee a by going out in phosph forting all these proteins is favoring completely the breakdown. put them in the same tube I've got purified pure glycogen phosphor and Pure glycogen synthes I put them together in a tube and I want to see what happens I add glucose and something very odd happens. The first person that answers that gets a free metabolic Melodies calendar for 2012 are they different active sites in the the same nope what' you say def phosphorilation come by and get your a calendar okay this Santa Claus is here okay all right so defosphorilation is happening but I only had two enzymes here how do I get DEF phosphOrilation I have a free metabolism Melody CD for the person who answers that. cool all right now why is that important why is it that this thing carries this thing around with it any thoughts about that should I put a c out for that there's a very important reason why this guy carries this around your book actually talks about it nobody's read the book this is quiets a Class B all term all right so why why are cells breaking down glycogen why are they doing thisy they need energy and why do they what's their typical needs for energy quick quick running from running from the grizzly bear right or the teacher that has is wearing a hat that's right either way okay I want this quick. what else did we learn what did I say about driving your Maserati to Fred Meyer you got to control them right if you turn something on and it's really powerful it's going to break things down really quickly don't you want to be able to turn it off really quick carrying this carrying around its own inhibitor is the most efficient way that it can turn itself off really quickly now notice this happens in the liver this is happening in the Liver the liver is producing what what's one of the things that the liver produces that only one other tissue produces glucose glucose. two things are happening one is glucose one phosphat is being produced by the breakdown of glycogen the other thing that's happening is gluconeogenesis is being stimulated both of those converge in the synthesis of glucose. When I stop exercising my tissues don't need it what happens blood glucose levels start going up. When my liver stops pushing out glucose and what happens to the concentration of glucose in the liver cell up and that's what we see right here this stops the liver from making too much glucose and it stops it very very quickly glucose is a poison we're avoiding the poison with this very very Rapid Control. ultimately right and what's that going to happen to the concentration of glucose in the cell it's going to fall we've just reduced the amount of poison okay make sense clear as mud yes sir. I will autograph these for you you can sell them on eBay I you know you don't know how much you might make from your knowledge here okay so knowledge is power knowledge may be money so you might meet some exciting people from having these things too. You never hey come over to. my house we can listen right or come Watch Me Turn the page of the calendar over that's what you're going to say right. glycogen storage diseases arise as a result of efficiency of certain enzymes either in that pathway or related to that pathway okay so um there are several of these voner disease uh this one lacks a glucose 6 phosphatase and affects liver and kidney and what happens to the glycogen well it's got an increased amount of glycogen but it has a normal structure well that sort of makes sense because this doesn't build glycogen is involved in doing other things. only the muscle cells are lacking the glycogen phosphor all right lacking glycogenosphor what happens when we look at the glyc there it's got moderately increased amount not surprising because this is what breaks glycogen down. It has fairly limited effects limited ability to perform strenuous exercise because of painful muscle cramps otherwise patient is normal and welldeveloped a person lacking glycogens phosphor in their muscle loses ability to do strenuous Exercise. The main thing if we look to what happens with the thing here's here's a a plot of the concentration of ADP that's what we get from the breakdown of ATP okay um for a person who has uh mardal disease all right and uh this person is doing this this is. a person with McArdle disease sees ADP levels go high and then it falls meaning that the cells are catching up and making ATP now for that last chance at a CD my question to you is what's making this possible. It's something we learn during the term something we learned a very important process that allows these people who have this disease to lead a fairly normal life. It could be slightly but no that's not the right answer the it's a process we learned during this term. the Cory cycle right what does the Corey cycle do glutose the liver has a normal enzyme right and so when the muscles start running out of energy what happens oh wow we need some glucose they can't get glucose from breaking down of glycogen but the liver sure as he can do that and the Cory cycle kicks in okay so in essence it's a a backwards thing to the lactate that you talked about but it's the fact that the phosphor in the liver is perfectly normal that makes sense. pretty readily in the fact that you're really just you know as as a kid you're going to have problem with exercise and you're just worn out with this so yeah I think it would be fairly easy to to detect that other questions I need to look in the back of the room and see if my surprises are ready yet or not are the surprises ready are the surprise ready oh okay are you ready for a surprise okay at this point you can put your pens down and your pencils down because we're not going to do anything more. heard before okay so um you guys know I like the Beatles I write a lot of stuff to Beatles music and you know the Beatles were like this but I really think they should have been like this you know I mean if this were an ideal world that's what it would have looked like. So as I was putting this together I sat in I thought about the Beatles and so forth and then I thought you know that's really odd you know there's all these things out there that relate to music that involve the letter B. hear the bgs oh you heard the BS okay Night Fever Night Fever right okay so anyway and what succeeded the bGS was a really important group known as right the back street boy what a group huh and of course what succeeded them we know of course was um yeah low moment in music I think but if you thought you've seen low moments in music You Ain't Seen Nothing Yet let me introduce the next bees that are going to turn the music world upside down through the bio comical choir please come down. Valeria and Linda so uh thank them all for uh thank you all for coming to help me with this I thought about you know introducing them you know we think about flash mobs I thought maybe we could just call these guys the world's first flush mob you know but that might be a little mean so I didn't do that so okay so we're going to do some of Britney's favorite hits we're oops we'll do it again and you guys know the rule about singing loud right okay. the first song that we think about is the fact that how many people in here are really sick and tired of that Sunshine there we go. When it finally turns out dry will be put away our reer it will probably be but I'll surely miss the Reindeer cuz the sound of the Falling Rain P down the makes. We don't want that Sunshine anymore please join us in singing our first big hit known as Let It Rain oh the Oregon weather's Dy the is mostly cloudy you can't stop it if you complain. music inside my brain so let it rain it rain let itRain okay I couldn't quite hear you guys Heather is going to pick the key for Heather will pick theKey okay I've been told I'm not picking the key on the next one so okay we have someone here who's much more musically talented than I in fact I should put the microphone with her perhaps we do that. who I'm destroying all my equipment here all right somebody put oh I don't want you don't wants that okay all right maybe I'll just hold it close to you all right wrong one here anyway all right the next song um we learned a lot during the term about hemoglobin. okay this is an old song that many of you may not know and some people here may not generation I grew up with this ad it's an old Coca-Cola ad it goes Heather S put some oy [Applause] [Music] ring Yank on his the globe and shapes will change a bit what a sight to see the way they toy cooperatively and as I exit from the lungs to swim in the blood stream metabolizing they allpress their needs to to them. hear a lot of voices on it's about sering proteases all right okay okay hea Heather started go for SES work almost identically Amino a TR tight changing their structure when they S1 then there are elect shs at the AC as theaction next [Applause] theide elak without ACH so one piece is bound to it the get set free has to act next toag where it started waiting for a pepti chain that it can itself to go and start all again. louder than you've sung before okay you do know you will know the last one. MP3's got added to my iPod some sometimes were and exams when the Cur turned out I don't think it's so my scores are too low sliding by finally there's examination on December. Heather take us no we're all starting all right ready one Anna two mil Hall dirty and they gety he walks to and not louder [Music] started MP3’s got added  to my iPod. 5m I'll have my car pack with information so I don't have to memorize it and I'll feel like aart with my party just one to go and then ho I'll be all right I think you got it thank you. [Applause] oh yes thank you thank you [Music] sh if if if you're too crowded for the final and I don’t get a chance to say it I hope you have a great holiday and I will see you next time thank you indeed you too study hard.