Professor Steven Smith: I want to talk today about my favorite part of the Second Discourse, a book that never grows old, that never fails to produce. Last time, I focused on a famous passage in which Rousseau claims it was the establishment of private property that was the true formation of civil society. But in fact, that's not really true. If Rousseau were only interested in issues of class and economic inequality, he wouldn't have written about inequality in the first place. Rousseau understands that even for institutions like property and civil society to be possible there must be huge and important developments that go on or take place even prior to this. And it is for Rousseau far more what we might call "the moral and psychological injuries of inequality" than the material aspects of the phenomenon that is of concern to him. There would be very little difference between him and materialist theorists of society like Karl Marx although Marx was in fact a very appreciative reader of Rousseau. Rousseau like Plato finds his voice when discussing the various complexities of the human soul. So what is the chief villain in Rousseau's Second Discourse and his account of the beginnings in development of inequality? Real inequality begins in a faculty or a disposition that is in most editions of the book rendered simply by the French term because it is really untranslatable into English. It is amour-propre, the first term I put on the board, which is the first and most durable cause of inequality for Rousseau. Rousseau distinguishes amour-propre from another disposition that he calls amour de soi-meme, a sort of self-love. Love of oneself is a natural sentiment, he writes, "which moves every animal to be vigilant in its own preservation" "Amour- Propre is merely a sentiment that is relative," he says, "artificial and born in society which moves each individual to value himself more than anyone else" "It inspired in men all the evils they cause one another and which is the true source of honor," he adds. For Hobbes, and this idea of pride, vanity, what Hobbes called vainglory, was a very important part of Hobbes' political and moral psychology in Leviathan. For Rousseau by contrast amour-propre is something that could only come about after the state of nature, a state that Hobbes had called solitary, poor, nasty, brutish, and short. But how could pride have arisen in such a state? Rousseau speculates about this and, again, this is part of his hypothetical or conjectural history. "From that gaze, from the look or gaze of another, that the passion of vanity was born," he says. The one who sang or danced the best, the handsomest, the strongest, the most adroit or the most eloquent became the most highly regarded. From these first preferences were born vanity and contempt on the one hand and shame and envy on the other. "The fermentation caused by this new leavens eventually produced compounds fatal to happiness and innocence," he writes. produced in many--for many people again, as he puts it, pride and vanity from some shame and envy on the part of others. That too is a part of amour-propre, the desire to be seen and recognized and respected. The desire for recognition, he says, is at the root of our sense of justice and underlying this is the intuition powerful and in many ways I think deeply true, that our feelings, beliefs, opinions and attitudes be acknowledged and respected by others around us. Rousseau: "From this came the first duties of civility even among savages" "Every voluntary wrong became an outrage because along with the harm ... the offended party saw in it contempt for his person," he says. "Each man punished the contempt shown him in a matter," he writes. "It is not the physical aspect of the harm that bothers him. It is the sort of contempt that is implied or entailed in the act of injury," Rousseau says. 'The contempt is more insufferable than the harm itself,' he adds. Rousseau: Amour-propre and society gave rise to the state of war. Do you remember that, about the cartoons of the prophet Muhammad and the outrage and the protests, often violent, that occurred about that? To some degree, I think, Rousseau would believe the protesters over those cartoons had a point. Their views were not being respected and to which you might say a Lockean or a liberal formulation of the problem or response would be, "Well, so what?" The task of government, according to Locke or the liberal view, is to ensure the respect.proportionate to the esteem in which he held himself. Government's job is not to impose a gag order on what can and cannot be said, he says. This is a respectable, sort of liberal line of thought going from Locke to John Stuart Mill, he adds. But there is something powerful and true about what the government is supposed to do, he writes. It is to protect you from harm and provide you with the freedom to practice what religion you like, consistent with others' freedom to do so too, he argues. The Danish prime minister has refused to apologize for the cartoon. Rousseau has to say about it, about this kind of issue. To tolerate simply means not to persecute, to leave alone, while respect for something requires that we esteem it. This is a vast topic. I think that amour-propre, the desire to be esteemed, recognized, and to have your values and points of view esteemed by those around you is very different from what Locke talked about. It doesn't require us to censor, self-censor, our own views on the ground that they may be disrespectful or hurtful to others. is in fact a violent and uncontrollable passion. It is the passion very much like Plato's thumos, spiritedness, back in the Republic. Like Plato, in many ways, Rousseau wants to know whether amour-propre is purely a negative passion or disposition or whether it can be redirected, in some way, to achieve social goods and social benefits. So much of Rousseau's subsequent account of civilization and its discontents grows out of this peculiar psychological disposition and passion. about the assertion that men who were once free and equal are so easily, as it were, led to consent to the inequalities of property and to rule by the stronger, which government brings into being. The social contract, as he presents it in the Second Discourse, is really a kind of swindle. Government is a con game that the rich play upon the poor. Political power simply helps to legitimize economic inequalities. How else can one explain why the rich live lives that are so much freer, so much easier and so much more open to attack? enjoyment, than the poor? That is Rousseau's real critique and real question. And it is the establishment of government that is the last link in the chain of his conjectural history. But what, again, is most painful to Rousseau is the emergence of a new kind of human being that this stage of civilization has been brought into--that this state of civilization have brought into being. The bourgeoisie is RousseAU's invention. Most striking about this human type for him is the necessity to appear to be one thing where actually being something else. Rousseau describes the dilemma of the bourgeoisie in the penultimate paragraph of the Second Discourse. He says, "The savage lives within himself. The man accustomed to the ways of society, the bourgeoisie, is always outside of himself and knows only how to live in the opinions of others" "From this distinction there arose grand ostentation, deceptive cunning, and all the vices that follow in their wake," he says. "Being something and appearing to be something" are two different things, Rousseau says. that he draws the sentiment of his own existence." Think of that sentence. It comes from the next to the last paragraph of the book, that in society we only live through the opinions of others, through the gaze of others. Such a person is duplicitous, hypocritical, and false. This is why this is the true, you might say, discontent of civilization. It is what our perpetual restlessness and reflectiveness have made of us. We are constantly our own sentiment of existence, he says. Rousseau's Second Discourse ends on a note of utmost despair. It offers no positive answer to cure the problem of civilization but only hints at best at two possible solutions. Democracy for him, this kind of simple rural democracy like that of Geneva, is the social condition that most closely approximates the equality of the state of nature. Only a very few people, Rousseau writes, are capable of finding their way back to nature, and he believed himself to be one of them. of civilization is responsible for all of our miseries. He denies that we can, as a practical solution, return to simpler, more natural forms of political association. But how then do we resolve the problem that he leaves us with? And his answer to it, his political answer, is contained in his book, yes, called the Social Contract, Du Contrat Social, published in 1762, seven years after the Second Discourse. It is not his only or final answer, but one such answer to the problems of inequality and amour-propre. In the state of nature, we are born free, equal and independent. Only in society do we become weak, dependent, and enslaved. How did this take--how did this change take place, Rousseau asks. I do not know. What can render it legitimate? I believe I can answer this question. In the Second Discourse. I take it he means the chains as in--that states man is born free and is everywhere in chains. It is what follows after that sentence in a way that is the shocker. Discourse, he had attempted to completely delegitimize the bonds of society. Now in the Social Contract, he asks the question, "What can give these chains or bonds moral legitimacy?" He says I believe I can answer that. Has Rousseau simply undergone a massive change of heart in the seven years between these two books? I don't think so but I think these are--this is part of his--one of his answers to this fundamental question. But before going into the details, let's consider some of the differences between these very powerful books. Rousseau's political philosophy begins, at least he believes, with the realistic or even empirical assumption that each individual has a deep rooted interest in securing the conditions of their own liberty. He does not presuppose altruism on the part of any human being or any other kind of self-other regarding characteristics. We are selfishly concerned with our own freedom and the best means to achieve it. The Principles of Political Right suggests that are appropriate to human beings conceived as free agents responsible to themselves alone. Each of us has a desire to preserve his or her own freedom and that social order will be rational or just, that allows us to preserve that freedom. The state of nature quickly becomes a state of war based on conflicting desires and conflicting again means of liberty preservation. This is the question that the Social Contract sets out to answer and to which his famous formulation of what he calls the general will is the solution. I'm going to end on that note today and Wednesday I want to talk about the.of preserving it and protecting it. general will and how Rousseau sees it as a sort of collective answer to the problem of the securing of individual liberty. So meditate on that if you like for the next day. If you like, you can read the rest of the book tomorrow. It's a great read and a great way to start a new day. I hope you'll join me for a cup of tea and a glass of wine in the next few hours. I'm looking forward to seeing you in the morning.