Al shalot is the CEO of GT Sports. He is a member of the Olympic commission the international Olympic Comm. He has been advising in the background for a while now. He says it makes absolutely sense to pay respect and celebrate gaming by having a dedicated event. It's part of the agenda strategic agenda 2020 plus 5 to connect with the audience the youth audience where they are and to leverage gaming and Esports to do that so it was strategically cited and we're just part of a discussion about how to implement it. have been very successful at using the gaming and the entertainment of virtual games to connect with audence with borts so there's less of like a fear and more kind of an excitement for the the potential. The Asian Games officially added League of Legend and other games on their list and suddenly you had like a lot of people watching a lotof people attending. The people from the Olympic Committee when they attended this event they like okay now we get it now we see that this brings so much potential to connecting with this generation that we need to take it seriously. moving around very much they're going to be in one location can you explain why Saudi Arabia as the host. I'm not sure that from from what I heard um this is a strategic partnership with a with with a host that has a lot of capabilities and we can talk about that in a second. They just said that it's going to come regularly to to be hosted in Saudi so my understanding is that that means that we're Going to go several times but not all the time just to to put this into context. a reason I think 70% of their constituents are passionate Gamers um and and if you're a gaming publisher or gaming team like us this is the fastest growing region of the world right now for gaming and eort so this is why finally I would just like PC always brought the idea to bring a property and events to a country to create some bridges I remember when Beijing was elected to host for some Olympics it created kind of like a a moment of like creating Bridges with like China and I I see the same way gaming entertainment in general could be a breach now for Saudi Arabia. you expecting to have those kind of conversations with some of the national Olympic committees and at the very least is that something that came up when you were advising the ioc on this. We have not been involved in the discussion with the host cities I know several City apply and and wanted to be the host uh this 12 years partnership sounds like a amazing opportunity to have a fing partner to launchable property but what I would say is that you know we we have been attending multiple events all over the world with or teams. to use this platform to to be open to anyone I think that's the way they describe it um so I look forward to it uh what I would say is like as a team as a as as players as athletes we want them to to play in the the best tournaments the best teams and therefore want everybody to participate so you mentioned the Esports World Cup there uh it feels like we've got lots of big new announcements lots of tournaments are we in danger of having too many things going on I don't think so and and we can talk about it. Singapore and we had an exhibition for Rocket league so apparently at this time this kind of game will be official titles and not just exhibition so all those games you've mentioned pretty uncontroversial. Do you think that there could ever be an Olympic branded event that has a shooting game in it though like do you thinkThat's ever so it's going to be possible to have a shooter under Olympic branding if if if you ask me I believe. Is it g to happen next year probably not I think there's kind of like a it's a common theme to talk about which sports are featured in the Olympic Games. Competition and as you can as you probably know poetry is no longer on the official program so I think uh it's totally possible that in the future uh finding the balance as always between popularity relevancy and a certain fit with the values that the Olympic Committee wants to project this kind of game will be futureed. At the short term it would be either depending of each title probably either a dedicated tournament for woman or a full mix tournament where it's possible but I'm very positive and affirmative that this will make a huge step forward. I'm not aware of any plans to to include video games or Esports in the Summer Olympics uh organizing Olympics games like winter or summer is a huge logistical challenge one of the idea from the ioc has always been to say okay can we can we do smaller or can we stop growing because it would be difficult for any City to host it if we keep growing again and again. By creating a a dedicated competition I think it gives more space for more game title to be featured. It give more room for celebration of gaming and ort instead of being one the additional Sports I Come Just As exhibition or just as a visit. of view of someone who runs a team uh one of the most successful teams in the world. What kind of impact will this have on your players because uh you know they might be getting pulled away to compete in these big International tournaments. There might be different connections they can form with players what's the impact going to be what's going to change I I see the long term okay I don't want to talk about oh who'sGoing to pay them should we be should we receive innity because we we give our players to the teams. opening ceremony under the the Olympics logos this is amazing the pride in their eyes is the fact that the parents had to find a passport for them to travel to represent I think this is what I want for every single players of G2. I believe this will also help us to connect with the BBC and talk to a mainstream audience about something that they don't know and and be discover this amazing Community this amazing passion the the Quest for excellence and the individuals that will become the heroes to win the trophy for the national team. similar to the summer and winter games uh there'll be something you know with a flag ceremony uh probably at the beginning. I think you know to see some of the players that we selected when they were underage that we help become the best version of them themselves as athletes being selected to represent. We have been dreaming of this like France against Spain with the best player of the World in League of Legend for years um so that's exciting for me as a as a fan not as a professional just as afan. their country wherever the country we have Chinese players we have malesian players. We have French players German players Turkish players American players at G2 make will make me super proud. I'm very excited about that and that makes by definition this event very special. There has been some small minor events with amateur players representing the country but nothing that ambition to be the best player of the world in the biggest games with national teams. That makes this eventvery special for us. We've got lots of events in Esports already what makes this one different is this idea of national teams like it's in the DNA of Olympic games. special the parity in terms of like uh balance between over multiple games is also something special aside from Bas Force World Cup. The mixity in gender which I think is very important desperately needed by Esports industry. It will give us an opportunity for the best player of the world to Showcase their talent and Inspire the Next Generation to believe it's possible for me to have a ro to play in Esports at a professional level just to follow that one up obviously you talked to lots of Esports players in your team is there a real want to compete under the national flag people want to do it. "Everybody wants to see what a dennish team will do against Corin I I would love to see it too you know so um I've seen a lot of players making the the guess or what the team could look like so his aspiration to be part of is is clearly part of the discussion," he says. "You follow a bit like the conversation about but uh rocket league and OverWatch back in the days at the at the World Cup for for their game and and and League of Legend also often have this conversation about creating the Euro Cup or World Cup"