The Underworld is actually a lovely place to "live" It boasts historic charm and eccentric neighbors with eternal ties to the area. The community even has its own guard dog, Cerberus. With Cerberus, you get three for the price of one! He’s just not a big fan of anyone leaving. And who would want to leave anyway? This is the Styx— it’S like the subterranean riviera. But you’ve been here before; it was the source of the Trojan War. your almost complete invulnerability, of course! The Underworld also features four other waterways: Acheron, the river of woe; Cocytus, river ofwailing; Lethe, riverof oblivion; and Phlegethon, a great source of natural light. Here, you'll join the ranks of royalty and heroes. Cadmus over there once slayed a dragon! And Patroclus is around here somewhere, along with lots of other friends and foes. Tisiphone here guards the portal. Ixion was once a king. When he didn’t pay his wedding dowry, his father-in-law, Deioneus, stole his horses to get even. Zeus miraculously took pity on him, and invited him to a Mount Olympian feast. There, it soon became clear that the disgraced king was trying to seduce Zeus’s wife, Hera. So, Zeus contrived a trap: a fluffy cloud that resembled Hera exactly. When Zeus had proof of Ixion having his way with the cumulus, well, you could say it was all nimbus from there. First generation of mortals, enjoying privileges like dining with the gods. When Tantalus reaches for food, the branches grow taller. And when he stoops to quench his thirst, the water recedes. At their father’s order, they beheaded their husbands on their wedding night. They must fill this basin with water, but, the trick is, their jars are cracked, so it always... just... leaks away. Oh, but don't worry! No leaky appliances for you. down again— all for trying to cheat death. As you can see, Achilles, the Underworld is full of exciting amenities. Here, you don't have to worry about brutal wars or painful cycles of revenge. You can finally just put your feet up and relax. It's a great place to take a break from your daily life. It also has a great view of the city of Athens, which is one of the most beautiful cities in the world. It is also a great spot to take some time off from your regular life and recharge your batteries.