Last week we looked at the we first saw our first magic formula which you've probably forgotten because it was a wonderful weekend so I'll remind you and um then from there we will uh resolve the spider problem and then uh we're going to look at uh uh something called the super magic formula. These are not official names I made them up or it's please please never ever say these in public okay but uh it's a useful formula okay um so last week we looking at as I said first of all we.  angular velocity is a kind of a madeup concept that just simplifies the math and it's kind of intuitive stuff is rotating Theta Dot multiplied by you know the Le lever arm right gives you a velocity. The Machinery I provided you is powerful enough to solve pretty much any kinematics problem because it's based purely on Geometry. The angle of velocity of in fact I'll fill that in later on a b and I wrote it as this so help me write it.  angular velocity is the angular of velocity frame B with respect to frame a right okay so we saw that for the first time now a little bit on the low of angular velocity that you've seen in previous classes but we we Plunge in anymore um the first thing is can of Point have an angular velocity now can a point have a velocity yes can a frame have a Velocity kind of no because if a frame's rotating some point different points will have different velocities so yeah a frame can have aVelocity but doesn't really mean much. "Ales don't add up right if I change the order in which I add angles" "Infinite decimal angles do add up" "If I rotate about one axis a certain amount 30° and then rotate about another axis 30° right" "You' seen this in Cloud yeah huh and that's right and why is that say again" "There's a plus minus two angles right but you know where I'm going with this" "Why is the angle adding up here a has something changed over the weekend" actually come pretty close all right so it turns out that infini dismal angles do add up. angle of velocity is D Theta by DT right and it's a vector if because it is about some direction and there's a d Theta here. If you you know have another angle of Velocity you add them up they doAdd up so the map does work out you understand am I making sense or not making sense any questions about this anyoneYeah angles don't add up what I mean by angles don’t add up is that if I said um rotate rotate. a rigid body right take this rigid body body and we we have two rotations one is about this direction right I was I was a little quick because I assumed you seen it before but I'm noticing that you haven't seen this before perhaps they don't talk to you about this in physics anymore so maybe let me take a step back and describe it in more detail. Instead I if I said rotated about X first and then rotated about Z instead I would have said X Y and Z so let's say I'm going to rotate it about Z 90°. you understand so if I just took Theta as a Theta with this vector and I said apply these two rotations well depending on the sequence in which you added the rotation vectors up you end up with a different position right but vectors don't have the problem when you add two vectors it doesn't matter what sequence you add them in right if I have two vectors whether I do this or whether I write this first and do this the net Vector is the same you get it. So if I'm going to treat angles like vectors they should add up correct regardless of sequence they must give the same result but they don't. of thing you need to kind of walk around with a book you know and people will think you're nuts but you know do that and you'll see that the angles kind do add up you get it. Angle of velocity is a measure of the rate of change of angle so it's a d Theta. It's a tiny angle get it in a moment of time right in a very tiny moment ofTime so angular of velocity does add up so you can treat it as a vector in the math. right then and between two other frames and you can create a sequence of frames you can calculate the angle of velocity of the final frame so if you look like look at a like a a um like a really complex system a gimbal assembly for example right you can always find little joints right mechanical engineering is full of these you know one Dee Freedom joints we call them hinges for example. You can always add up the angles of velocities and the net angle of velocity is the angle of velocity of the final frame with respect to the first frame. the final you know in terms of that initial frame get it and W so we introduced the the velocity and then the next thing we did last last in the last class was I revealed to you this magic formula I said if you have a vector let's call it n and you want to take its derivative with respect to the frame a now if it turns out it's more convenient to take the derivative of that Vector in b then you can do this. A lot of math lot of derivatives that's how we did it uh. but you need this correction term which is very beautiful done done okay so this was the magic formula that I introduced in the last class how would we go about proving this anybody yeah do the math how wouldWe do theMath how would We prove this here's what we'll do let's prove it let's consider a frame a by the way you notice I will always show frames with this little circle a saying that it's a frame and with a little wiggly line pointing to it I willAlways do that if I don't stop me and make sure I do it okay. little A2 are the basis vectors okay or the unit vectors you can always assume that little B1 little B2 are. the basis Vector vectors in b I'm going to stop writing it because it just clutters up the diagram. Let's let's assume n is equal to sum U1 which is not a constant time B1 + U2 * B2 now what I'm trying to prove is this formula how would I go about doing it someone wake up everyone's asleep wake up wake up. yeah let's Express exactly we're going to express B so here's what we're looking for we'reLooking for a d by DT of N and look n is expressed in terms of B1 and B2 that's really not nice. The way you would do it is convert it to an A1 and A2 representation can you please look at your notes and tell me what B1 is interms of A1 or A2 quick look atyour notes say it again is it plus or minus so B 1 is cosine Theta A1 is that right? compute the right hand side up there what would the so the rightHand side would be to take U1 B1 plus U2 B2 and take the derivative with respect to to frame B right yes maybe right so tell me what it comes out to be what's the first term on the righthand side mhm B2. Let's see if these terms show up there do they aha yes this shows up this Shows up up so this matches this matches right so now let's take a Omega B what is a OmegaB folks quick Theta dot it's a vector B3 isn't it the A3 why is it the. B3 they're the same. that's aligned get it okay so that right hand side term and we're going to use B3 instead of A3 just because our Math's going to be simplifi simplified. If you do the math there I'm not doing it because I want you guys to stay awake in class I don't want to just blindly copy down the notes here right so it all works out okay I will never ask you to prove something like this in an exam right this is almost like a solved example. you're confused that is fantastic because that's a symptom of something else and I'd like to surface it and help you figure it out any confusion about this anything. The first term here was BD by DT of n the second term is simply that this guy make sense John you convinced no no no are you convinced uh convinced enough okay anybody else you've totally got to get this Andrew yeah you had a rotating and rotating and Des okay okay. I took so look what's the magic formula it is the left hand side is this is equal to b d byDT of n right in the B frame. let's do that so let's imagine I'm spinning a basketball on my finger I could never do that but let's just imagine I's doing it right I'm standing at this and spinning a Basketball on my fingers the room the world the Earth is a frame the basketball is another frame the kind of the U you know you guys need to be like uh Neo in Matrix have you seen that movie right it's very very important if you understand Matrix algebra you need to see Matrix all right so go see Matrix. video game right so similarly so what others see is a is a basketball spinning what you see once you're done with the scores is you will see an embedded V embedded basis frame you know with its AR you know pointy arrows sticking out of the basketball get it and you would see it spinning. But one of the axes which is the one one pointing up ain't sping right it remains vertical got it? You can kind of do this Freeze Frame where you frame and freeze it then a second you freeze it again you measure the angle and that's Delta Theta over Delta time. a frame and be done with it okay any more questions about this very important hey let me ask you another question when I say frame is rotating with this is this is a tough one. When a frame rotates on another frame for an instant with respect to that other frame there might be a point that does not move. That is called the instantaneous Center of rotation but that but the angle of velocity is in about that point. The frame has an angular of velocity it's not an angular velocity about a point get it. yeah okay using um frames uh using angle of velocity so the problem was we have the ground, the spider and the Frisbee we put a frame here. How many degrees of freedom does the insect have in the same plane in the the same Plane in 2D right assume this it's like a hockey puck it's sliding around the ground how many degrees does the U frisbee have two dimensions in two Dimensions I have a Frisbees and it's you know I'm I'm throwing it in a flat on a flat plane right how manydegree does it have three okay. The three parameters are u v and L the way we're doing our geometry we're saying the the spider look this is just in formal okay I'll formalize this ston right. Those are the three parameters that change in our geometry and with those three parameters we're going to capture the blocation of the spider but we're using three parameters but in the end the SP spider is only going to have two degrees of freedom right but that's okay because when you get the velocity of theSpider it'll have only two components when get the acceleration only have two components so it'll work itself out. the the acceleration the velocity and acceleration of the of the insect anybody how do I begin write down the yeah always begin by writing down the position Vector so r o s is equal to U A1 Plus V A2 plus L B1 L is the distance of the spider from the center of the fris oh oh I call it Q sorry sorry I'm sorry q h say it again ah let me ask you when I write a position Vector does it need a reference frame doesn't the only thing where I can get away without writing a a uh reference frame is when I writing a vector at a vector. B it's just a mishmash of little vectors that are all defined in terms of parameters it's it's an important question you need to understand this this actually encapsulates the geometry of this entire problem right because if I CH change U1 the whole thing is going to move move to the right if I change U uh V uh sorry if I changed uh sorry U the frisbe is moving to the left. If I change the parameters things change parametrically that's also called parametric design okay okay so how do we solve the problem now I want both the velocity and acceleration of the spider. With this with the magic formula we can rewrite this as what so um first of all L is a scalar so there are a couple of routes we can go here okay and I just want to give you the routes one thing we could do is we could say l do a by DT B1 plus B1 you know we know we.d by DT of this Vector which is now these two guys no problem I can write them as U1 Dot A1 Plus U uh sorry V Dot A2 not U1 not U2 but U do V Dot right plus now I need I have this kind of mismatched term. can kind of do it that way but the simple way to do it is to simp well you know it doesn't matter we can just write this as B take the whole term d by DT of lb1 plus what quick hm I'm hearing a hesitant murmur not the yeah I was mumbling something a moment ago I'll tell you what I mean what I was trying to say uh cross lb1 what is a Omega B so we can rewrite a Omega b as Theta dot B3. um what I was trying to say here was you can go a couple of ways with this right you can say l is a scaler and pull it out and just apply this whole thing to you know do by CH by by uh uh use the chain rule or you can just treat the whole thing like one vector get it and they're both okay they'll both come out with the same answer that's okay okay because L is a Scaler. L is doesn't care what a reference frame is B1 is a vector it cares which reference frame you take its derivative in L doesn't you understand. by DT of B1 whichever way you do it the answer will come out to be the same just go naturally understand the the basics go naturally it'll work itself out is my point all the rules apply okay all right so now we want to calculate the acceleration now. We want to do the acceleration plus you how do we do this come on say it again yep take the derivative of this guy right I'll just write it all out and we'll do it neatly this time d by DT of u. A1 Plus v. A2 plus L dob1 plus Theta do L B2. on someone back there huh magic formula right and so the magic formula the way it will come out is this is going to break down to two terms. The first term is b d by DT of B1 of l. B1 plus a Omega B I'm going to stop writing a omega B I'll just call it lb3 to save our soul sorry theta. B3 cross l dob1 so these are the two terms from this guy and what do I do with the next term I repeat it. On purpose by mistake you never know with me I think it's correct okay and that is U do a1+ v. A2 plus this is going to be easy now. We need to do this guy by by in the using the chain rule right because the two terms you have to take the derivative of right say it again I'm sorry oh l dot here yeah so here what do we have we get th. lb2 L do B2 so by the way you notice this term showed up twice right that'll become so anyway we'll remember that plus what is this. compacted the math recognizing the magic formula right and it was all initiated by Andrew who asked the question why don't you do it right for which he gave up his watch AJ I'm going to show the videos now okay just to kind of break them on monotonous prob start with the um Med go round and then the other one right so this is it I'll tell you when to start in a second right so these are all the terms they're going to be there should be one two three did we miss anything oh we missed something for sure yeah okay um help me remind me what these terms are. you'll notice with coris these two terms always show up in different places and they add up just and it becomes two right. What is this guy cental what is this guys it's called Oiler whatever okay if you as I said if one of you invents a new term we'll name it after you okay and and so far I've used these words coris and all that I kind of called them out without telling you a lot more about them right so what we're going to do now is take a break in the following way I'm going to show you some videos showing you the coris force. We're going to derive a very general formula for something moving on something that's moving get it no seriously it's going to be a general formula. The super magic formula as a code word in this class so it turns out that several people have done research uh and I mean not like hard C technical research but research involving merar rounds. All the formula that you have so far are for things moving on a frame right but now we're going. to kind of but this frisbee is somethingMoving on Something that's already moving so we're Going to come up with a General formula for that. The Coriolis effect is a phenomenon that occurs when objects in an inertial frame move in a different direction to the path of the ball. In this video, four kids are sitting on a merry go round and then someone comes and starts spinning the Mero around. The kids in the merry go around see something different to the observer above them. G volume is turned up to an observer above the merrygo around the path the ball appears to appear to go in a new direction. The Corioli effect is the result of a change in the shape of the object in the frame. This is to this one I discovered uh I think last night and um there are two dudes who went to a high school and they put a bilard a pool table on top of the mound okay and then they did some experiments and these are very committed people I must say was obviously also a cold day and I just thought I'd put it up just to show you the power of human Innovation go ahead but these these dudes are very. committed people and they're very smart and they've got a lot of ideas. totally into it so they don't stop but the real the funny thing is that the kids actually can't see all this because they're below the level of the pool table so they're like jumping off you know okay so let me explain what's going on here so it turns out and then we're going to do the super magic formula in about a minute right. It turns out that with respect to someone standing in space and not rotating with the planet earth right so if you're standing above the North Pole and you're looking down at the Earth rotating it's like a mer around. kind of Swing Away get it and what happens with things like hurricanes and we'll show you I'll show some videos later if we have time is so now you're you're on the North Pole right you're sitting in the North pole and this is the Earth this isThe North Pole okay you're looking down a particle when it's let's say there's a low pressure region here low pressure so when all the particles start rushing towards it because it's low pressure right but they think they're going in a straight line but meanwhile the particle is moving with the Earth. tornadoes and stuff like that that's why it spins in a certain direction in the north on in the Northern hemosphere and the southern emisphere spins the other way right. There is a Coriolis effect but the slight deviation angle is so slight it's like a fractions of a degree per meter at that scale that it doesn't build up enough to really impact the Earth's climate. It's turns out that in that scale in fact there's a Coriolais effect. It doesn't affect the climate in the northern hemisphere. direction in which the vortex takes place okay the vortex is created far more by asymmetries in the sink or by rotation that was created earlier that can of remained right okay the angle of momentum which we'll cover later on the class it stays for a long time and it influences things to go in one way or the other. So it sinks you in fact you can construct a really large sink and you know apparently you can show it but it's very hard to do it it's hard to kind of isolate environmental factors so sinks not a valid example hurricanes avalid example. rotating other words there's a Theta Dot and an l dot term get it then there is a deflection in the B2 Direction in the way we've written it now I'll give you the general formula and you know B2 what it is ETC it become more clear any questions about coris by the way in the last class I told you this anecdote I said that artilleries artillery guns right in the 1700s 1800s um they would have to compensate for directionality because of the coris effect. that wasn't the reason the corus effect was discovered so I take it back right but there it is also true that in the in World War I when the British when a British Fleet near Faulkland ran into a German Fleet they spend they shot 1,000 shells uh taking the Coriolis effect of the northern hemisphere well they were in the Southern Hemisphere and missed and then 60 shells um they actually use the right correction and they nailed the German Fleet and they won that battle so it's certainly true that by this you know by by the time World War II came along the range of these guns was high enough that the coriolus effect is relevant. What is the force that the astronaut feels you know or what force must the astronaut exert in order to move in a straight line with respect to a spaceship or a space shuttle or something? That's the question we seek to answer. What we're going to do is basically generalize the Frisbee problem and the way we're gonna do it is just watch YouTube videos all day. To see more videos like this just in fact why don't we just watchYouTube videos all Day it'll be fun right all right. Kane K an is a professor at Stanford he I think he's still there retired um and uh kan's method is used uh to analyze the Dynamics of robots complex robots and Space Systems. Once we finish this concept it's beautiful and now by the way this kinematics that I've done is completely 3D right you can do any 3D system with this stuff. Going to do it is like this we will Define as usual and you'll find this all repetitive because really it's all the same stuff over and over again just getting more and more compacted. around Etc they use this method they use the symbology a b and all that right very few undergraduate courses on the planet uh learn teach the mechanisms that you've learned and understood right this is it that's all there is to on the kinematic side now Kan also has a way of doing Dynamics which I won't tell you I'll do the Newtonian approach uh but you certainly have it okay so the problem we seek to solve now is a your frame a a I'm actually trying to derive a general formula that captures what we did for the frisbe you have a frame B and what we're going to say is frame B is hurtling through space. to my notes p and this is point Q so I'm just generalizing it earlier put that you know the spider was going along uh the B1 basis Vector right. We want to express the acceleration the velocity and acceleration of Point Q with respect to frame a is assuming that it's more convenient to naturally denote it in terms of frame B get it like I'm walking in a spaceship I can measure my distance to the back of the spaceship right but I really want to calculate my acceleration withrespect to the Earth okay so that's what we're trying to do now. with respect to a what do we call that say again it is yes it is if I take the derivative of this it is right plus the derivative, this so in fact if you want I'll expand it I'll write it in smaller steps so you you you can follow it right right I've just written it out right. So this is the velocity version of the magic formula and I'm sure you'll admit that I did nothing particularly profound in deriving this okay and then that handout the typed handout that you you hopefully downloaded and read from the web you will see this EXP expand it out for you. acceleration of Point Q with respect to frame a what do I do yeah just take the Der of that one. Point p is a point fixed in frame B you understand very important so space shuttle astronaut cting on Space Shuttle find one point on the shuttle for example the instrument panel that figures out you know where the space shuttle is. If I'm doing anything that's not boring that means I'm making a leap that is not uh grounded yeah did I miss something yep yeah yeah P just so you know thank you AJ. is that's Point P get it so rpq is that vector okay okay so now let's do this how do we expand this what is this term come on yep what do I do here guys magic formula so that you know I line these two guys up right plus what what plus so that's these these thesethese these two terms correspond to this guy what next whatDo I do with this guy same thing okay absolutely the same thing it's correct precisely okay same thingOkay don't worry it's all going to work out this is perfectly cure I didn't do anything wrong here I don't think anyway I did anything wrong. yeah ah very good B where's this guy well it's just that it is what it is you will recognize it as anyone recognize what this guy is it's half of the corus effect the coru effect is actually two terms that come together right and it'll become two eventually so we need to look for another of these guys keep an eye open all right okay what do we do here folks tell me claudo leave it as it is no we want to expand it out take the derivatives away y what's your name yeah what's his name sry Jeremy yeah what did you say a yeah but it's a vector you're on the right track though can you do it using the chain rule why not let's do that okay let's doing this b d by DT of a Omega B right cross rpq okay I have a caveat when I finish this I'll come back to it what I'm doing it is is fine plus a Omega B cross b d by DT of rpQ so that's these two guys make sense plus what about this could I do there I just just leave it as it is don't worry okay yeah okay I can't change the order did I changed the order yeah you can'tchange the order you cannot change the Order say it again I'm sorry aha. a just a PhD student is getting his PhD in U in wiress sensing oh oh sorry sorry sorry Simone I'll be out in a minute one more minute excuse huh just one minute sorry thanks Andrew next time set your watch 3 minutes fast like mine okay so folks I'm going to write out the super magic formula actually this is it okay the supermagic formula is this and I'll name the terms and we'll finish it next time a acceleration of Q is equal to the acceleration of Point P which is the fix point plus b a Q Plus ahuh what is this guy Alpha huh do I skip which term do Iskip we'll come back to this. yeah sorry and plus this thing okay we'll end now because Professor Socrates needs to take over this is it this is correct acceleration of P acceleration of Q with respect to B Oiler coris centripedal and you know why it doesn't go to zero because I'm not taking a Omega B cross a omeg B. I'm taking a omega B cross this whole term which is at 90° to a OmegaB got it got it? Yeah sorry and Plus this thingOkay we'llend now because professor Socrates need to takeover.