We also talked about axioms. Assumption you can say axiom assuptions, or you can says also properties that is this technology that we talking about satisfies. And I am going to talk about only few of them there are modes. So, one we said free disposal, what does it mean that throwing away inputs is cost less, you can dispose of inputs without spending any resources fine. In other word if certain amount of output can be produced by given amount of inputs, then the same combination of input puts can also be used to produce less amount ofOutput. In economics at least 1 input is required to produce some output, or more than you know more than 1 kind of output. So, the key word is feasibility technology. Feasibility technology represents the feasibilities that the combination of inputs and outputs, that can be achieved in this world even the current level of technology fine so that is free disposal. The second is no free lunch. And this is quite famous term that we use in economics again and again at no free Lunch and what does it mean here. out of nothing that is not possible in the real world. Third is non reversibility, what it means is that a production process cannot be reversed. So, if you obtain half kg of curd from 1 kg of milk, you cannot obtain 1kg of milk from halfkg ofCurd. That is what we are talking about no free lunch, that's what we're talking about. We're not talking about a free lunch here. That's not what we mean by 'no free lunch' in the process and labor hours spent in the process back. So, in that sense all the production and processes are irreversible. And if we have reversibility in the production process, then it would violate the laws of thermodynamics. Basically it is related to entropy, if you are not familiar with this term forget about it, but you should just remember that a production process cannot be reversed fine. Next is convexity ok, but before we talk about conveXity we are going to talk about additivity that we talked about earlier and divisibility fine what is additivity. Student: To produce 1 kg of rice ok, you need either let us say 100 grams of fertilizer or 50 liters of water. We need land, but that is fixed those are fixed, we are not talking about it only these 2 are variables. So, on average we are saying this is what it is not always true, but I am saying on average, what we can do is that we can produce 1kg of rice here, using 1 comma 2 and 1 minus t by 100, 2 comma 1. is possible, then we say that technology exhibits additivity. Another related, but it may sound different let us say, if it is technologically feasible to produce let us says y amount of output. And it is also technologically possible to produce y 1 amount ofOutput, then y plus y dash amount of Output is technologically possible. This is example of convexity; let us talk about additivity first. What is additivity? Let us say that a production plan is let us talks in sense of first production set, if there is a productionPlan y what does this production plan y means, that it gives certain combination of input and output that is feasible. If y bar and y bar dash both are feasible, then what additivity says that y bar plus y bar hat is also feasible, is it clear. Let us say let us take an example y bar is nothing, but 1 2 minus 1 minus 2 comma 1 what it means, that we are using 1 unit of input 1 and 2 units of input 2 and we are getting one unit of output. Now y barhat is let say two comma 1, then here now we're using 2 units and 1 unit and it leads. to it gives us 1 unit of output. Then this is also technologically possible, that we use 3 units of both the inputs 1 and 2 and we get then 2 units of output, in other word now let us come to divisibility. So, again we are talking about feasibility, we are againtalking about feasibility fine. If y bar is feasible production plan if ybar is a feasible production, then it is possible to produce y bar. And in the process we will use three units ofboth the inputs. plan, it means let us say this take one example, minus 1 minus 2 and 1 if this is a feasible production plan, then Lambda y bar is also a feasibleproduction plan. So, what we are saying is that a production process can be miniaturized ok, a productionprocess can be synched fine at this level. It sounds very you know it may not be possible sometime, but if we are talking about really large scale, then what we're saying that if we decrease all the inputs in the production process, then we can get half unit of output. same proportion, then output will also decrease in the same proportion and this is possible this is feasible fine. The easier is easier way easier although they these two are not same, but the similar 1 implies the other, but not the other way around. If this is the input combination and it is feasible to combine them, in this way and get some output, then also it is also possible to combine lambda x 1 to lambda x 2 of course, here we are not talking about the amount of output. are concerned about it whether it is feasible to combine the inputs in such a manner or not ok. When it is possible then we say that technology exhibits divisibility, or production set or technology is divisability in each other fine. So, let us look at it. . What it means? We have taken example where 1 unit of output can be produced using 1 unit. of input 1 and 2 unit of input 2. And similarly what we have discussed that this is also feasible. Then convexity says that there let us say this is y bar and this are y bar dash. Then or in other word if it's possible then y bar is an element in the production set. 1 unit of input 2. Now let us say we just do not want to produce 1 unit we want to production 100 units. So, 100 units we can produce by replicating this process 100 times. What we are using basically 150 units of both the input. And if we define this t not by 100 using say that t not. by 100 rather than using 100, we say it is t. So,. basically t 1 comma 2 1 minus t 2 comma 1 will give us again 1 unit of output. If we add these 2 up we will get 100 units of output ok. feasible here, y is taking care of not only inputs but also output. The combination is all given here and this exhibits convexity. This is a simple example of how to make a complex shape. The shape can be any shape at any time. It can be either a shape or a shape-shift shape. It is possible to combine two shapes to create a shape that looks like a shape shape. For example, the shape could look like the shape of a circle or a circle.