Vladimir Ilyich Ulyanov, AKA Lenin, was one of the most influential figures of the 20th century. He helped overthrow the Russian tsar Nicholas II in 1917 and founded the Soviet Union. But was he a hero who toppled an oppressive tyranny or a villain who replaced it with another? It's time to put Lenin on the stand in History vs. Lenin, on CNN at 10 p.m. ET/PT on Sunday, July 8. For more, visit CNN.com/History. "He reluctantly did the bare minimum to avert revolution, and even there, he failed" "Perhaps there would've been more reforms in due time if radicals, like Lenin, weren't always stirring up trouble" "Your Honor, Lenin had seen his older brother Aleksandr executed by the previous tsar for revolutionary activity" "Such slander! The July Days were a spontaneous and justified reaction against the government's failures" "He even launched another failed offensive in the war, where Russia had already lost so much, instead of ending it like the people wanted" and outlawed his Bolshevik party, forcing him to flee into exile again. "It's a good thing the government collapsed under their own incompetence and greed when they tried to stage a military coup then had to ask the Bolsheviks for help when it backfired" After that, all Lenin had to do was return in October and take charge. The government was peacefully overthrown overnight." "How many people did they execute without trial? And was it really necessary to murder the tsar's entire family, even the children?" in his cause, living modestly and working tirelessly from his student days until his too early death. "He saw how power-hungry Stalin was and tried to warn the party, but it was too late." "But these advances could still have happened, even without Lenin and the repressive regime he established." "Yes, and I could've been a famous rock and roll singer. But I'm not that kind of singer." "You could call it that. But it was Lenin's efforts that changed Russia in a few decades" how would I have sounded?" We can never be sure how things could've unfolded if different people were in power or different decisions were made, but to avoid the mistakes of the past, we must always be willing to put historical figures on trial. We must never forget that history is not an exact copy of the present, but it can be a guide to the future. It can be used to learn from the mistakes made in the past and to make better decisions in the present. It is never too late to put a historical figure on trial for their actions.