Bogdan Fedeles: Today we're going to be talking about Problem 2 of Problem Set 4. We'll discuss in detail the mechanism of HMG-CoA synthase, a key enzyme in central metabolism. The enzyme is responsible for making the five carbon building blocks from which all sterols, such as cholesterol and steroid hormones, are made. To help us understand the mechanism, a crystal structure of this H MG-Coa synthase is provided in this problem. It's shown here. In many reactions that use a cysteine in the active site, which is used to form a covalent bond to the substrate, we first need a base to deprotonate the cy Steine and make it a really good nucleophile. The reaction will start by forming this thioester between the acetoacetyl-CoA carbons and the cy steine. In a lot of these cases, the base is a histidine. But if you look at this histidine, it's quite far from our cysteined here. intermediate you've seen in the serine protease mechanism. Now in that case, such an intermediate was stabilized with hydrogen bonds from the backbone of the protein in a structure that was called an oxyanion hole. Now let's take a look at the crystal structure of HMG-CoA to see how a tetrahedral intermediate might be stabilized. Here is the acetyl of the acetoacetyl- CoA substrate. The acetyl now is bound to the cysteine 111 here in the active site. active site and may also be involved in catalyzing the reaction with the cysteine by stabilizing the tetrahedral intermediate. In that case, this distance will have to become even smaller, that is to form a really good hydrogen bond on the order of 2.6, 2.7 Angstrom. Once acetoacetyl-CoA has reacted with the enzyme, hence, formed the thioester with the Cysteine 111, we're now ready to proceed with the reaction and form a carbon-carbon bond. up the proton from the general base in the active site. So at this point, we're just going to release the thiol of the cysteine 111, and the rest of the molecule is exactly our product, which is the HMG-CoA. The curved arrow mechanism we just wrote answers part 1 of the problem. Second question of this problem is asking about the stabilization of the tetrahedral intermediate, which actually we have just discussed. But let me reiterate as you guys saw in the serine protease mechanisms, they tend to be stabilized in an oxyanion hole. sufficient information to say for sure which are the key interactions to stabilize these tetrahedral intermediates. A lot more work, a lot more experimental data is necessary to figure out which are. the key hydrogen bonds and interactions that stabilize the tetrahedra. The three general mechanisms by which enzymes accelerate reactions are binding energy, general acid/general base catalysis and covalent catalysis. Now let's take a look at our structure and figure out how each one of these mechanisms might be operating. pretty obvious here the acetyl-CoA substrate first reacts and forms a covalent bond with the cysteine of the HMG- coA synthase. So this covalents attachment to the enzyme allows this residue to be positioned just right so that it can react with the other substrate. Now, general acid/general base catalysis, we've seen all these residues that participate. Obviously, in order for this to react, we need a base to deprotonate the cystine. Then we need an acid to stabilize and form this hydroxyl group that will be developing on this oxygen. energy contributes to this reaction. Both of the substrates need to bind to the enzyme. In order to do that, they need to be desolvated, that is to remove all the water molecules that surround them. The binding energy is also derived by when we align the substrate in the active site of the enzyme, we align them so closely the right geometry and within a few tenths of an Angstrom so that the right orbitals overlap and allow the reaction to happen. So also the ability to align this residue so closely that also contributes to the binding energy. or the tetrahedral intermediate is stabilized more than the substrate, then the reaction is accelerated and proceeds towards that pass. Part 4 of the problem is asking us to look up the structure of coenzyme A, or CoA and then contrast the reactivity of say, acetyl-CoA, the thioester with CoA, with a thioesters with a much smaller thiol group. Now, it turns out these thIOesters will be very, very similar because really it's only the thiol moiety that we need to form thio testers. a look. Here is an oxygen ester that shows a proton in alpha position. And as you know, the lone pairs on this oxygen can conjugate with the carbonyl group and form certain resonance structures. So the electrons can move like this, and then we're going to have a negative charge here and a positive charge here. And this is possible because the electrons on both oxygens are found in orbitals of comparable energies. By contrast, in the case of a thioester, we have a sulfur. better electrophile to react as nucleophiles behaves more like a ketone. For the same reason, when we are to deprotonate the alpha position on a thioester, the density on the carbonyl is there to stabilize the enolate much more so than it would be for an oxygen ester. Therefore, the pKa, the acidity constant for this hydrogen on the thioesters is close to 18. This sums up Problem 2 of Problem Set 4. experimental work and evidence. The study of the effects of drugs on the human body was conducted in the 1970s and 1980s. The results of the study were published in a book called "The Effects of Drugs on the Human Body" The book was published by Oxford University Press in 1989. It was the first of its kind to be published in the U.S. and is published by Simon & Schuster, a division of Simon and Schuster Inc. in New York. The book is available in hardback and paperback.