CASEY RODRIGUEZ: We proved these two theorems last time, and we used them for-- and we had a couple of applications of them. So the first theorem, simple theorem, was that a sequence converges to x if and only if the limit as n goes to infinity of the absolute value of xn minus x goes to 0. And then we also had the squeeze theorem, that if you have three sequences-- a sub n,. b sub n, and x sub n-- so that xSubN is in between a subN and bSubN. squeezed in between a sub n and b sub n. Last time we used this to prove a kind of special limit that this equals 0 if the absolute value of c is less than 1. So let's use this to do a few more special limits if you like. I'm not going to prove it, but it's a simple exercise using induction. And the binomial theorem says that [? for all ?] [? N, the ?] natural numbers, x, y in R, x plus y raised to the n is equal to the sum from k equals 0. to n of n choose k, x to the n minus k y to the k. If p is positive, then limit as n goes to infinity of p to the 1 over n equals 1. And the third is-- it's just that a certain limit exists-- limit as N goes to Infinity of n to 1 over N equals 1, OK? Let me make a small comment here. So far in our discussion of the real numbers, so far we've been talking about real numbers. We're going to move on to other topics. we've only defined what it means to take a real number to an integer power, but-- and n-th roots. So using that, we can then define how totake a real numbers to a rational power. OK? All of that is just to say that to define a positive real number, we need to use the elementary facts about the real numbers, the fact that it has the least upper bound property, and that the rationales are somehow dense in the realNumbers. positive real number to a positive real number or to a real number of power doesn't require the introduction of the exponential or logarithm. So all of that is just to say that what we've done up to now-- these things actually do make sense. But we're just going to use the basic properties of exponents throughout all this, so we don't-- we haven't even talked about continuity, or derivatives, or anything like that. So we'll just use elementary means to be able to prove these statements. epsilon positive there, we should be able to find a capital number M, such that if n is bigger than or equal to capital M, 1 over n to the p is less than epsilon. So that proves number one. So number two we'll do-- we really only need to do two cases. One is p. So p equals 1 is fine. This is clear, because then I just get 1 for the whole sequence. Now let me do p bigger than 1. OK. We have an inequality which we proved actually in the second lecture, I think, using induction, but you can actually get from binomial theorem as well. OK? So we use this inequality now with x equals p minus 1. So p-- this is equal to 1 plus p to the 1 over n minus 1 raised to the n-th power. And so I want to show that this quantity here goes to 0.over n plus 1. OK?" "Yes," he says. "I'm sorry. I'm sorry." the binomial theorem. And we'll use the binometric theorem to get a little bit of a different inequality. So for number 3, we want to prove limit as n goes to infinity of n over 1 over n equals 1. So let xn equal n to the 1/n minus 1, which we note is bigger than or equal to 0 for all n. And so my goal I want to show is limit as x as n went to infinity, because then that proves that this converges to 0. way we're going to do that is using an inequality we get from the binomial theorem-- and using this trick here. Now, if we look at plus x to the n raised to theN, this is just-- that's just n-- let me move it over a little bit. Plus x to n raised the n. x sub n is n to the 1/n minus 1. Add 1. I get into n. And these coefficients are just quotients of factorials, so I get n. they're always non-negative as well. This sum is always bigger than or equal to 1 term from the sum. So it's bigger than  equal to k equals 2 [INAUDIBLE] y2-- you'll see-- x sub n squared. Now, n choose 2-- this is equal to n factorial over 2 factorial n minus 2Factorial x to the n squares x of n squared, which equals n times n minus 1 over 2 x ofn squared. to 2 over n minus 1 square root. OK? And now this is just 0, so it converges to 0. This right-hand side is square root of 2 overn minus 1. Now, the limit as n goes to infinity of 2OverN minus 1 is 0. Square root of that also converged to 0, that's a fact we did from the end of last time. So this whole thing convergesto 0. And that completes the proof. All right, so now we are going to study a couple of objects related to a bounded sequence. What's the underlying question? Convergent sequences are bounded, so-- and they have convergent subsequences. Not all sequences have convergence. We're going to prove it by introducing limsup and liminf, because these are also two important objects that arise in analysis. So let xn be bounded sequence. And we define-- if they exist, there are there, there. And this is a very-- really a very powerful statement. And I'll restate it in a little bit when we get to the statement of that theorem-- namely, that every bounded sequence does have a convergence. are going to be certain limits, so it's not clear that they exist at all to begin with. But we'll show that they always do exist. We define limsup x sub n. And sometimes I'll write n goes to infinity underneath. Sometimes I'll just write limsup or I'll have an n underneath it. This is supposed to be a number, and this is equal to the limit as n go to infinity of a new sequence. What are the entries of this new sequence? This is sup of x of k, k bigger than or equal to n. If I have a bounded sequence, then the limsup and the liminf exist. And we show that by proving that these two sequences have these monotonicity properties. And so this uses the sup part of this previous theorem, but if we use the inf part, then we also get the statement for the b sub n. So rather than write out the details, I'll leave it to you just to flip around the inequalities for the inf in your notes. So similarly, for all N, a natural number, b subN is bigger than or equal to b subn plus 1-- or other way. in terms of the a sub n's and b subn's-- means minus B is less than or equal to b sub n. So these sequences are bounded. So in fact, these two implies that-- all right, so we've shown that these two sequences that define-- that we use to define the limsup and the liminf are monotone and bounded, so therefore, the limit of these two. sequences-- the limits, which define theLimsup and liminf, actually exist. The smallest thing in a set cannot be an upper bound for this set, so if you like the Archimedean property, you can always find something from the set less than 0. So we're looking at now the set 1 over k, where n is-- where k is bigger than or equal to n. So the supremum of this set is simply 1/n. So as n goes to infinity, the limit of this supremum here, which equals the limit as n go to infinity of 1/N, equals 0. The Bolzano-Weierstrass theorem says that every bounded sequence has a convergence to the limsup and the liminf. We can prove this by taking the limit as n goes to infinity of 0 equals 0, all right. So the original sequence, which we know-- or shown last time-- doesn't converge. But that's not just a one-way street. In fact, we have something stronger, in that we have at least two two subsequences which converge at least at least once. to these two numbers, which may or may not be the same. OK? So the reason this is so powerful and so strong is that it-- to get your hands on something, it doesn't require you to show something as strong as showing there is a sequence converging to that. So first, take a sequence approaching-- so that the values are approaching that-- the outputs are approaching the maximum. Then you could pass to a subsequence, which actually does converge to something by this theorem, and proceed in that way. small bit of rambling about why this theorem is so useful is that, again, it's very difficult to show convergence to that thing you want to study. But this theorem says you don't need to work that hard or try to do the impossible. It's also useful in the study of PDEs, which is what I study. So I have a soft spot for it. Actually, one of its generalizations-- all right, so let's prove this theorem that there exists some sequences which converge to. the limsup and liminf. So I want to show that there's something converging to the limit as n goes to infinity of the a sub n's. So we know that there exists an n sub 1 bigger than or equal to n. And so what I'm going to do is I's going to try up a subsequence of elements between a subN and a subn minus something which is converging. to 0, and not quite a sub N. So it'll be along asequence as well. than or equal to 1 simply by how this is defined as a supremum, and by the exercise from assignment 3. a sub 1 minus 1 is not an upper bound for the set asub 1, which is x sub k's. Therefore, I should be able to find an element from this set strictly bigger than that. Since a sub 2 plus 1 equals the supremum of the x of k, there exists an n sub 3 bigger than n sub 2, such that a sub n sub 1 plus 1, minus now a third, is less than 1. The limit as k goes to infinity of a sub n sub k minus 1 plus 1 equals the limit of the original sequence, which is, by definition, the limsup. Now, we've shown that there exists a subsequence converging to the lim Sup and the liminf, which gives us the Bolzano-Weierstrass theorem. And now let me come back to the statement I made about these two sequences here-- namely, that the lim sup equals the lim inf if and only if the original. sequence converges. Let x sub n be a bounded sequence. Then xn converges if and only if limsup equals the liminf. And there's one more part. If xn agrees, then all these limits agree. We're assuming that these two things equal each other. They're given by a common value L. And what we're going to end up showing is that this sequence converges to L. So that's another way of thinking about limsups and liminfs is that they also somehow measure just how divergent your sequence is. If that difference is 0, then your original sequence is convergent.