Professor Steven Smith: I want to talk today about Aristotle's discovery of America. This will probably come as a surprise to some of you that Aristotle discovered America, but I will get to that in a minute. In many ways for Aristotle, as it is for every student of politics, the most difficult issue one confronts is the problem of faction. Smith: Aristotle's proposal for a mixture of oligarchy and democracy seems, in many ways, to anticipate James Madison's call for a government where powers must be separated. any sensible reader of Aristotle would reach is that Aristotle, in fact, discovered the American Constitution 1,500 or 2,000 years before it was written. This may seem surprising to you, since of course Aristotle lived long before. But that may simply be our own prejudice to think that my friend at the CUNY Graduate Center, Peter Simpson, has argued in a paper that I found quite convincing. I say, it may just be our prejudice that he didn't, but it may be true. like ours or even identical to ours existed at some point in the ancient past, in the far distant past that Aristotle knew about. But Aristotle's mixed constitution differs from ours still in certain important respects. Aristotle understands the mixed constitution as a balance of classes--the one, the few, and the many. For Aristotle, it is not the liberty of the individual so much as the functioning or functional well-being of the city that is the highest priority. He clearly understands, in many ways, the virtues of private property and of commerce. people par excellence--the Phoenicians would be the best regime. Aristotle could never endorse the view stated by a famous American president that the business of America is business. The political partnership, he says, must be regarded for the sake of noble acts performed well. He would have been critical of the American tendency to organize into clubs, what we call political parties. These political clubs or parties use their influence to incense the populous, using their power to whip up dangerous passions that tend to make politicians closer to demagogues than to statesmen. Aristotle was not without his own critique of the American constitution and American political culture. There is, obviously, much in the American regime that Aristotle would have found admirable, even though it does not conform to his idea of the best regime. In these parts of the Politics, Aristotle offers a serious challenge to existing Greek traditions and patterns of political education. Every bit, in many ways, is far reaching as Plato's Republic. In the first place, he tells us the purpose of Aristotle's Republic is directed not at the people, but at the best men. to war, but in fact to peace. The citizen of the best regime, he says, must be able to sustain war if duty requires, but only for the sake of peace and leisure. Leisure does not simply mean rest or inactivity, but leisure is necessary for education or what he sometimes calls by the term philosophy. By philosophy, he seems to suggest not so much the capacity for abstract or speculative thought, but rather a kind of liberal education that he regards to be the preserve of the megalopsychos. The megalopsychos, the gentleman, whatever else he is, is not a philosopher in the strict sense. He is a person of some inherited wealth, chiefly landed property, but whose way of life will be urban. He will be a member of what we might call the urban patriciate. We can begin to see how Aristotle's best regime differs from Plato's intransigent demand for the rule of philosopher-kings. The gentleman is, in many ways, for Aristotle, the ideal recipient of this form of education, of liberal education. Aristotle tells us he is slow to act, unless something of great importance is at stake. He repays favor with interest so as not to be under any obligations to others. He speaks his mind without fear or favor, somewhat like the New York Times, because to dissemble would be beneath him. He may occasionally hurt others, but this is not done out of deliberate cruelty. He will possess beautiful but useless things, suggesting the possession not only of wealth, but of a kind of cultivated aesthetic sense. megalopsychos walks slowly, because to hurry is undignified, is tall and speaks with a deep voice. Most importantly, you might say, what distinguishes the gentleman as a class from the philosophers is a certain kind of knowledge or practical intelligence. The gentleman may lack the speculative intelligence of a Socrates, but he will possess that quality of practical rationality, of practical judgment necessary for the administration of affairs. Aristotle calls it by the term phronimos, that I have on the blackboard. same thing, obviously, as speculative or philosophic intelligence. The phronimos is the person who is able to grasp the fitting or the appropriate, the appropriate thing to do out of the complex arrangements that make up any situation. Such a person embodies that special quality of insight and discrimination that distinguishes him or her from people, again, of more theoretical or speculative cast of mind. How is this quality of judgment, of practical wisdom, of horse sense, how is it acquired? Aristotle tells us that this kind of knowledge is most appropriate to politics. knowledge of how to act where the purpose of action is acting well. This kind of knowledge entails judgment and deliberation. We only deliberate, Aristotle says, over things where there is some choice. We deliberate with an eye to preservation or change, to making something better or to preserve it from becoming worse. It is the skill possessed by the greatest statesmen, you might say, the fathers of the constitutions, as it were, who create the permanent framework in which allows later and lesser figures to handle change. The quality of practical judgment phronimos, practical wisdom, was developed, I think, in a beautiful essay, without any explicit reference to Aristotle, by the English political philosopher Isaiah Berlin. Anyone here ever heard of Isaiah Berlin? Not one of you? Famous, famous English philosopher, died a number of years ago in the late ‘90s. He wrote a wonderful essay called Political Judgment. In it he asks, "What is the intellectual quality that successful statesmen possess that distinguishes their knowledge from all other forms of rationality and knowledge?" Like Aristotle, Berlin distinguishes a kind of practical skill possessed by the greatest minds, political minds at least. He says it's quite different and from what he calls the great psychological novelists, from that possessed of the greatest philosophers and scientists. "What are we to call this capacity?" Berlin continues. "Practical reason, perhaps is a sense of what will work and what will not. It is a capacity for synthesis rather than analysis, for knowledge in the.public life, which successful statesmen have" sense in which trainers know their animals or parents their children. Aristotle describes this political knowledge as phronimos. How is this knowledge acquired? Are we just born with it? Do some people just have it or is it a product of experience? Aristotle doesn't say, but I think the answer is clearly some of both. It is a quality, as I agree with Berlin, possessed by some of the great psychological novelists. I mention the names of some of them in this article. Berlin: Does Aristotle have a political science, a science of politics? If so, what is it about? What distinguishes it from all other studies is the concept of the regime, of the politea, he says. Berlin: For Aristotle, politics has a priority to all the others, because as he has argued, man is the political animal. To be a political is to have the skill of judgment, discrimination and practical reason, Berlin says. It is also a virtue of great statesmen, he adds. animal means first to possess speech or reason that allows us to participate in a community or a way of life governed by shared standards of justice and injustice. It is our logos, our reason that makes a community possible and also expresses or creates a certain latitude or indeterminacy in how our behavior distinguishes us from other species. To be a political animal, for him, is to engage or to engage in conflict and conflicts over justice. It's precisely, he believes, this latitude that makes political communities not only sites of agreement over shared standards, but also, as he says, sites of moral contestation. Aristotle: To be human is to be part of that conversation. Most people today are attracted to the study of politics because they are interested in things they've read about in newspapers or seen on TV. To refuse to participate in that conversation, to declare oneself an outsider to it, he says, is either to be below humanity or above it. It is a debate over the very nature of justice, to refuse to engage in that debate is to deny humanity's right to know. The study of politics is not for the sake of knowledge for its own sake, says Aristotle. All political action aims at preservation or change, he says. When we act, we seek to preserve or to change. Political science exists for the reason of the human good, he adds. It helps to make it better or prevent it from being better or worse, he writes. The Politics is published by Oxford University Press, priced £16.99, with a print run of 2,500 copies. Aristotle's political science is ultimately the supreme science of statecraft. It requires not only theoretic acumen, but political judgment and the kind of practical knowledge that Aristotle discusses at length. The statesman is the founder of regimes, laws, and institutions. They provide the constitutional framework within which we, later figures, operate. It is the ability not only to keep the ship of state afloat, but allows the greatest statesmen to guide the ship, to steer it safely to port. Without a distinctive method for obtaining and organizing knowledge, we are all just groping in the dark. To some degree, Aristotle refuses to play the methodologist's game. In a well-known passage from the Ethics, he says that our discussion will be adequate if it achieves clarity within the limits of its subject. There will always, he suggests, appear to be something ad hoc about the methods used in the study of politics. We will have to let the method fit the subject, rather than demanding the subject matter fit a kind of apriori method. These four questions are intended to guide inquiry, to shape and direct inquiry. They are not intended to yield sure or certain results, but to guide and inform statesmen and citizens in the U.S. The political scientist must have a grasp of the best regime, given the most favorable circumstances. He must also know something about the techniques of reform and persuasion, what we might call the area of political rhetoric by which existing regimes can be brought closer to the best. And he must have some knowledge of how to render any regime, no matter how imperfect, more stable and coherent. Aristotle's political science stays entirely within the orbit of ordinary speech. He adopts standards of proof appropriate to people in debates and assemblies, in courts of law, in council rooms and the like. The language of Aristotelian political science is the language of man, the political animal. Today, it seems, political scientists are more concerned with advancing the abstract truths of science and claims about creating a methodologically rigorous and pure science of politics. Aristotle takes his stand from within politics and the regime of which he is part. Most contemporary political scientists tend to be liberals. Their values are liberal values. This raises a question. Whether the relation between contemporary political science and liberalism is merely accidental or whether there is some intrinsic, some necessary connection between them. One might do well to ponder which political science is really more scientific--Aristotle's, which is explicitly and necessarily evaluative or that offers advice and exhortation to the statesmen and citizens about how to care for their regime, says Julian Zelizer. the back door. On Friday, let me just remind you, Il Principe. We'll study Machiavelli. On this very partisan note I conclude. On Thursday, we'll study the life of the Italian statesman and play a game of chess with him. We're going to see how well he can play the game of poker. I'm looking forward to it. I hope you'll join us for the game on Friday night at 8 p.m. ET on CNN.