Professor: Today I've got quite a lot of stuff to go through. So hopefully we'll get to the actual game playing, but if not, don't worry, you'll actually get to play the games. The games that we'll end up playing today are games from last year. A lot of them are actually the final semester-- the final project, which means they are not answering the same question that you're trying to answer with your very first project. But it should give you a sense of what the scope of this class actually is. a two week project, and that was just without staff. These were more like four week projects. And we'll design my students with larger teams and probably closer to the kind of game that you're going to end up making. I want you to keep in mind you're not constrained to building games that look exactly like those. All these games are like this sort of board game. You find out what this is. And you'll be able to do-- you can think a little bit about what would it be like to design a game that's not that. you just wanted to make your car game, for instance? You can. That's no reason why you couldn't. What if you want to do a live action game where you actually move around with your body, that sort of thing? That's totally doable. I really, really hesitate not-- try not to put any live digital components in your game. I know some people-- unless it's something simple like a timer that you can run off your iPhone. OK, maybe that's fine. By actually writing code, then the scope of this project just went through what I expected you to do. I want to-- I try to cover quite a bit of it from the first reading during class itself. Was anyone here not here on Wednesday? OK, all right. So we need to make sure that your name's on the attendance sheet. And you should come and talk to me after class. And we'll make sure you get a copy of the syllabus and everything like that. Make sure that you get expectations for this class. So I hope you got-- I got it allright. a game? AUDIENCE: (COLLECTIVELY) The players. PROFESSOR: The players, right, not the designers, not you. But you when you actually play someone else's game. Then you're the most important person. If that person's experience is problematic or exciting or engaged or outright hostile to other players, or something like that, that's making it the way that they want to take it. You as the designer are are going to run through a number of different challenges trying to be able to give them an experience that you're trying to create for them. hate the people around me, the table. And I don't like it, that is fine. It's OK for them to not like your game based on my criteria like that. However, one of the things that comes up in the Brathwaite reading is this concept of meaningful decisions, right? Well, what's-- Sid Meire how many of you heard of Sid Meier? Yeah, what games can people remember from-- AUDIENCE: (COLLECTIVELY) Civilization. might come up in the reading or occur to you right now? That a decision in a game can be meaningful-- what does it mean? What does it means to be meaningful? Couple hands? When you make that decision, the game's status changes or code that meanders the change? PROFESSOR: OK, so when you make a decision, and then the outcome actually has changed. So the corollary is that if you made a decision and the outcome hasn't changed, it wouldn't terribly be meaningful. OK? could be something really awesome in the game, and you make a decision. How about if you decide to roll a die? Game state has changed, usually. Is that a meaningful thing? It could be if it's like a choice you have. You roll a dice in one direction of the game or do you not, and choose different that's meaningful. It's like, do I roll the die now, or do I wait a minute before I take my turn? That's not really a meaningful decision. version of Candy Land which lets you choose which pile of red cards to draw from. But is that meaningful? A stack of randomly shuffled cards? Audience: Yeah, it has to do with [INAUDIBLE].. PROFESSOR: The thing is that they might be games but that particular decision may not be the meaningful one. And it's possible that in the entire game, maybe you don't get that many meaningful decisions. That doesn't necessarily make it not a game. It just means that these things aren't games. good game, which is a different thing. To a two or three year-old it maybe an awesome game. You get to play in a land of candy. A few more hands I thought I saw? AUDIENCE: Yeah, on that topic. I think there's a reason why people who over a certain age never really wanted to play Candy Land anymore because they realized that they don't really do anything, so they get really bored with it. For kids or some other targeted thing going on more than the meaningful decision, making it fun to actually just doing something and moving-- or winning cards that makes it fun. I believe Candy Land was invented to keep kids from getting polio from each other. That might be urban legend. With polio, you can't do much of anything. There's a huge inversion from the get out and get some exercise. It's a serious game. It has health benefits. Let's play it. I can actually play this with an adult? Learning how to take turns is one thing that people have actually get good at the games like Candy Land. I believe it was invented. play in the land of Candy. You make a decision in a game, and you've changed a game state. If you don't let the player know what changed the game state, is it that meaningful a decision anymore? You did something. Some numbers changed inside the system. It's good to affect how things go out later. But anyway, so what do you need to be able to communicate to the player that their decision actually changed anything? OK, actually let me flip that around. It wasn't a decision-- it wasn't-- I get to try to roll from three identical dice. you don't actually know what happened. And also if you expect players to get very into your game, this is the stuff that you can leave with because they will understand it and figure it out on their own. And that has to be part of the game. Whereas if you expects players to pick it up and play it three times in their life and then move on, then it probably won't help them that much and you should you should probably should probably. Does that sound familiar? AUDIENCE: I feel it's very much potential to player and the system. give them more feedback socially. There's a long term consequences, so a lot of immediate consequences. In Dominion, oftentimes you can draw cards that don't help you just pointlessly causing a reshuffle. But normally if I were to do this without thinking and thinking doesn't matter. Would it actually be slightly beneficial or slightly [INAUDIBLE] that actually do this? But unless you really think about it, you won't even notice that it caused any sort of change. If you have an adventure game where there's a story or something. And you tell some guys to just not help the guy. And then he becomes an evil warlord later. There's a specific point where you must-- if there's a dog, you need to give it a sandwich. Otherwise you're doing it yourself 200 turns later, like hours later in this game. Sometimes, your opponent sees something that you didn't see. And they changed their strategy based on that. I've played a number of adventure games that actually have this in them. There's a game called The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy text adventure. There is a game where you can't really see what your opponent is doing. more as a puzzle solving thing. So it's not like 200 turns later something changes. It's like something changes right away, and you need to figure out what changed. There's not immediate feedback. But I want to say I probably didn't enjoyed those games. Maybe someone does. Something-- Do you want to ask it? AUDIENCE: Well, you have to be careful that it doesn't have too much complexity or some sort of unanticipated change that there's too steep of a learning curve to actually enjoy it. game state changes, and you're not really sure how your decision came up with that outcome. So not random exactly, but overly complex maybe. You have to react on the fly. You can't just plan out all of your moves. Right, in chess you see the board and you-- a lot of the really good players will see X number of moves in advance. But when things happen, they just randomly appear. And so even though you make meaningful decisions, you don't know what the meaning is. "I just feel as a player, that would frustrate you to no end," he says. "It kinda turns it into a Candy Land game even if it's not" "We sort of did stuff, but we had-- and then afterwards, we didn't really understand. We didn't understand how we were changing it, but it took awhile before you really-- you don't understand," he adds. "I've played some word [INAUDIBLE] games that are hard to understand. And the mechanics aren't intuitive like Village" what's happening. And there are many games where you can do very poorly or very well. In a digital game, usually people have to take their turns and have to play out more slowly, whereas in a good board game, you change something and-- if you do something and something changes, maybe you can just start over and do it again like it's a different thing. Some games let you save state and then reload state. So you can can do trial and error. And it takes a while to understand exactly why you're doing very poorly. say, well, what if I tried this decision? And then there's an interesting phenomenon that goes with that in a lot of strategy games called save scrubbing. And that is where you know that the outcome of something is based on a probability. And so if you save and reload often enough, you will always be successful. But for a game whose random number seed has been saved and you fail and then you reload from the start, it means you'll always fail because that's a different concept of how the random number generator works. The book used to be called The Psychology of Everyday Things, which had a nice little acronym him of POET. But then people had trouble finding the book because he was looking for design books. And it was shelved in the psychology section. So he changed the name to The Design of Everyday things, which I think is a really interesting application of the kinds of things that he's talking about. So you get to re-roll exactly the same time, exact the same way, which means you've got to come. make a change and you iterate on it. And if you look at the copyright, it actually still Psychology of Everyday Things. He talks about visibility. And what does visibility do in a syst-- in a design? Audience: It helps people understand the qualities of what they're doing or what they want to accomplish. It gives them a clue on what they could do to accomplish that. So already, that's a direct application to games, right? You have a goal in mind. It's like I want to accumulate more cash. in a visual game, that's telling me visibly, right now, that this might be the way I get to do that. In a lot of strategy games, some of these things are very literal, right? So and so technology gives you this bonus. It's depending on the design of the game. But visibility has something to do with the intent of the player of the user in Norman's case. But he's not talking about games. He's talking about the user's intent. design of everything. And what the system can actually do, the actual operations of the system. The other thing is this concept of mapping, that there is this-- again, it has to do with the player's intent of what they want to do. But mapping, instead of the actual Operations of the System, actually has toDo it for the player. So I need to be able to convey to the player that this is not something you can actuallyDo in the game. You can tell which hex to move your tank, but that's it. what you can see of the system. So there are affordances and there are constraints. These are both words that are introduced in that reading. I think affordances is introduced in this reading. What's an example of an affordance? Audience: If you can sit on a chair? PROFESSOR: What about this thing tells you that you could sit on it? AUDIENCE: It seems sturdy, and it's got a place for your butt. PROFessor: Yeah, it'sGot a nice little butt-shaped thing, here right? It's not made of spikes. It's got at least three legs, which may help, and evenly distributed, which means that it's not going to tip over. handle on a door? PROFESSOR: What does a handle on adoor allow you to do? It's like-- it's a place for your hand. It's hand-shaped. If you hold your hand out in a natural way, you grab-- looking at the text. Oh, I wasn't thinking of that handle. I was thinking of the vertical type of handle. AUDIENCE: The one that looks like a U-shaped tube-- like that. PROFessor: Because they're not finger-shaped, although it has a kind of weird happy happy happy. face on it, which I always thought was a little bit strange about-- that might have been designed, too, actually. That might have something because if you-- this won't kill you, really. So you should put it in your home. I want to find out more about the history of the Edison plug. It's actually-- the design with the ground on the bottom is a bad idea because if something starts falling out that are too exposed to it, it will not be the ground one. But when it's the other way around, it's actually a little more stable. You could stick your finger in a British pin, which means they have to design all kinds of protection mechanisms, plastic springs, and things like that. It does have-- yeah, this one's actually nice because the biggest hole in there is the lethal hole. It's actually like a mo-- British plugs, actually, have the pin usually on top and-- AUDIENCE: The British just have the eyes [INAUDIBLE] pin. in there, is the one that doesn't have any current running through it. So they talk about materials like wood and glass, right? Glass is for looking through. Wood is for holding things together. And in games-- let me just bring in an example. Let's try to identify the components of-- how many of you have played put before? Really, really-- this is the box. I guess it affords reading, but I'm not going to talk about the rule sheet. about. It has this thing. Actually, what you do with this thing? AUDIENCE: Ring it. PROFESSOR: Slap? [BELL RING] Yeah, that's what it does. OK, all right, so now that you've seen what this thing does. What is one of the things that this-- not in the rule book completely. If you have this in your game, what is this thing good for? Audience: Getting attention, yeah. It's loud. You could use it to annoy people. comes with a bunch of cards. Ooh, whoa. What happened to these cards? Good Lord. OK, now the paint could rubbed off or something that. So don't worry too much about the text and the graphics. But just look at the card. What do cards allow you to do? What are the affordances of cards? Hm? Audience: You can hold a couple of them in your hand. Because there's two sides. There's a side that you can put no useful information on, right? Besides the brand of the game, sure. on their side. It's possible but really hard to make something, to make a card stand up. Other orientations other than that face up or face down aren't really considered. A square card could afford full rotation in any direction, rotation. We'll get that, actually, in the next one where you can just rotate things around. It'd be hard to do with a square or circle card, but a regular shape, an elongated shape. Stiffness and shininess of them distinguishes them. them from stacks. Cards do a lot. And when you're designing a game, you need to think about whether cards are the right thing for your choice, for your game. Something that might be a little subtle-- the rounded corners actually make it much easier for you to do things like this. If it wasn't around the corner, it's actually pretty uncomfortable to do a fan. It's not like you couldn't. You totally could. There are a bunch of things that cards do are already that you've identified which are all very accurate. stationary stores actually do sell punches, corner punches around of your cards. It is not something that I would actually recommend that you do during prototyping because it takes too damn much time. But if you were to design a game for home, for your family, or something like that, and you want to make it a pleasant experience. You might just want to spend $2 on a punch and just punch the corners out. It's really, really hard to do it consistently when using your hands, by the way. information from other people. And then there's the affordances of the system. Now if I wanted to hide my cards from you, then I will hold my cards in a way that only you can only see the side that doesn't reveal any useful information. So that's a very, very direct, clear what he calls natural mapping, although I am not quite sure that phrase is very easy to use in practice. It gets a little bit more complicated when you actually look at the system that the game is trying to reproduce, right? couple of things in this game that is this board. There's a back of the board, which is not colored. And it has a design on it. We could just pass this one around. It's got little playing pieces that are referred to as meeples by the hardcover board game fact base, I guess. They look like little people. Actually, there's probably enough in that for everyone to grab one or two. And then you can just take a look. Whoops, and a bunch of tiles that I will also hand out. the tiles suggest, just by looking at them? Terrain? PROFESSOR: Terrain, all right, something to do with land. What else? The various terrain features seem to match up. The fact that you've got a hidden back gives you quite a lot of different possibilities. This rule-- this game in particular uses mostly because of this shuffling and this randomization. You don't know what tile you're going to draw. The idea is that maybe you could freely, just freely rotate these things. that is probably a little bit less insightful for this particular lecture. It's a combination of all three. It is a scorecard. If you loop around, I think it means that you've got 100 points or 50 points. So you do something to move you along the path somehow. And then the first person to reach it probably wins. It makes me think that maybe instead of winning by just getting around, maybe every loop, you get a new tile or something like that. So it's probably just a scoreboard. just add 50 to your score every time that you go around. And what fits on those things? What would you place on that board? AUDIENCE: The little people? PROFESSOR: The meeple. You place the meeples on the tiles. You wouldn't place a tile on thatBoard because there's no hexes there. So there's a mapping of probably what intent that you've got. Let's make some big things and put our people on them. And the affordances of what you can do with these tiles that suggested that to you. a whole bunch of ways that you can help people with these sorts of mappings. I guess Donald Norman would describe a lot of these as spatial, metaphors to use. Spatial mostly to describe things like driving in a car and you turn the wheel to the left specifically toward the top of the wheel. And you car it's directed to turn left, that sort of thing. There are sort of bodily metaphors as well. Things that are high are either supposed to be good and happy, things that are low when you're feeling depressed. that you can play off. I'll give you a couple of more examples in about two weeks when we revisit the idea of user design. He talks about things like single control, single function where if you've got something that does something, you might not want to make it do yet another thing on top of it because that starts to get really, really confusing. I personally think this game will be a little bit easier to learn if they just gave you a different piece for the scoreboard that was the meeple. about is what do these tiles not let you do? Well, they did let you doing that, but was it easy? AUDIENCE: No. PROFESSOR: No, OK, all right. They're also not very good building materials, just like cards aren't. Holding a whole bunch of them is hard. And you saw the difficulty I had just trying to pull half of them out of the box. They were unwieldy. You can-- all right, maybe I'll do this once a game. just put the whole back hiding thing and just put them all into a bag and then just pull one out of random. So these are constraints. You're not really supposed to have more than one tile at a time in Carcassonne. You are supposed to draw one, figure out where it goes, put it down. So it's OK that the tiles are designed in such a way that it makes it hard for you to hold on to do. They are not very useful to you when you've got them face down because you can't really see the information. of cards, like in Pit, you really want then held face up, facing you. When they're face down, they're not interesting to you. So these are constraints. These are things-- this is another way that the visibility of the system can help you with those mappings. You're looking at the system and the pieces that it's giving you, and you're thinking, what can't I do with these things? And that's probably not what the game wants you to do. be designed poorly. That's a caveat. Everything that I say is a qualitative, subjective statement. As you play around with these pieces-- of course when you read the rules and you see the illustrations, maybe when they read it at the back of the box. Usually you start trying to figure out what a game is when you pick it up off the shell and you start looking at it. And it says, hey, this is a game that I want to play. It says Deluxe Pit, over 100 years of--100 years of card game fun, geez 100 years. The title of the game suggests things. It isn't like a commodity trading game. On the side, it says, "Corner the Market." And it's got a bell. This is like, this game back in the time when stock market are run with bells. I guess they still are but mostly just run with computers nowadays. I'd love to see Pit done on some sort of updated 21st century thing. Shout your Shout Your Shout! for the next episode of iReport.com. Deal and trade your cards to corner the market, et cetera. Family age seven plus, 30 minutes, three to eight players, just to tell-- to give you a better idea. When it comes to Carcassonne, there is actually a deep, deep problem with this game despite how popular it is. And that scoring is actually pretty difficult to do. It's a math intensive problem. It does largely map on to how many of the meeples that you have. you have of your own color on large patches of things. How much those things are worth requires a lot of counting. So that is a big problem with that game on how the mapping works. It doesn't really give you a good idea or a good conceptual model of how much something is worth. But you've got a large patch of thing. You've got your dude somewhere in there. You can at least make the mapping. That's worth something. And then that's-- the feedback that you get back from games when it's Pit. a couple of board games where you have to put pieces together, and that gives you an idea of maybe those two pieces don't go together. What others things look for in the realm of feedback when it comes to board games? AUDIENCE: Maybe a track? PROFESSOR: Hm? You mean a board track? Audience: Yeah, you want to stay on the track. If you fall out of it, you are no longer-- that's not a legal place for you to place your token. It doesn't necessarily mean anything but it's a good indicator. Just something like that would usually be nice to see you just quickly look at it and say, oh, this person's winning for this reason. In Monopoly, if you look at the board, whoever has the most houses. Similarly, in Catan, you can see if somebody has massive roads or a lot of settlements or cities. And, of course, in that game, you earn points by having the longest road. In poker and other games, other players are your primary feedback mechanism on whether you've done a move that's OK or not. In Mafia, all the information you're getting in the game is through other people in Mafia. In Battleship, there's information that's hidden from you, but it's completely available to your opponent and vice versa. Charades and Pictionary-- usually your teammates are the ones who are guessing, so I wouldn't necessarily call that feedback because it might be confusing. be good feedback on whether your clues are getting across to your teammate. But your opponents are also usually some sort of feedback mechanism that's keeping time. If they hear you say something, they go ah, ah,Ah. And are there a few more hands or something like that? So just always remember that you can employ other players into your feedback mechanism. It doesn't always have to be your game alone. The game is called Scotland Yard. The player positions is almost never known. You get some feedback about what he's doing. your objectives from the player that knows the information. The person who's running knows where they're going at any given time. The detectives are working on partial information to try to corner and close this dragnet. So I think that's on the list. Do you remember it? That was on the syllabus. It used to be-- Scotland Yard. But we may have changed the game. But that also falls in mastermind category of games where it's like, here's this person with all the information, only that person is changing the information as the game goes on. That's a big difference in Scotland. Donald Norman ends his very first chapter on why is it so hard to actually make something right? Anyone remember? Or anyone thinking of-- AUDIENCE: Doesn't the designer never really communicates one-to-one with the user? They're communicating through the object that either was designed or being used? PROFESSOR: That is definitely true. It is a second book. We do have a copy. We'll bring it in. It's a good game. We've gone through this huge list of things. order problem. You're designing something that then becomes this manifestation that somebody else uses. And that's actually when all the problems occur. Market forces push you to add things, to do additive design in order to distinguish yourself from the competition. That naturally leads to complexity in interface. And a lot of products, you said, don't get through that process because it'll take five or six times to get it right. But if it's not good by the second time, people just won't buy it. get back to iteration. 5 or 6 times means five or six times at the same problem, right? So iteration is the reason why design starts off as being very clunky. But it can eventually become something that works well, communicates well, or something that people can learn and maybe even enjoy in the case of the games. One thing that's funny about the book is that it talks a little bit about the clock radio that could do-- make phone calls, and be used as a desk lamp. And it's exactly the same thing they he's describing. what he's talking about only, I doubt that actually imagined that this was something to be possible at the time when he wrote it. That was 1980. And cell phones obviously have gone through a lot of criticism. But it is it has been successful through a number of different reasons. Don't discount marketing as being a big part of it. It's expensive for what it does. But then, arguably, by locking out a many things that you might want to do but maybe don't have to do, they are trying to make it easier for you not to do the wrong thing. something that the does sell. But what I want you to think about now is actually the process of prototyping. Prototyping might be something we'll leave up to Wednesday. So that there'll be a little more time for you to work in your teams. So I'd like you to start forming your teams, thinking about what kind of game that you want. And then the last hour of class, what I'm going to do is I'mgoing to go into brainstorming. to get all the Carcassonne bits back. So and then we'll pick this up in about five minutes. We'll be back with the rest of the story in a few minutes. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from. Click here to read the full transcript of this article. Back To the pageyou came from, click here to Read the Full Transcript of this Article. Backto the pageYou came from the page You were from, Click Here to Read The Full Transcript.