Expectations play a huge role in economics, says Ricardo Caballero. CaballERO: I want to give you a shortcut to think about the role of expectations in the kind of models we have already discussed. And so I'm going to do all that in the most basic model we have discussed, which is the IS-LM model. And I hope you'll get the gist of what expectations can do in economics. And the main idea is that expectations play a big role in asset pricing. here is that the IS-LM model as we have described it up to now really overweights the present. And in practice, expectations about future conditions play a big role in the decision of all economic actors. We'll look at investors, asset pricing and so on. But it's also true of consumers and firms. And even governments and foreigners, when they invest, do foreign direct investment, they go and invest in a country, it's a lot about expectations of what the country will do in the future. impact on asset prices and so on precisely because they change what people think, for good or for bad, about future conditions. So we want to do things in two steps. The first, I'm going to revisit the consumption function and the investment function, now taking into account expectations. And then I want to embed not the fully fleshed out consumption and investment decisions, but the flavor of the role of the future into the IS-LM model. And by then, you would have seen-- you will have seen all that I wanted to communicate, at least, in this set of lectures. impact on your consumption. People know early in life that they have a lower income than they will have later on. So they will tend to spend and borrow more when they're young. Then, in the middle of their life cycle, before retirement, they panic, and you tend to save more. So you don't consume all you have because you know there are many years ahead of you where income will be lower than your consumption needs. How wealthy you are will pin down more or less the consumption you have more than your current income. expect to inherit or whatever, minus the debts you have. So very much as we discussed in the previous lecture in the context of asset pricing, the expected present discounted value of the cash flows of all the assets you have, that's your financial wealth. And the very rich often have no income, [CHUCKLES] at least labor income. All the income comes from returns on assets. And again, they mostly borrow against that. But in any event, the point there is that what really brings out your consumption is your wealth, not the current flow of income. live out of the income that they get, they couldn't afford what they normally afford. But they spent a lot more than that income because they expect to get a big bonus and things like that. So in principle, your consumption should be something that is not proportional to your disposable income. But in reality, both things really matter, so a more realistic consumption function is something that depends on both things.. Many people have no savings. But it's about 0.03, that kind of thing, OK? People who live hand-to-mouth don't think about smoothing consumption over time. They're consuming whatever income they receive. Most banks are not likely to lend you a lot against your expected present discounted value of labor income. Your income-- you think about how wealthy you'll be, but you also think about your flows, the cash flow you're receiving. That's also part of your considerations. The richer you are, the more this term matters, the less this one matters. like that. So we weren't wrong when we did IS-LM, having the consumption function as increasing in disposable income. But I always told you there is a lot of interesting stuff hidden in that little C0, in the-- in that autonomous component of consumption. Well, that-- lots of interesting things has a lot to do with wealth, OK? And again, this term here is something that captures a many things that are permanent. But it's also the case, in a boom, wages are high. A lot of people tend to spend more. Even so, this captures a lot the temporary component. you're going to consume more for any given level of wealth, OK? It's temporary, but that's what it is. What about investment? That's a decision by the firm. How much physical capital? I'm talking about physical investment, real investment, not financial investment. The decision also depend on current, but particularly on expected profits. And when you think about expected profits, you need to think about interest rate as well. We put the interest rate, as I said, OK, it's more expensive to borrow if the interest rates is high. Investments that give you a return, a quick return, are worth more than things that have a pay-off in the very long run. So the decision, for example, of buying a machine needs to look at the price of the machine right now and then at the expected present discounted value of the cash flows, OK? So let's think a bit more carefully about that decision. So suppose you buy a machine for a price. Let's normalize that price to 1. The first thing you need to know is, well, how long will this machine last. And a reasonable assumption is, for most, the machine will be worth a lot simply because interest rates are very high. machines, is some sort of geometric depreciation-- so meaning, it's not deterministic. It's more or less-- machines break down occasionally, but there is certain probability that they break down. We typically call that notation in economics-- we refer to that as delta. That's the depreciation probability. So if you think in terms of expected value, if you buy a machine today, and you ask, how much of a machine I'll have next year, well, it'll be a weighted average of 0 and 1 probably. you know. I have this machine, and it's likely to give me cash flows over this many years and so on. And then I have to know how much expected profits I expect to get in each of those years. So at the end of the day, when I calculate, I do my little project, and I need to decide whether 1, which was the price of the machine or not, is too expensive or too cheap. So here is an example. This is a machine that gives-- the first expected cash flow comes next year. There is something in the market that I could look at and that I really know. What is that? AUDIENCE: Is it the [INAUDIBLE] RICARDO CABALLERO: Exactly. I could use 1 plus r2. These are one-year rates. R2t squared. So when you have the term structure, when you see all the interest rates, a firm deciding whether to invest or not has the interest rate it needs. It doesn't need to have expectations. The market is doing it for them. In principle, a better investment function-- remember, we wrote an investment function as investment, a function of output, current output, and then the interest rate. It depends on many things, but not only today's, also the ones that you expect for the future, OK? And it depends on the interest rates of the future. If I look at this expression, even if the interest Rate today doesn't change, but I expect the interest Rates to change in the Future, to go up, that will lower the value of my project. when we posted the initial investment function. But here we have that. And sorry, and this is an increasing function of that. The higher is V, the higher is the expected present discounted value of buying a machine given the price, the larger is the investment. Now, this is in principle. In practice, current cash flows also matter a lot, OK? So in the same sense as in the case of the consumption function, we said, in principle, it's only wealth that matters. But in practice, there's lots of consumers that are financially constrained, they're hand-to-mouth and so on. much or is not as optimistic as the firm is and so on. So it may not borrow-- the firm may not be able to borrow as much as it would want given how optimistic that particular firm is on its own project. The bank may say, you know, I'm going to be more conservative here since I'm lending you the money. And one way that firms use, actually, to get around financial constraints is simply by returning their earnings, meaning they generate a cash flow, and they save. firms, especially smaller firms, have deposits and cash flow and so on mostly because, if they get a good opportunity, they may face financial constraints. So if current activity is high, sales are high, firms are going to be less likely to be financially constrained. And that's the reason current profits also end. Now, current profit is an increasing function of output over capital that-- for any given level of capital, if output goes up, that's going to generate more profit. And so we can write our investment function a little bit like we had in the earlier lectures. more realistic model. If you expect profits to remain high for a very long period of time, that machine is going to be worth a lot more than if you only expect the machine to be very profitable for only one year. And the same is true for interest rates. If I expect-- since interest rates are high today, but we expect them to go down in the near future, then that's not going to happen. Anything that is likely to be persistent is also likely to have a much larger impact. affect a lot the discounting of future profits. If interest rates go up today, and I expect them to remain high for a long time, that's going to affect a lot more the present value of profits. And therefore, it'sgoing to depress investment more. In fact, central banks, much more than playing with the current interest rate, they play with your minds. That's what they do. They are always telling you stories for why interest rates will remain high, for why-- [CHUCKLES] time, because otherwise it would be irrelevant. One of the problems they're having now, actually, when the Fed is trying to cool the economy, is that they keep hiking rates, but the loan rates have begun to decline already. And that's a problem for them. They would like you not to believe, bankers not to Believe that will happen. And they're trying to convince firms and households and so on that the interest rate will remain high for a while. Otherwise, you're going to get very little effect out of that. of aggregate demand, aside from the government, which is something that moves, more or less-- OK, with different behavioral functions. But the big drivers are consumption and investment. Those are at least the private sector drivers of aggregate demand. And what we have said now is that human wealth is affected not only by current income, but future after labor income, future real interest rate. That affects human wealth. That's very important in financial wealth. Future nominal interest rate affect the price of bonds. For firms, future after tax profits affect expected present value. in this column here that enters into the consumption and investment decisions that we care about. So remember the basic IS-LM model. We wrote it this way. Output was determined by aggregate demand. And closed economy-- forget all that, fully sticky prices. And we wrote consumption as these functions. So aggregate demand was increasing in output and government expenditure, decreasing in taxes, and decreasing on the interest rate. So a shortcut-- so what I want to do now is give you a shortcut to integrate these views of expectations or the concept of expectations. current taxes, current interest rate, current expenditure, but also function-- and with the same signs-- of future output. The LM is going to be the same as before. So what I want you to think about now is a model that is like the one you had before with thesame LM but now the IS is a little bit richer. It has more parameters-- these are parameters-- because I'm going to determine today's output. And all these parameters are essentially the same variables that we worry about today. but are the variables we expect of those-- are the values of respect for those variables in the future and, again, with the same sign. So if output-- so if taxes go up today, aggregate demand will decline, and output will decline. But if I expect future taxes to go up as well, then that's going to depress aggregate demand even more. That's the type of logic I want you to develop. So that's the way our model will look. So this is the IS in the same space I had before. it did in lecture 3 or 4? So suppose we increase taxes by 10%. Will that reduce output more or less than when we had the static IS-LM model? Yeah? AUDIENCE: Depends on the expectation. RICARDO CABALLERO: OK, but I haven't moved. These are parameters from my curve. So I don't get the right to move them. It's a combination of the present and the future. So if-- that means that anything that is just the present will matter less than in the past. said, well, it depends on whether I expect the future taxes to change or not. That tells you there is a difference between changing temporarily the taxes and increasing taxes permanently. So what happens with this curve-- so we decided that increasing taxes reduces this IS to the left by a smaller amount than in the past. What happens if you expect taxes to increase in the future? Which wealth goes down? Human wealth, in particular. Your human wealth will go down because you expect your disposable income to be taxed more. the static model. Changing government expenditure, same idea-- it will also move aggregate demand to the right. But will it do it by more or less? Well, think how government expenditure worked in the basic model. It increased aggregate demand, and that then led to a multiplier. And we got a lot more income and so on. Now, if we expect this government expenditure it to be temporary, that multiplier also will be a lot smaller because, yes, it will increase income, but people are not going to spend all their income today. on whether they expect future income to also go up as well or not. Now, that's a tricky experiment because if you-- and it's very relevant for today. If this government expenditure goes up permanently, it's unlikely that the central bank will remain unmoved. And so you also have to start thinking, well, what will the centralBank do? And that takes me to this variable here. Well, actually, let me point out that it's not accidental that I made this curve a lot steeper than it used to look. I mean, this looks like a pretty steep IS curve, which is a way of saying that a given change in interest rate now has a very small effect on current output, OK? Much smaller than we had in the static model. And the reason is, again, this is permanent versus transitory. If you spec the interest rate to decline only for today, and that's it, that's not going to have a very large effect on consumption or investment. For that, you want those changes to be more or less permanent, persistent. If the Fed cuts the interest rate but doesn't persuade anyone that this rate will remain low in the future, then it is going to get very small effect on output. However, if we convince people that there will be future changes, that the rates will remain lower for a long time, that means that this IS now will shift to the right. That's what we have here. So you have distinguish which is a movement-- when the Fed cut the interest rates, you get a small movement along the curve. But if the Fed persuades you that this is a long-lasting cut in interest rate, then the IS shifts to the left. And you recover the power of monetary policy. Alan Greenspan is known as one of the biggest central bankers that the US has, at least in recent memory. He went through a period which was called-- was known as the Greenspan conundrum. The economy was overheating. He kept hiking interest rates. But the loan rates kept coming down. So he couldn't cool off the economy. There was no way around that because they couldn't persuade the markets that this would be a long-lasting effect. The reason was a different one. It happens that, at the same time, you had China sending massive capital flows to the US. ineffective in terms of its monetary policy. So again, expectations mattered quite a bit. If you convince the markets that-- and the markets and consumers, households, and so on-- that you're cutting interest rates and that, with that, you'll be successful in cutting rates. If the Fed convinced that the interest rate will be lower in the future as well, then you get the IS to shift to the right. But if interest rates will be low in thefuture, that means output will be high as well. creating a-- getting out of a recession, for example, in the future, that also increases human wealth, expected present constant value of cash flows, of profits, and so on and so forth. So again, for central banks, it's a lot like-- it's mostly about expectations management. That's the business of a central bank, really. And he described good monetary policy very much like Maradona's goal scored against the UK, England, in some World Cup. essentially drew in a straight line to the goal and scored. But he persuaded everyone around to move away from his path, and that was a successful strategy. And central banks do a lot of that-- lots of talking. And, you know, at the end of the day, the true actions of moving the interest rate are the least important part of, really, a monetary policy strategy. That's what the Fed is trying to do, and it's doing a good job so far. Most of the time when you have episodes of fiscal consolidation in environments that are not of very high distress, financial crisis, and so on, it typically sort of-- how successful that is depends a lot on whether people expect to be a sort of implicit deal between the central bank and the Treasury. So, for example, if you have a fiscal contraction that leads to an anticipation of a big cut in interest rates in the future, that may be expansionary. It can offset quite a bit of the fiscal contraction side. So towards the late '80s, they began a delivery plan of fiscal consolidation. Fiscal consolidation means, essentially, reducing the deficit. And they were very successful, as you can see. But contrary to expectations, at least, output growth did not decline, actually. They finally sort of-- they had a very good period like that. So that's all-- it was all about expectations. Notice that unemployment, though, did go up. So despite the fact that you got more unemployment and so on, output began to grow. example is abused by almost anyone that wants to cut taxes and things like that. But there are experiences. There is a whole spectrum of experiences. But in situations that are as extreme as this one, it clearly proved to be very effective. So that's that. So the role of this lecture was to say something that I sort of should have said earlier on, but I would have been a bit confusing. But it's very important. Expectations plays play a central role in economics. In particular, expectations influence aggregate demand. did talk about expectations mostly in the context of aggregate supply. But I think a much bigger role is played-- of expectation is really on aggregate demand, and certainly on asset prices. And finally, I want to say that, many times when you find episodes of fiscal, even sometimes monetary policy that are counterintuitive, it's entirely due to the expectations part. So this is case of fiscal consideration is not that the cutting in fiscal expenditure is not the reason for the reduction in aggregate demand. was expansionary. That was contractionary. But it was overwhelmed or offset, more than offset by the improvement in the outlook that you had. And that also happens with monetary policy. Countries that have high inflation problems and so on sometimes get-- and they have to go through dramatic tightenings. Yes, most of them get very short-lived recession. But sometimes they are veryshort-lived recessions because eventually the reduction of the instability caused by high and unstable inflation sort of ends up dominating any direct contractionary effect.