In the 5th Century BC Athens was a direct democracy that encouraged wide participation through the principle of ho boulomenos, or anyone who wishes. This meant that any of its approximately 30,000 eligible citizens could win a position in the legislature. Most offices were filled by random lottery from a pool of citizen volunteers. This might strike you as a strange way to run a government, let alone a democracy, but it was the way the ancient Athenians ran their government. In fact, elections only played a small role in Athenian democracy, with most offices filled by lottery. could attend the ecclesia, a general assembly meeting several times a month. In principle, any of the 6,000 or so who showed up at each session had the right to address their fellow citizens, propose a law, or bring a public lawsuit. The Athenian system also relied on a 500 member governing council called the Boule, to set the agenda and evaluate proposals. Rather than being elected or appointed, the people in these positions were chosen by lot. This process of randomized selection is know as sortition.  democracy arose in Athens after long periods of social and political tension marked by conflict among nobles. Powers once restricted to elites, such as speaking in the assembly and having their votes counted, were expanded to ordinary citizens. By 21st century standards, Athenian rule by the many excluded an awful lot of people. Women, slaves and foreigners were denied full citizenship, and when we filter out those too young to serve, the pool of eligible Athenians drops to only 10-20% of the overall population. Some ancient philosophers, including Plato, disparaged this. Many modern democracies reconcile this conflict by having citizens elect those they consider qualified to legislate on their behalf. But this poses its own problems, including the influence of wealth, and the emergence of professional politicians. Could reviving election by lottery lead to more effective government through a more diverse and representative group of legislatures? Or does modern political office, like Athenian military command, require specialized knowledge and skills? You probably shouldn't hold your breath to win a spot in your country's government. But depending on where you live, you may still be selected to participate in a jury, a citizens' assembly, or a deliberative. poll, all examples of how the democratic principle behind sortition still survives today. Polls show that the principle of sortition is still very much alive and well in the United States today. The majority of Americans support sortition, with the majority of people in the U.S. voting in favor of it by a wide margin in the last presidential election in 2008. The most popular type of vote in the 2008 election was for the Democratic Party, followed by the Republican Party and the Libertarian Party. The Democratic Party won the popular vote.