This episode of Crash Course U.S. History looks at the history of the United States as seen through the lens of Marvel comic superheroes. We talk about how women transformed pre-Civil War America as they fought to improve prisons, schools, decrease public drunkenness, and end slavery. And while fighting for change and justice for others, American women discovered that the prisoners, children, and slaves they were fighting for were also victims of war and violence. The episode is presented by John Green. fighting for weren’t the only people being oppressed and marginalized in the American democracy. So in the colonial era, most American women of European descent lived lives much like those of their European counterparts. Lower and working class women were actually more equal to men of their own classes, but only because they were, like, equally poor. In general, throughout world history, the higher the social class, the greater the restrictions on women— although high class women have traditionally had the lowest mortality rates. So at least you get to enjoy that oppression for many years. expected to marry and have kids rather than, like, pursue a career. Under the legal principle of “coverture’ actually husbands held authority over the person, property and choices of their wives. Also since women weren’t permitted to own property and property ownership was a precondition for voting, they were totally shut out of the political process. Citizens of the new Republic were therefore definitionally male, but women did still improve their status via the ideology of ‘Republican Motherhood’ it was a result of not having potties. So even living without rights in a pottyless nation, the Republican Mother idea allowed women access to education. Also women were counted in determining the population of a state for representation purposes. And then the market revolution had profound effects on American women, too. As production shifted from homes to factories, it shifted away from women doing the producing. This led to the so-called “cult of domesticity,” which like most cults, I am opposed to. domesticity decreed that a woman’s place was in the home, so rather than making stuff, the job of women was to enable their husbands to make stuff. The rules here are simple. I either get the author of the Mystery Document right...oh, hey there, eagle...or I get shocked. Let's see what we’ve got. “Woman is to win everything by peace and love; by making herself so much respected, esteemed.” and loved, that to yield to her opinions and to gratify her wishes, will be the free-will offering of the heart. … But the moment woman begins to feel the promptings of ambition, or the thirst for power, her aegis of defense is gone.” Well it was definitely a dude and I have no idea which dude, so I’m just going to guess John C. Calhoun because he’s a bad person. No? Well, what can you do? It wasn’t a dude? It was apparently Harriet Beecher Stowe's sister Catharine who was an education reformer. The idea of true equality between men and women was so radical that almost no one embraced it. Despite the economic growth associated with the market economy, women’s opportunities for work were very limited. Only very low paying work was available to them and in most states they couldn’t control their own wages if they were married. Still poor women did find work in factories or as domestic servants or seamstresses. Some middle class women found work in that most disreputable of fields, teaching, but the cult of domesticity held that a respectable middle class woman should stay at home. in reform movements. Reform movements were open to women partly because. if women were supposed to be the moral center of the home, they could also claim to be. the moral conscience of the nation. Many of the most famous advocates for legally prohibiting the sale of alcohol in the US were women, like Carry Nation attacked bars with a hatchet and not because she’d had a few too many. The somewhat less radical Frances Willard founded the Women’s Christian Temperance Union in 1874, which would be a powerful lobbying group by the end of the century. 19th century. Women gave many temperance lectures featuring horror stories of men who, rather than seeking refuge from the harsh competition of the market economy, found solace at the bottom of a glass or at the end of a beer hose. Now don't get me wrong: Prohibition was a disaster, because 1. Freedom, and 2. It’s the only time we had to amend the constitution to be like, “Just kidding about that other amendment,” but it’S worth remembering that back then people drank WAY more than we do now. Many women were also important contributors to the anti-slavery movement, although they tended to have more subordinate roles. Harriet Beecher Stowe wrote the terrible but very important Uncle Tom’s Cabin. Sarah and Angelina Grimke, daughters of a South Carolina slaveholder, converted to Quakerism and became outspoken critics of slavery. Sarah Grimke even published the Letters on the Equality of the Sexes in 1838, which is pretty much what the title suggests. And they may have had had husbands. Like abolitionism, the 19th century movement for women’s rights was an international movement. Often American feminists travelled abroad to find allies, prefiguring the later transatlantic movement of other advocates for social justice like Florence Kelley and W.E.B DuBois. Most of the delegates at Seneca Falls, for instance, were from the middle class. There were no representatives of, like, cotton mills, but this didn’t mean that working women didn't acknowledge the needs of working women. And other women recognized that women needed to be able to participate in the market economy to gain some economic freedom. Amelia Bloomer popularized a new kind of clothing featuring a loose fitting tunic, trousers, and eponymous undergarments. Bloomer and her pants were ridiculed in the press and in the streets, and this brings up the third important thing about the 19th century women’s movement. It faced strong resistance. Patriarchy, like the force, is strong, which is why Luke and Yoda and Darth Vader and Obi-Wan and whoever Samuel Jackson played...all dudes. Many women’s rights advocates were fighting to overturn not just laws, but also attitudes. Some of those goals, such as claiming greater control over the right to regulate their own sexual activity and whether or not to have children, were twisted by critics to claim that women advocated “free love” The Equal Rights Amendment, despite being passed by Congress, was never ratified. But by taking leading roles in the reform movements in the 19th century, not just when it came to temperance and slavery, women were able to enter the public. American women changed the world for better and for worse, just as great men do. And along the way, they made “the woman question’ part of the movement for social reform in the United States. In doing so, American women chipped away at the idea that a woman’s place must be in the home. That might not have been a presidential election or a war, but it is still bringing real change to our real lives on a daily basis. I’ll see you next week. in comments where you can also ask questions about today’s video that will be answered by our team of historians. Thanks for watching Crash Course and as we say in my hometown, don’t forget to be awesome. Back to the page you came from with this week's Crash Course video. Follow us on Facebook and Twitter @CrashCourse and @CNNOpinion. For more Crash Course videos, visit CNN.com/Crashcourse and follow us on Twitter @cnncrashcourse.