Three breads will be made with a brief mint which will be left for 12 hours to ferment then it'll be mixed into the main dough. The main comparison I want to do today is between the two breads which will take the same amount of time to make the one with the bereavement and the one that will be well fermented in the fridge for 24 hours. My opinion is that using a bereavement when cold fermenting makes no sense because we can simply leave the dough in the refrigerator for longer. Both breads will take about the same amount of time to make but why are we doing this a while ago I posted a video comparing prefix and fermentation in that video I concluded the Callback fermentation beats bereavement in every way it develops far more flavor it makes the crust crispier and the crumb most substantial and it simplifies the process because we don't have to make a separate thing. As soon as I publish that video people started asking me about combining the two methods I always told everyone just leave your DOTA for men for longer why make that preferment. Cold fermentation versus brief mint there is no better method. fermenting the whole dough makes the bread more chewy but at the same time it boosts flavor quite a lot. using a Polish improves the flavor slightly but it gives the bread a much lighter and airier crumb or at least it is able to and it can make for a thinner crust too all great characteristics of a baguette. I'm a bit biased just because I like to simplify the process and I prefer the results from cold fermentation. baker or up to the person eating the bread but when it comes to combining Cobalt fermentation and bereavements that's where I say simply fermenting for longer is better than using prevent and then fermenting the dough in fridge. I've said that with confidence even though I had not tried the side by side obviously you can only find this out by trying it yourself my taste buds are different from yours but let's just get back to our three does here so the one on the left has been in the fridge for 24 hours the one in the middle was made with the bereavement which took 12 hours to rise. use slightly less yeast in the dough that was made with the bravement and that was to compensate for the amount of yeast coming from the bereavement itself as it rises it multiplies so I thought technically in the end the double debriefment would have more yeast in it. If you want to find the written formula it is in the link below the video title okay we'll do the final shaping now we'll Place those in love tins we'll let them rise and that will bake them kind of a short video today. when cold fermenting and I'm pretty sure there is is a yes or no question so here we go we got our three loaves they all look pretty much the same on the outside and obviously they have all split open on the side too they were a bit underproofed which doesn't make any difference in this test it is the fermentation time up until the final proof which really counts now cutting them open I can tell you that the crust on all breads is exactly the same next up I smell them all see if they smell any different I did not feel any difference between a 24 hour fermented one and the one with the bereavement. comparison for yourself then tell us of your results you might be surprised. What do you think of my test and my results have you ever tried something like this before do you use preference when cold fermenting let me know down in comments. If you want to see more videos like this one click over here subscribe to the channel click right here that's all I have for you today thank you so much for watching I'll see in the next one and I'll be back in a few days.