The world woke up this morning to Global chaos massive Tech outages are impacting Airlines businesses offices thousands of flights grounded globally long cues frustrated passengers there was nothing on the boards there were nothing there's no G staff in the UK doctor surgery is forced to let down patients we going to have to cancel your appointment businesses unable to serve customers we'll try to receive a credit card payment and just would not accept it credit card and debit card and TV programs abruptly taken off air the cause at crowd strike we monitor trillions of cyber events. A faulty update meant millions of Microsoft users saw this screen pop up. The blue screen of death pops up when there's a critical error affecting the operation of your PC. Every single machine affected needs a manual reboot in safe mode which is not as simple as turning it off and on again. Some people have had to do it 15 times so it could take a while spare a thought for it departments there will be someone In Crowd strike who will be in a lot of trouble right now for not getting this right. The firm behind the outage crowd strike has held up its hands but admitted that it'll take time for things to get back to normal. Thousands of flights cancelled around the world at UK airports there have been huge cues and delays all on.still advises that it's a good idea to keep on top of software updates although perhaps today is not the day to bang that particular drum Zoe kimman BBC News as we heard the firm behindThe outage crowd Strike hasheld up itshands but admits that it will take time to get things back tonormal. Emma vardi is outside their Headquarters in Austin Texas. Passengers should have been on planes were forced to wait out delays so people are tired they've been handing out water the boards don't really say anything so it tells you where to go but there's no departure. Many airlines found themselves unable to use their normal systems we've had to revert back to pen and paper basically and manually check each of our customers in of course that takes longer for our customers so we've seen a good operation but it's a slower operation. from chaos at Amsterdam to planes stuck on the ground at Newar in the US cancellations and delays spread around the world Edinburgh stopped accepting incoming flights. Disruption on what was set to be the busiest day for UK flights since before the pandemic will take time to sort out. GP practices in England and Northern Ireland that have been most affected with doctors struggling to access their records and online bookings. Pharmacy Services have also been hit here's our health editor H Pim so I am at the minute doing life is usually hectic at GP practices but a lot more so today most in England had no access to electronic patient records frustrating for doctors and patients. At some health centers only the sickest patients were being seen with other appointments cancelled. Only written prescriptions are available with pharmacists warning patients the electronic system has failed anybody who's coming in for their prescriptions. "We have to tell them to go away uh go to back to the surgery and then get a the oldfashioned fp10 uh which is the old green prescriptions," says one pharmacist. "I can't get my sick note um updated and unfortunately I was about to be sanctioned by the um Social Security office" GPS is monitoring developments across the health system. There's a genuine glitch that's affected systems right across the world and is having a particular impact on GP practices and Pharmacy. We're working with colleagues across government to get things back up and working as quickly as possible hospitals say urgent and Emergency Care has not been affected and if people have got appointments booked they should come in as normal but no one's denying that there has been an impact on some routine day-to-day activities at NHS trusts. This just goes to show how dependent we are on it and how vulnerable we are I think it really highlights the fragility of our digital lives. There are some calls for people saying actually we shouldn't be so reliant on on a few big companies for everything. Other people are saying well actually if we have lots of smaller companies doing this stuff then are we leaving ourselves more open to vulnerabilities to weaknesses to attack so it is a real dilemma I think but nobody has seen anything of this size.