Professor Martin: Fluorescence is the emission of light not associated with heat. Luminescence is the general term; fluorescence is a little bit more specific. There are different types of luminescence, and you'll get to see some of those varieties. Professor Martin: We love to wow you with images of fluorescent cells and cells in action. But I want to step back and actually show you how that all came about.. Where do these fluorescent proteins come from? What are we looking for? How much protein engineering was done to make these such an amazingly useful set of molecules. Luminescence is the interaction of a chemical with another chemical to give luminescence. Another pretty useful type of luminescent is bioluminescent. I've done a lot of scuba diving in my life. And there's nothing more exciting than a scuba dive where you're trying to find out what's going on under the water. It's a great way to get a sense of the depth of the water, and how the water is moving. I think that's the most famous luminol sort of example. Many marine organisms undergo bioluminescence. It's a biological reaction that causes luminescence, which is a more specific term for fluorescence. In a cuttlefish shown here in this image in the corner where they are brightly lit at night. And actually, it's just a whole party there at night in the ocean where all sorts of organisms are signaling to other organisms through biolominescence and reactions such as luciferase reactions. So those are both important. But what we're going to talk about principally is Fluorescence. And you'll see all these, like, little fireworks. The first thing to learn about fluorescence is how to spell fluorescence. It actually is fluor, F-L-U-O-R-E-S. I cannot tell you how many papers, scientific papers I read where they spelled fluorescence wrong. So make it look like you know what you're talking about andSpell fluorescence correctly. It's one of those-- there's two or three amazingly accurate ways to spell it. There's another C in there. There we go, we snuggled that in. common typos in people's slides. One of them is spelling fluorescence wrong and the other one is spelling complement wrong. fluorescence is a key point. It's the absorption of light energy by a molecule. Lambda excitation of a particular wavelength. Once that molecule has absorbed light, there's a very transient period until the molecule lets out energy in the form of light. And returns back to its ground state now. So that the photo physics of fluorescence involves the excitations of a molecule with light of one energy. That light energy is at When you excite a molecule, you'll take it to the excited state. It'll sit and vibrate there a little bit. Then it will kick back energy out at a longer wavelength. And for the majority of the fluorescence experiments that we do in biology, the wavelengths that you see emission at are in the visible range. So what we're going to see is the relationship for the electromagnetic spectrum. And then look at some fluorescent dyes that are very, very commonly used in biology. very often related to what's around it. Why is that the case? It's because the excited state may behave differently in different environments. That's why you might see fluorophores experience a change in their fluorescence as a function of their environment. Is that clear to everyone? So the molecular environments, if I'm a fluorophore and I'm in water, I'm going to feel pretty differently in my excited state. It's pretty dramatic when you see it. So here, say, when you mix ethidium bromide with DNA, and it could be in a cell or a lysate from a cell. we've got a gel that we've run DNA on. We might have a set of standards. And in other places, we're looking for the size of DNA. Remember that great experiment we saw where we saw how quickly small and large pieces of DNA ran through an agarose gel? So here is what the DNA gel would look like if you soaked it ethidium bromide. So here's the gel as a ladder of bands. But then let's say you wanted to do some work on a piece of DNA and maybe ligated you see DNA pieces at different wavelengths that have different mobilities based on size. can avoid it. The other way is simply to soak a dye into the gel. And the dye, because of the positive charge here, the counter ion gets displaced. And it gets attracted to the DNA and associates with it quite tightly. So that would be a way that you would observe DNA bound to dye in a gel. This fluoresces a pretty long wavelength. So this fluoreces this bright orange that's actually at about 605. So you can see, this is really in the visible range. 605 would be right around here.  ethidium bromide is a dye that can get into cells. And we can look at DNA within cells. Here's a picture of how it would look. It slides into the DNA. And you can see over here, the structure of DNA. Now, there's a big problem here. Because you can't use DNA ethidiumbromide. It's pretty toxic. And it's the fact, more, think of what the.molecules. think of. what the DNA intercalator would do. dye does when it gets to the DNA. What would that do to things like replication and transcription? It just kind of messes it up. And so these are toxic dyes that can only be used in fixed cells to do observations of cells. So we use it a lot. We need to be careful of it because if it gets absorbed through our skin, it could get into our cells. And it could interfere with replication and other cellular processes. Because it would accumulate on our cellular DNA. it's a natural product that's isolated from bacteria. And it has this structure that also makes it a DNA intercalator. It's used as a cancer chemotherapeutic agent because it interferes with cell division and proliferation. So we actually exploit that property. But only with cells that we want to kill or stop dividing. So you could picture, well, I don't want to use something that's going to interfere with cells if I'm doing live cell imaging. Because I'm going to have trouble with the properties of the cells. DAPI and HOECHST, H-O-E-C-H-S-T, were discovered in a bio company in Germany. They are different kinds of dyes that fluoresce on binding to DNA. You can in fact substitute ethidium bromide with these dyes. But they bind to DNA pretty differently. And when those moleculesbind to DNA in water, they don't fluorescence. But when they bind. to DNA they fluorescent an intense an intense light. cyan blue. So that's at a shorter wavelength from the ethidium bromide. So taking a look at this structure, does anyone want to explain to me how the molecules might bind to DNA? We know intercalation is perpendicular to the axis of the DNA. So where, looking at this, do you think these bind? A while ago when I was talking about the structure of DNA, I like to think of DNA as having two grooves, two places where things combine to it. And that's a minor groove and then this big trench is what's called the major groove. was in the major groove, it would be swimming around in that groove. It's almost too big. So what's really cool about these dyes is they slide in between into the minor groove. And they also make some contacts with the phosphodiester backbone. They're literally in the groove. But there's some opportunity for electrostatic interactions. And in fact, they bind in particular regions of DNA where there's AT, not GC. Those are the places where there're just the pair of hydrogen bonds instead of the trio. in those grooves and you're dissociating easily, you're not going to interfere so much with replication. Does that make sense? So it's a weaker force. Now, I moved this slide up. I realized he was in the wrong place in the deck. This is just an application of the DNA minor groove binder CEOCHST. And in this case, we're looking at three cells. These two are not actively dividing. But take a look at this cell, it's actually clearly in the state preparing for cell division. and brighter when the chromosomes are in the state they're in for cell division. So you know that there's not DNA running around everywhere. It's literally in very specific places with the cell. These dyes will bind also to other nucleic acids. But they don't bind so well. Because those don't have the really repetitive, double stranded nucleotide structures. But there are other dyes that bind much more specifically to RNA. But we won't discuss that one. And one question here. So, if you're looking at cells, you're trying to observe cells, where else in the cell are you going to see DNA? So we can see the nuclear DNA. them. So nucleic acids seem to be something that we can definitely pinpoint with fluorescence. We can see where it is. We could follow cell division. For example, upon adding things to a cell, can you see-- remember very, very early on, we showed you movies of cells dividing. You could do that with this kind of dye because it's a non-toxic dye. So, great, so far, so good. The key thing, though, about biology is we have so many other entities within a cell that we want to be able to track and monitor. And what we needed, what is absolutely essential are reagents to do that. Professor Martin will talk about antibodies, which are agents of the human adaptive immune system. antibodies have been exploited intensively to study biology. Professor Martin will also talk about the nuts and bolts of the immune cells. And how it mounts a response to disease and other features.to recognize carbohydrates. But they're a little bit harder to bind to antibodies. But nevertheless, those are useful. To recognize a protein in a cell, you need a particular entity that will bind to that protein and show you where it is through some kind of signal. The adaptive immune system is an amazing system where you can do combinatorial biology and basically recognize any target entity you're interested in. So we're going to focus exclusively on the B cells and the way that they mature to produce soluble antibodies, based on what they've been challenged with. And when you challenge a B cell population with a foreign entity, the B cell populations will go into gear to produce antibodies that very specifically recognize that foreign target, because in the human adaptiveimmune system, that might be a wonderful tool to get rid of that foreign entity. is you have a bunch of different B cells. And there's something you want to recognize. What you might do is challenge this population with the cytokine. And then you will end up with B cells that produce a lot of an antibody to a cytokine such as EGF. Now what's so special about antibodies? They're pretty big molecules. The molecular weight is pretty high. But the key thing about antibodies is that the majority of the structure stays fairly constant. When B cells mature, there's loads of rearranging in that variable section. We always draw antibodies as this V shape. And an antigen-- you've heard this word before-- it's a foreign entity that's foreign to the immune system. The antigen binding site is right here at the tips of the antibody. The C's designate constant regions. See C all the way through here. And V's represent variable regions, which I've shown you. And at the tip of the V's are the antigen binding sites. So you're going to see more about antibodies in theimmune system. of different antibodies in the human system. If we had a gene for every single different light chain and every heavy chain, you know, our DNA would be completely swamped by being dedicated to the genetic material for antibodies. So instead there is a particular system which provides little portions of the DNA structure that are in little pieces of variable components that can get zipped together through transcription and slicing events. And this is what's known as the BDJ system. And you'll hear more about that from Professor Martin. When you get a population of B cells that produce antibodies to a particular target, these may be what are known as polyclonal. People also tend to use a great deal of monoclonal antibodies, because they are a lot more specific. So let's say you want to visualize in a cell-- let's move straight to a real targeted application. We want to make an antibody that might recognize actin and a different antibody that may recognize tubulin to take a look at. The way you make antibodies is by injecting. the foreign agent or antigen that you want to make an antibody to. The organisms are adapted not to recognize their own proteins unless there's some disorder like an autoimmune disease. So you would inject the rabbit with a human epitope, so for example human actin, generate antibodies with a specificity for actin. Alternatively, you might want to made a different antibody for tubulin. You've really got two types of macromolecule that can be interacted with a fixed cell. method that's directed just at antibodies. Then you've got your population. And you can throw a fluorophore dye at it and chemically label it. So it's a good point there. There's a lot of work being done now with antibodies from different organisms, in fact, you'll see them from camels. And they're also ones from shark. And the reason why they're kind of interesting is that they sort of have mini antibodies that are much more useful for technology. So let's see what we can do here. We can do fluorescence experiments. DAPI gets into a cell easily. But what about antibodies? Can they cross the plasma membrane to get into the cell to label a target? What do you think? Who says yes? who says no? Good. OK. You guys don't say much. But I know you know the answer here. They just can't float into cells. They're too large. So you have to fix the cells on a glass side and permeabilize them, for example, with methanol so that the antibodies can gain access to all parts of the cell. an antibody to tubulin. And you can look at the various colors of the fluorescence emission. So fluorescence is extremely valuable for looking a biological systems. Many of these fluorophores shine so brightly they can be used to look at in single molecules. Professor Martin described to you single molecule DNA sequencing. That actually exploits very bright fluorophore that is so bright that you can see just a few of them in one place very, very clearly. OK, how am I doing? I just want to actually leave you with something. Technology. So you could almost picture-- with all of what we've seen so far, you couldalmost target any cell with an antibody that's specifically raised to a particular protein that's within the cell. So we can see-- in the next class we'll discuss what the limitations of that are. But we've already talked about the fact that we have to use antibodies with fixed, not living anymore, cells. So they are really dyes that can only be used in that way. DNA microarrays are just the size of just a microscope slide. On this slide through arranged technologies, you can literally spot 40,000 distinct sequences of DNA in grids to recognize. So these DNA microarray can be used for profiling genetic material or for profiling not just DNA, but RNA, and we'll see how at the beginning of the next class, in order to probe for particular stretches of DNA that might be disease related and have single nucleotide polymorphisms. And the DNA microarray experiments show you how you can use fluorophores attached to DNA sequences.