Professor: I'm going to briefly wrap up the lecture we were doing on Friday because there were a couple of things that I wanted to make a note of. Now, in the last class, I introduced you to the lipidic molecules, and you can pick them out of a lineup because they are rich in carbon-carbon and carbon-hydrogen bonds. They are molecules that are mostly hydrophobic, which can also be referred to as lipophilic. You either-- you can hate water and love fatty acid or you can love it and hate it. fatty types of materials, so those both terms are synonymous. And some of the lipids are what are known as amphipathic, and they include hydrophobic and hydrophilic components. There are a couple of tiny terms that I didn't mention explicitly, so I just want to go ahead and do that now. For example, in this phospholipid structure-- and we'll talk about these-- they have long chain fatty acids attached via esters to this glycerol unit, so there's one here and the second one here. bonds take on a particular shape because there's not freedom of rotation around double bonds the same way there is around single bonds. And so double bonds, we refer to them as either trans, where the two groups are on opposite sides, leaving the double bond, or cis. We tend to use that cis and trans sort of naming system in a lot of other contexts as well, but you almost always want to remember that trans is as far away as possible, cis is closer than trans. All right, so I'm just going to take you forward to the phospholipid structure. supramolecular association of phospholipid monomer units. Here's a monomer unit up here. You see it has an amphipathic structure, with a lot of hydrophobicity but also hydrophilicity. These molecules assemble into supramolecules that form the boundaries of your cells. Saying they are semi-permeable tells us a little bit about what can go through them. If they were fully permeable, anything could come and go and they wouldn't be much use frankly. polar head group is interacting with water on both sides. A lot of cells, especially eukaryotic cells, have a lot of endomembranes, membranes within the cells. For example, forming the boundary to the nucleus or to the mitochondria. So what do you think this one might be, folks? Unsaturated. And what's the double-bond geometry? AUDIENCE: Cis. PROFESSOR: Yeah, it is. It's like a-- it looks like a ballerina or something. other small hydrophobic molecules can pass readily in and out through the semi-permeable barrier, but other things, things that are charged, things That are big, need a different mechanism to get in andout. And we will see later on how proteins provide the opportunities to cargo things into cells or out of cells, even very large entities. There are certain mechanisms whereby that happens through a semi- permeable membrane, OK? I want to show you the other feature of membranes. They are self-healing. What this means is if you poke them, you poke a hole in a cellular membrane. is a really cool video of someone doing micro-injection into eukaryotic cells. You can drop something into the cell, and then the cell closes and maintains its integrity of the barrier. So this is a very cool observation. People do this. They have to not drink too much coffee because it's quite complicated to do a lot of micro- injection, because you can really cause carnage in your cell population if you're not very dexterous. So I just want to ask a couple of questions before, give you a couple more things to think about before we close up. components, and just one of the phospholipids is highlighted, and that would be this molecular structure here. So first of all, what do you think the non-covalent forces at that membrane interface may be? What are the types of interactions that you might have there? Give you a minute to think about it, and I want to show you that I'm actually giving you a clue here, because you can see the structure, negative charge, positive charge. Anyone want to tell me what the answer is, and why? Water is a good hydrogen bond donor and acceptor, so there will be hydrogen bonding. Salts are going to need ways to get in and out. Small proteins are too big to dissolve in that membrane through passive mechanisms. We're going to have to figure out how to get proteins in and in of cells. It's electrostatic amongst the head groups, hydrogen bonding between all that sort of dense bunch of charge, and the water. And then the other question, what type of molecules can get across? I've already answered that question. It just can't get through without a transporter of some kind, and it's actually proteins that end up doing the heavy lifting of the transport processes that we'll see. OK, so moving along. This section will be about the building blocks of your protein macromolecules, which I want to remind you comprise 50% of all of the macromoles. Now, the amino acid building locks-- blocks look pretty simple. They're called amino acids because they have an amine, the carboxylic acid. lonely amino acid in aqueous solution, it's in a different charged form, just consistent with what we talked about in the last class. So this is glycine. It's one of the 20 encoded amino acids. That means the amino acids that are made through ribosomal biosynthesis through a code that's provided by the messenger RNA. Later on, you'll see all of the beautiful mechanics of those processes. You'll have a table that shows them, but you do not have to remember them. on that table, I won't necessarily give you the information on what their properties are, because those are things that you should be able to spot by looking at their chemical structures, all right? So that's important. So these are all line-angled drawings, so you see the carbon. The hydrogens aren't shown in there. The charges are shown for what's called the side chain, because most of the amino acids have a side chain. The amino acids are also chiral, but you'll learn more than you ever wanted to know about chirality in 512. on the previous slide, is not an alpha amino acid, actually it's, a gamma amino acid. Alanine has a methyl group, for example, where I've shown the R, that would be alanine. And they get increasingly big. They're quite large. Some of them have quite extended size chains. Other ones have side chains with rings with double bonds in them. Those are what we would designate in organic chemistry as aromatic. They show different properties to this other set of amino acids. that ring system, but also hydrogen bonding with the OH on the tyrosine, so some of the amino acids can do a few different things. The next set of amino acids are those that are polar and charged, and I've shown you the most common state of all of those amino acids. And then finally, there are amino acids with polar uncharged side chains, such as those shown here. Now, this doesn't look like a very exciting set of building blocks. How can life be different? run on things made of 20 relatively simple building blocks with functional groups? And it's that the building blocks are not functional themselves. It is the polymers that are made up of amino acids, and I'll always call them AAs because it's easier for me. And all the functions of proteins are dictated by the order of the amino acids. So once again, remember a couple of things that we will always give you this table to think about. Ooh, come back. There are Glycine is the simplest amino acid with no elaborate side chain. Proline is a little odd because its side chain is kind of in a cyclic structure. collagen's structure is totally dependent on the involvement of proline in the sequence of the amino acids that make up collagen. And then the last sorts of unusual amino acid is cysteine. It has a thiol, and the one clever thing about Cysteine-- I'm just going to put a bit of a peptide here. at a different oxidation state where the two sulfurs are joined to each other. Amino acids are assembled in a unique linear polymer of defined order, and we designate that defined sequence the primary sequence. And proteins can be 1,000 amino acids, 1,500, 100 amino acids. They can be various lengths where they, you know, we would like them to be, but that just sort of sets cysteine apart a little bit for its properties, all right? OK, so coming down the side here. generally consider the smallest protein to be about 400 amino acids, and you might go up to thousands of amino acids. When the proteins are smaller, they are not capable of adopting too much ordered structure, and we mostly call them peptides. So the primary sequence will define the structure of a protein. And that primary sequence is kind of a cool thing because it's very specific. It defines-- it's got encoded into its structure, the three-dimensional fold of the protein, OK? All the information for the folded, compact, globular structure that's functional is encoded in that primary sequence. It's a cryptic code. We may not be able to tell by looking at it what it really looks like, but all the information is there in order to program the folding. So the primary sequence determines the fold, and it's the fold of the protein that mandates its function. And I think it's absolutely amazing that with a relatively limited set of building blocks, we can define so many different functions of all the proteins in our body. limited set of building blocks, OK? Now, let's now talk about peptides because one gets a little frustrated looking at single amino acids. They don't tell us so much about the peptidic structure. When nature bonds all these amino acids together, it carries out a condensation reaction to form a peptide bond between these two components of the amino acid, the amine and the carboxylic acid. And now I'm going to draw two amino acids, and then I'mgoing to tell you one important thing. R1, R2. OK, so this is a dipeptide, two amino acids, and there are some characteristics I want you to remember. When we write out peptides, we always write them N to C. So in that peptide, this would be the carboxyl terminus, and thisWould be the amino terminus. If you don't always remember to write things in this order, and you tell your friend, oh, go and get this peptide made, andyou put it down in the wrong order, they'll make the wrong peptide. The amide, or peptide bond, is unique in that there's restricted rotation about that bond. So it's as if you've got a linear polymer, but every third bond has kind of stuck in a particular orientation, which starts to define a lot of details about protein tertiary structure. It's like spaghetti with little bits that haven't been cooked. They're stiffer than the rest of the sequence. And the other really important thing about the peptide structure is that embedded within that structure, there is the amide. functional group where, remember, this can be a hydrogen bond acceptor, and this can being a hydrogen Bond donor. Once you know that, the next few slides will make a lot of sense as we talk about higher-order structure of proteins. When I condense three amino acids, I spit out two molecules of water, and I put in place two amide or peptide bonds. If I go down this backbone, every third bond is going to be fixed, fairly fixed. There's not freedom of rotation around it. Chemists have for years tried to understand how we could predict the folded structure from the primary sequence. It's not simple because what you're doing is you're solving a massive energy diagram, where as you fold a structure up, you're trying to maximize all those non-covalent forces for maximum thermodynamic stability. There are a lot of ab initio and molecular dynamics programs that are now starting to be able to fold proteins into fairly reliable structures, but they don't always get them right because they haven't gotten all the clues yet. mistakes, and I felt this one was particularly pertinent. So a bunch of guys lugging around in a lab and says, well, we finished the genome map, now we just have to figure out how to fold it. What is wrong with that cartoon? What fold? Yeah? AUDIENCE: You want to [INAUDIBLE].. PROFESSOR: Yeah. It's double helical, duplex DNA or something. You're actually folding proteins, so the cartoon is not quite right, but it's sort of kind of cute. figure out what the one-letter code spells there. Just take out your table with all the amino acids and you'll be able to see what that very large peptide spells. All right, I don't want you working it out while you're here. You've got to listen to me for the time being. OK, so the first order, we get it, there's a primary sequence. The next thing to think about is what's known as secondary structure. It's a higher order than just the primary sequence, and it's established by non-covalent bonds. continuous linear sequence. That's what we would call the peptide backbone, and the secondary structure is put in place by hydrogen bonding between components of the backbone. And there are a couple of major forms of secondary structure. What I'm showing you here is what's known as the alpha helix. It's a continuous strand of peptide, but there are hydrogen bonds between COs and NHs all the way through the backbone, such that this strand can fold up into a cylindrical, helical structure. showing it in detail, they might show it as a cylinder, so you might need to pick that out of a structure. All right, so we've seen primary. Secondary is just with backbone. And things start to get much more interesting when we get to tertiary structure. Tertiary structure is enabled by all these other interactions, electrostatic, hydrogen bonding, hydrophobic forces, that can be put to use. OK, so this is like taking your very extended stored of polymer, knowing there are different kinks in it, because of the backbone bonds, but folding it up in a structure that maximizes the opportunity. in place due to the side chains of amino acids interacting with each other or with the backbone structures. So look here, that's a very small motif. And what I'm going to call your attention to is when you fold up these motifs, when the secondary structure is in place, a lot of side chains are near each other, and they can engage in long-distance contacts. But what I want to do is take a look at this and see, can you put any of those potential interactions on the drawing that's on your handout? It's pretty pretty. obvious where there's an electrostatic interaction, right? Boop. OK, between plus-- get those out of the way, those are the easy ones. interactions between hydrophobic groups, where they want to amass that lipophilic structure, so it's not exposed as much to water, so they cluster, so those are easy. And then you can start thinking about what are all of hydrogen bonds you could draw. Here I've shown one between side chains, between side Chains and backbone, betweenside chains and water. Those may all contribute to the ultimate thermodynamic stability. A video of a protein that holds reversibly under appropriate conditions. This is a simulation. It's not looking at anything by spectroscopy or in solution or anything like that. And what I'm going to do is just show you for a few seconds, you know, this thing's like trying to find its thermodynamic minimum, and it's actually failing pretty badly. And it does that for about 30-- 60 seconds of the simulations, so I made a point to myself to take this video. you to about minute one, where things start to get fairly interesting. You see that nascent helix, in the background, the red and the blue, is starting to form strands that are a little bit aligned. At a certain point in the simulation, five of the hydrophobic groups are in a little pea. That's a breakpoint in the folding process, because that gets everything glued together better, so that the rest of it can start to really find its final place in the folded structure. downhill to get all the remaining interactions in place to fold the protein, OK? So protein folding is a puzzle that can be solved computationally by maximizing thermodynamic interactions. That's going to get difficult the larger the protein gets, but for small proteins, those simulations really start to make sense. All right, so let's just move on here. What did you think of the simulation? It's kind of cool, right? So you can find the link in the sidebar. So just pop these back on now, and that's the folded structure. is the green fluorescent protein, which is a cylindrical structure made up of anti-parallel beta sheets. When you sort of rotate it, you can see all those sheets, but then it does this little sort of curtsy to the audience, and you can look down into the barrel. And then in some cases, proteins may be a mixture of a secondary structure elements. Here it's a little hard to tell. This is triose phosphate isomerase, but if you look down it,you can see the helices, and there's also a group of beta strands that are held together. I'll show you. But wherever I show you a structure, I'm trying to show you the Protein Data Bank code, and in the web site, you can see there is a free download of PyMOL, which is the program I used to create all these structures and movies. And believe me, it took me about three years to learn how to use it properly. It'll probably take you about a week or maybe a couple of days. So if I can learn it,You can certainly learn it. Proteins are condensation polymers of amino acids. Each protein sequence is defined by covalent bonding. Most of them that are not have quite quaternary structure are folded through secondary and tertiary interactions, these things that we already talked about. And subunits may also come together through quaternARY structure. We'll see a little bit more about this when I talk about hemoglobin in the next class, because the features of the quaternaries structure are very, very important for the proper transport of oxygen. Collagen is the most abundant protein in the human body. It plays enormous roles. Collagens provide a mechanical stability to lots of essential components of complex organisms. There are many different types of collagens that are found in different parts of the body. In the next class, we'll talk about transporters and enzymes, and as we move on to signaling, things like receptors and membrane proteins and so on. The next class will focus on proteins that provide mechanical support for tissues. A single amino acid change in the primary sequence of collagen can destabilize the structure, so it is no longer viable. The disease type I'm going to talk to you about is a set of diseases known as collagenopathies, and the particular one is called osteogenesis imperfecta. A lot of babies with this defect can't even be born through the birth canal because it would crush the bones, and many of them don't survive very long at all. Some survive with different kinds of cases, but their lives are greatly impacted. extended, and I show you three strands in this polymeric structure, a yellow, a red, and a green. And these rolled together into a three helix bundle that has a fibrillous structure, and then all these structures come together to make the macromolecular structure that is collagen. And there are many genetic defects of collagen, and what's so important to think about is if you have a defect in one strand that defect will propagate through every single strand. independent strands, and there's a set of magenta residues in the middle, which come from a defect in the sequence where a glycine has been changed to an alanine. That defect is caused by the change of a hydrogen to a methyl group on three residues that come together, and that bulges out that fibrillous structure. So if you look at it, you can even see that helix gets bulged out and it's not as compact and beautiful as it should be. well-aligned as the rest of the structure. And then that defect gets propagated into all the fibrils and results in the weakening of the bones. Either the collagen fails to form properly, or the collagen, when it forms, it has much less mechanical stability. So I think that's a good place to stop and I'll pick up next time with hemoglobin. There's a great link on the website to the Protein Data Bank to see how enzymes work. These slides are posted with these reading assignments, and they're posted in color if you want to look at them again.