Random variables are an absolutely fundamental concept in probability theory. Let's start off with an example that in fact is a game because that's a fun way to start. We're going to play the bigger number game and here's how it works. There are two teams, and Team 1 has the task of picking two different integers between 0 and 7 inclusive, and they write one integer on one piece of paper. They turn the two pieces of paper face down so the numbers are not visible, and the other team then sees these two Pieces of paper whose other side has different numbers written on them. and turns it over and looks at the number on it. And then, based on what that number is, they make a decision, stick with the number they have or switch to the other unknown number on the face down piece of paper. And the game is that Team 2 wins if they wind up with the larger number. So which team do you think has an advantage here? Course, if you've read the notes, you know. But if you haven't been exposed to them, you don't know. this before, it's not really so obvious. And if you have the opportunity, this might be a good moment to stop this video and try playing the game with some friends if they're around. Otherwise, let's just proceed and see how it all works. So this is the strategy Team 2 is going to adopt. They're going to take this idea about big and small that I mentioned and act on it in a methodical way. So they'regoing to pick a paper to expose, giving each paper equal probability. Team 1 can't try to fake out Team 2 on where they put the number. Team 2 is going to decide whether the number that they can see, the exposed number, is small. And if so, would they switch? And otherwise they stick. So that guarantees that they have a 50/50 chance of picking the big number. And that's true no matter what Z you take. If Team 1 knew what your Z was, they would just make sure to pick their two numbers on the same side of your Z. The most interesting case is the middle case. That is, when your Z, which was chosen at random, happens to fall in the interval between low and high. And then in that case, your Z is really guiding you correctly on what to do. If you turn over the low card, then it's going to look low because it's less than or equal to Z so you'll switch to the high card and win. But if you turn the high cards over, it'll be greater than Z so it'll look high and you'll know to stick with it. So in this case, you're guaranteed to win. And so the probability that you win, given the middle case occurs, is 1. Now, in case H, that's the case where Z happens to be chosen greater than or equal to the high number that Team 1 shows. Well, in that case, Z just isn't telling you anything. So what's going to happen is that both numbers are going to look high to you. And that means that you'll win, if and only if, you happen to turn the low card over first. variable Z was a thing that took a value from 0 to 6 inclusive, each with probability 1/7. So it was producing a number by a random process, that chose a number at random with equal probability. If Team 2 plays properly at random picking which piece of paper to expose, then the number of the exposed card will also be a random variable. And if Team 1 plays optimally, the number on the expose card is going to be aRandom variable. That is, Team 1 in their optimal strategy that puts an upper bound to 4/7 is in fact, going to choose the two numbers randomly. picks its larger and smaller cards randomly, it's going to be another example of a number produced by a random process. And likewise, the number of the smaller card. So that's enough examples. This little game has a whole bunch of random variables appearing in it. And in the next segment, we will look again officially, what is the definition of a random variable? We will also look again at the concept of "randomness" in the game of cards and dice.