CNN's John Sutter and Jonathan Gruber continue their discussion of consumer choice. They'll talk about what budget constraints are, how consumers make constrained choices. Gruber: What stops people from just bingeing on everything? It's their budget constraint. And then we'll end with an example of food stamps, Gruber says, because food stamps are a form of government aid to the poor. The full interview is on CNN iReport, tonight at 8 and 11 p.m. ET. earn, OK? That is there won't be any savings or borrowing,. OK? Now that is a simplifying assumption. And, indeed, we'll spend a couple lectures at the end of the semester talking about what happens when people can save or borrow. That said, this is not a terrible description of most Americans. The median American household has $400 in the bank. So that's what we'll do. It also might not be sort of a terrible describing of your life. you as well. We write the budget constraint as saying that your resources, your income Y, can be spent on either pizza or cookies. You can essentially devote your income to some combination of pizza and cookies, but you have to consider how much they actually cost in doing that. Every extra cookie that you buy, holding your income constant, lowers the amount of pizza you can have by p sub p, OK? So let's consider an example. Suppose that Y is $96, that the price of pizza-- it's an expensive pizza place-- is $12. back to the key concept we talked about in the very first lecture, opportunity cost. The opportunity cost of a slice of pizza is two cookies. And that's the sense in which you're transforming pizza into cookies or cookies into pizza, OK? Now this seems kind of abstract, but let's actually think of an organization which has taken this principle to heart to develop the best method of weight loss in America, which is Weight Watchers. Now it turns out that dieting is super hard and basically doesn't work. Dieting is incredibly hard and basically doesn't work, OK? But a much more successful approach has been established by Weight Watchers. They set up a budget constraint and ask you to follow it. So, for example, they essentially assign point values to every good you might consume. They then ask, well, what weight are you today? What's your age and gender? That stuff matters for weight loss. And what weight do you want achieve? And they say, if you want to achieve a weight loss of x over y days, then you've got to limit yourself to z points. your goal is to lose weight. So we're going to give you the budget constraint. We're not going to tell you what to eat. That's why it's better than dieting because, once again, Adam Smith was right. People like to have choices. They like to let choice drive things. So, for example, vegetables are like zero points. Snickers bars are like six points, et cetera. They have various point systems, OK? For example, suppose your budget is 30 points, which would be pretty typical. the trade-off by imposing a budget constraint, by setting relative prices across goods. The points are like utils, they're not meaningful. They're only meaningful relatively. So budget constraints can help with a lot of kind of decisions in life. OK, now what happens if we shock the budget constraint? We're going to do a lot in this class of what we call comparative statics, which is, essentially, making changes in one thing or another and seeing what it does to the system. goes from $12 up to $18. Well, what happens to the budget constraint? Let's look at figure 3-2. You have your original budget constraint BC1. The equation of that line is 12P plus 6C equals 72, OK? Now the price of pizza has gone up. What that's done is that has pivoted inward your budget constraint to BC2. It has flattened thebudget constraint because the slope, remember, is the ratio of the price. of cookies to thePrice of pizza. The slope has fallen from negative 1/2 to negative 1.1/3. So what's happened is you can still have as many cookies as you had before. The y-intercept has not changed, but you can have fewer slices of pizza. So that's what happens to the opportunity set when a price changes. And, likewise, you should show to yourself the same thing will happen when the price of cookies change. But your opportunity set will still shrink, OK? Now what about-- yeah? We haven't-- we assume they're spending all their money, but it's just a way of representing. We care about-- we just care about the area because it represents the set. But that's a good question. Now let's ask about a second thing. What if your income goes up? What if prices are back to 12 and 6, but your parents decide to send you more money? Suppose your parents-- or send you less money. It turns out you haven't been paying enough attention in 14.01. parents are mad. They're monitoring you. That's why we have the camera here. This goes directly to all your parents, OK? I'm sort of joking. And so let's say parents cut your allowance to $60. Well, what does that do? That's in figure 3-3. OK, the slope is dictated solely-- you don't do anything to control the slope. The market controls the slope, but you and your family control the level, and the level has shrunk. Audience: How do you determine your marginal rate of transformation? How do determine your-- like say it wasn't just pizza and cookies? How would you determine that value? JONATHAN GRUBER: That's a great question, and we're going to actually answer that question next lecture very explicitly. Hold on to that question. We'll talk about we'regoing to compare explicitly why income changes differ from price changes and what are the underlying mechanisms. Yeah? Audience: Great, great question. it'd just make your head spin. But the basic-- so all the basic ideas can come across with two goods, but it'd be the same mechanics with more goods, OK? You essentially, when we get to the constrained optimization, you'll essentially have more first-order conditions in your constrained optimization. That's the way to think about it. OK, so let's-- actually, that's a great segue. Let's turn to the second part, which is how we use budget constraints and the utility function we learned about last time to describe how consumers make choices. our indifference curves. Utility is square root of P times C, OK? And let's consider the same budget we wrote down up here-- $72 income, $12 price of pizza, $6 price of cookies. And what we see is that point D is the furthest out indifference curve you can achieve while still meeting your budget. And, therefore, we say that the optimum, graphically, is the tangency between your indifference curve and your budget constraint is the optimal constrained bundle. point A better? Why isn't it better to have two? Maybe you just-- maybe you like cookies a lot and don't like-- or like pizza a lot. How can we say that point D is better than point A? Yeah? AUDIENCE: Why not choose point E? It's above the budget. JONATHAN GRUBER: Yeah, you can't afford it. OK, likewise, point C you wouldn't choose. Point C has the same slope as point D. In other words, the slope is minus 1/2 at point C. The math of constraint optimization is all about the marginal decision. Remember, it's hard to say how many cookies you want. It's easier to say should I have the next cookie, OK? It's about constraint optimization. And what we want to ask is we essentially want to compare how do you feel about trading off pizzas versus cookies versus what will the market let you do in sort of trading off pizza versus cookies. That's the graphic. So let's come to the math. is the optimum is going to occur when we set your marginal rate of substitution, which, remember, we defined as minus MUc over MUp. And this is the fundamental equation of consumer choice. If you understand this equation, you can solve virtually every consumer choice problem I'll give you, OK? That basically, at the optimum, the ratio of marginal utilities equals the ratio prices. That is the rate at which you want to trade off pizza for cookies is the rates at which the market will allow you to trade. a position where the MRS was greater than the MRT. The marginal benefit to you of another cookie relative to another pizza is higher than what the market will charge you to turn pizza into cookies. The next slice of pizza makes you 1 over square root of 10 happy. Your marginal rate of substitution is 2.5. That is a meaningful concept. Utils are not, but that that number is meaningless. So we only care about it in ratios. So let's do the marginal utility of cookies. Jonathon Gruber asks audience to trade two pizzas for one cookie. "That's what that number means. And that is a meaningful number," he says. "You are willing to give up 2.5 slices of pizza to get one cookie" "So what should you do? Eat less pizza. Eat more cookies," he asks. "We can use that. That's not an ordinal. that's cardinal" "You're willing to trade. Yeah, say it loudly so we can hear," he adds. You basically want to trade pizza for cookies until these things are equal. If you do the same math starting at point B, you'll find the MRS is much below 1/2. That is, at that point, you are happy to give up tons of cookies to get pizza because, jeez, you've got 10 cookies and one slice of pizza. So you'll happily do it, and you move back towards point D. And that's sort of in a bundle sort of the intuition and math and graphics of the show. how we do constrained optimization. OK, that is hard and very important. If you understand this, you're sort of done with consumer theory, OK? This is sort of the core of what consumer theory is all about. It's all about this balancing act. The whole course is fundamentally all about one equation, which is marginal benefits equals marginal costs. OK? Everything we do is going to be about weighing the marginal benefit of an activity against its marginal cost. We want to set them equal. And this sort of example I hope explained why. The poverty line is essentially a measure of what's a minimum level of resources you need to live in America. The poverty line for an individual is about $14,000. For a family of four, it's about $28,000, depending on where you're from. If you're below the poverty line in America, roughly speaking, you get help with buying food. And that comes through a program we now call SNAP, which used to be called food stamps. It's basically a program the government has that provides money for individuals to buy food. be used to purchase food. So here's the question. Why go through this rigmarole? Why not just give people cash? This fancy thing, if we want to give poor people money, why don't you just give them money? And we're going to-- I don't want the answer yet, OK? What I want to do is show you graphically how we think about the trade-off, and then we'll come to the answer. So let's actually graph how we thought about food stamps. Let's go to figure 3-5A. you're poor. We're going to give you $500 in cash. Well, now all we've done is shift out your budget constraint from 5,000 to 5,500. What does that do to your choices? Well, consider two different types of people. Person y, OK, they used to be on indifference curve I0. They used to spend almost all their income on food and not a lot on shelter. Now what do they do? They spend a little more on food. about what I did here on this graph alone? Yeah? AUDIENCE: Like, even if like you gave them money specifically for food, couldn't they then just reallocate their other money? JONATHAN GRUBER: OK, that's a good point. We'll come back to that. OK, but do people understand what the cash transfer is, how it works? OK, now let's go to SNAP. Instead of handing them a $500 check, we give them a debit card with $500 on it that can only be used on food. How does this affect their budget constraint? this course in drawing budget constraints. The new budget constraint is this kinked line that runs from 5,000 on the y-axis to the point x2 at 5,00. Can someone explain to me why that's the new budget constraints? Yeah? AUDIENCE: You can't spend a negative amount. So you can't spending like negative amounts of your non-food-stamp money on food. JONATHAN GRUBER: Exactly, you have-- we are forcing you to spend at least $500. $500 of your money on food. It doesn't have to be a specifically labeled 500. It can be any 500. But we're forcing you to spend at least $500. Well, what does that do to your choices? Well, for person y, it makes no difference whether they get cash or whether they gets food stamps. Why does it make no difference? Yeah? why does it-- whatever, greenish, I don't know, yeah, you. You're already spending a lot of his money on. food. Jonathon Gruber: People always get to the point that makes them happiest. He says if you force them to spend $500 on food, they must be less happy. He asks audience: Do people understand the graphics here and the conclusions I drew? GRUBER: I just want to know if people understand. Why would we force people to have food? Why would you-- they're better off with cash? Yeah? Audience: Say because what makes people on the highest indifference is just what makes them happier. you die, that would be really bad. The reason to do this is because we think they don't know best. In that case, maybe we don't feel so bad about forcing the guy to buy food instead of cocaine, OK? In other words, this a program which might make sense if we are paternalistic. Now we're getting into normative economics. If we think that people won't necessarily make the right decisions, we're not going to get the best out of them. for themselves, then it may be worth actually making them worse off because they're not worse off. Their perceived benefits are worse, but they don't know what they're doing, OK? Now you can see why-- I hope you can sort of immediately see why this concept makes economists a little nervous because why do we know what we want better than they do? So it makes people a little bit nervous, economists alittle bit nervous. And a lot of people are nervous to say, gee, maybe they're just happier doing cocaine. And how do weknow that that's the wrong way for them to spend their resources? curve and all their information? JONATHAN GRUBER: That's a very good point. If you're really just sad he's poor, then you should give him money. If what you're sad about is, gee, I don't like how he's living, I'm sad he can't have better food to eat, sad at the place he lives. Then you're starting to impose your preferences, but let's be important. That's imposing your preferences. but, really, the point of SNAP isn't really with contentedness or happiness, but rather like what would be to a more sustainable life. If the taxpayer cares about, look, we want a healthy populace that's going to live a long time and be productive and pay taxes, then that would be a reason to do this. But, once again, I want to emphasize, OK, this is paternalism. If you really just care what makes people happiest, you should give them cash, OK? amount of shelter is kind of fixed, but like the amount of food that eaten [INAUDIBLE].. So, if we let people spend more money on food-- JONATHAN GRUBER: Yeah, yeah, so, basically, that's a great question. Do food stamps actually increase food purchases? First of all, there's two reasons why they might not. Reason one is everybody could be like y. X is sort of a silly case, right? You're going to die if you eat that little. in practice. Are they making a difference? Well, actually, we've run an experiment on this, OK? We're going to talk in this class a lot about empirical results in economics. Here we have an uncertain prediction from theory about whether food stamps will affect food purchases or not. So let's test it. And the way we test it is we actually have run food stamps cash out experiments where we literally take guys on in the street. You always want to start with the theory, but the theory sometimes has predictions that are uncertain. food stamps and give them cash instead and watch what happens to their consumption before and after. Food stamps is forcing people to spend about 15% more on food than they would like to unconstrained by the cash. The experiment is a real randomized trial. We literally flip a coin. Heads, you keep your food stamps. Tails, we replace those food stamps with an equal amount of cash. Then we watches what happens. What happens is that people spend about 10% less on food. "The price of our paternalism is 15%, OK? We are making people, effectively, 15% worse off," he says. "We're making them spend 15% more food than they want to," he adds. "So, actually, the evidence is starting to pour in that it might not be worth it" "In developing countries, the answer seems to be just giving people cash makes them better off, that actually, especially in developing country, people use the cash in productive ways" example, they have a series of evaluation programs where they've given people cash. And they find that people spend relatively little of that on drugs and alcohol, but they actually tend to spend it productively. And, in fact, they found, in developing countries, this often provides valuable resources for individuals to start businesses. So they ran experiment Uganda where a nonprofit company randomly offered a group of women $150, which is huge relative to their income. That actually effectively doubled their earnings. From that one injection of cash, it led them to actually double their annual earnings, OK? Vox.com followed these women up nine years later, and the effect had totally gone away. They're not worse off, but it looks like, at least what in the short run made them better off, well, that effect fades over time. But the bottom line is, at this point, I think the evidence is sort of probably in favor of being less paternalistic and just giving people cash, but that runs into a lot of difficulties in terms of our concerns about how people will spend it. stop there. We will come back on Monday, and we'll talk about how we actually go from this stuff to the demand curves we started the class with. Back to the page you came from. back to CNN.com home. Follow us on Twitter @cnnireport and @CNNOpinion. Follow CNN Living on Facebook and Twitter. For more, go to www.cnn.com/lifestyle and www.dailymail.co.uk/lpin.