Calculus is the big application of calculus, so it's kind of interesting to see what part of calculus actually get used in differential equations. The derivative of x to the n, the derivative of sine and cosine. Above all, the derivatives of e to the x, which is e tothe x. And I'm going to show you what I see, and it's not everything by any means, but it's some basic ideas, but not all the details you learned. is e to the x. Dy dt equals y. And then the inverse function related to the exponential is the logarithm. With that special derivative of 1/x. OK. But you know those. Secondly, out of those few specific facts, you can create the derivatives of an enormous array of functions using the key rules. Derivative is a linear operation. The product rule fg prime plus gf prime. The quotient rule. Who can remember that? And above all, the chain rule. of functions that really blow open the functions or we can deal with. OK. So the fundamental theorem involves the derivative and the integral. And it says that one is the inverse operation to the other. The derivative of the integral of a function is this. Here is y and the Integral goes from 0 to x. I don't care what that dummy variable is. I can-- I'll change that dummy variables to t. Whatever. I'll use it. Maybe that's better. A key example in differential equations. The function I have in mind, I'll call it y, is the interval from 0 to t. It's a function of t then, time, It's the integral of this, e to the t minus s. Some function. That's a remarkable formula for the solution to a basic differential equation. So with this, that solves the equation dy dt equals y plus q of t. So when I see that equation and we'll see it again, we'll derive this formula, but now I want to just use the fundamental theorem of calculus to check the formula. So I have a function t times another function of t. I'm going to use the product rule and show that the derivative of that product is one term will be y. OK to take that derivative, I notice the t is appearing there in the usual place, and it's also inside the integral. But this is a simple function. I can take e to the t out of the-- outside the integral, and I'll show you how to do it. Be nice, I just think if you plug that into the differential equation it's solved. rather I just called the function f. A function at a point a little beyond t, is approximately the function at t plus the correction because it-- plus a delta f, right? A delta f approximately? It's approximately delta t times the derivative at t. That's a fundamental idea of calculus, that the derivative is quite close to delta f divided by delta t. So the way to get closer is we have to take into account the bending. The curve is bending. What derivative tells us about bending? That is delta t squared times the second derivative. function because that's a nice function, e to the t. We can recreate that function from knowing its height, its slope, its bending and all the rest of the terms. So there's a whole lot more-- Infinitely many terms. That's called the Taylor series named after Taylor. It's frightening because it's got infinitely many terms, and the terms are getting a little more comp-- For most functions, you really don't want to compute the nth derivative of the function. this isn't so practical. Tangent parabola, quite practical. Higher order terms, less-- much less practical. But the formula is beautiful because you see the pattern, that's really what mathematics is about. They all fit that pattern and when you add up all the terms, if you have a nice function, then the approximation becomes perfect and you would have equality. And those are the best functions of mathematics and exponential is of course one of them. OK that's calculus. Well, part of calculus.