developed a department- level plan for designing and implementing responder health programs that incorporates the lessons from the WTC health programs. HHS has not described the roles and responsibilities of its components. Until HHS completes this work, responders to a future disaster could be left vulnerable if they experience health problems as a result of the disaster. In the absence of a plan, NIOSH developed department-level plan that incorporates five lessons from WTC program and defines the roles of all HHS components with regard to planning and implementing response programs. components would be used, and how efforts would be coordinated. In the absence of a department-level plan describing the roles of all relevant HHS agencies, NIOSH developed a proposal in February 2008 for working with some of the relevant HHS components. Timely implementation of such a system, prior to a disaster or emergency occurring, is important. Although NIOSH’s proposal for a project to develop strategies for addressing responder health issues is a step in the right direction, HHS has not developed a plan. to adapt two existing electronic record systems used by NDMS for this purpose. HHS has not developed a department-level plan for designing and implementing responder health programs that incorporates the five lessons from the WTC health programs. The Joint Patient Tracking System and the Electronic Medical Record can be adapted for the purpose of responding to emergency situations. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S., call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. HHS has taken steps to ensure that responders are registered, but it has not developed a a result of carrying out critical response and recovery activities. To ensure that effective programs are developed to deal with the health effects that responders may experience in the event of a future disaster, we recommend that the Secretary of HHS take the following action: develop a department-level responder screening. We also urge HHS to ensure consistency in program design, so that programs collect data that are consistent, comprehensive and comprehensive. its components in designing and implementing responder health programs. According to the NRF, agencies should clearly define roles and responsibilities in their disaster preparedness plans. HHS has not identified which components would be involved in responderhealth programs, which component would take the lead, and how the expertise of various component would be used in the program. The NRF says HHS should identify these components and their roles in the response to a disaster in the coming years. The agency has not released any details on how this would work. would be adequate. HHS’s disaster response activities, including efforts to address the health of responders, operate within an administrative and legal framework. In response to the attacks on September 11, 2001, the Congress enacted the Homeland Security Act of 2002, which established DHS and required the department to consolidate existing agencies. The agency is responsible for responding to natural disasters, such as hurricanes, earthquakes and tsunamis, as well as responding to human-caused disasters such as fires and floods. develop a list of responders, and policy approaches, such as the importance of ensuring comparability of services for all responders. Although HHS has taken some steps to apply the first lesson concerning registering responders, it has not completed work to adopt a system to register responders who are deployed to war zones. The U.S. government is working with the State Department and other agencies to develop a system for registering emergency responders. The goal is to have a system in place by the end of the year. and treatment services. In the event of a future disaster, providing comparable services to all responders would ensure more equitable access to services. No group of responders would be unable to obtain certain services on the basis of who their employer was or where they reside. This could be a way to prevent future disasters in the future by providing equal access to care and treatment services for all people in the same circumstances. The proposal is being considered by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services and is expected to be voted on soon. programs, FEMA specified that the funding it provided could not be used for research. HHS’s Federal Responder Screening Program also was not designed to collect any information on responders’ health for the purposes of research. The interagency agreement between FEMA and ASPR to establish the program limited the program to a onetime screening examination. HHS officials said they did not have the resources to conduct epidemiologic research with the federal responder population. In hindsight, such research clearly would have provided useful data and benefited the program. HHS has not indicated whether its policies and actions following a disaster or emergency would apply these lessons. Another consequence of not having a plan is that HHS has not described the roles and responsibilities of those involved in screening and monitoring. The agency has not said whether it would use epidemiologic research into the design of screening and Monitoring services. It has also not said if the agency would use the results of such research to develop new screening tools and screening programs in the aftermath of a disaster. The plan is expected to be completed by the end of the year. timely mental health screening and monitoring that is integrated with physical health screening. include a treatment referral process; and make comparable services available to all responders, regardless of their employer or geographic location. In its comments, HHS acknowledged that any overall HHS plan should include guidance on treatment referral processes and methods to ensure comparable treatment services across all responder groups. HHS did not comment on our recommendation that HHS develop a department-level responder screenings and monitoring plan, but acknowledged that such a plan would be needed. need of care to treatment services. An NIMH official told us that a working group of agency officials and other experts examining responder mental health issues concluded that providers who identified a need for treatment during screening examinations acquired a responsibility to provide access to care. Lesson 5: Making comparable services available to the same level of care is key to getting the best care for the same or similar patient. For more information, go to: www.nimh.org/mental-health. necessary. HHS also provided technical comments, which we incorporated as appropriate. As agreed with your offices, unless you publicly announce its contents earlier, we plan no further distribution of this report until 7 days after its issue date. At that time, we will send copies of thisReport to the report's authors and to your offices. The report will be released to the public within seven days of its release, unless it is made public earlier by the authors or the report’s authors. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. The RRR survey instrument is designed to collect information that would enable officials to inform individuals about follow-up health services. RTI’s responsibilities include providing information to the entire at-risk population on how to enroll in the RRR. The RRR is a two-page form that can be distributed in paper or electronic format. According to RTI, the form can be adopted by state and local entities to register responders and other individuals exposed to a disaster. It can also be used to identify individuals who left the disaster area before being enrolled. department-level plan for responder health programs. ATSDR has developed a survey instrument that state and local entities can voluntarily adopt to register responders. ASPR is also taking steps to establish a system to register HHS employees and certain other volunteers, but it has not completed its effort. HHS has not yet released a plan for responding to emergency situations in emergency situations, a spokesman said. The plan is expected to be completed by the end of the year, the spokesman said in an email to CNN. ATSDR has shared the instrument with other federal agencies, all state health departments, and local response organizations. As of February 2008, 21 states had used the instrument, with more on the way. The data would be collected and maintained by state or local entities with ATSDR’s and RTI’’ assistance. The instrument was developed by the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NICE) ATSDR established a contract with Research Triangle Institute International (RTI) to support research studies. The survey asks 38 questions that are intended to collect basic demographic and health information. The questions include contact information; exposure information; and information on exposure-related health effects, immediate health and safety needs, and health insurance. ATSDR is a division of the University of Texas Medical Branch, which is based in San Antonio, Texas. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. All responders, excluding FDNY firefighters and emergency medical service technicians. Current federal employees. Federal Occupational Health Services (FOH) Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) Until December 26, 2006, ASPR was the administrator. In addition to the contact named above, Helene F. Toiv, Assistant Director; George Bogart; and Helene Toiv. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. HHS is the primary agency for coordinating the federal government’s public health and medical response. OSHA is the lead agency for responding to worker safety and health concerns, with HHS as a cooperating agency. HHS can also assist state, tribal, and local officials in establishing a registry of potentially exposed individuals and conducting long-term monitoring for potential health effects. Under ESF#8, HHS can deploy its publichealth and medical personnel, including civilian volunteers, to the affected area. The Environmental Protection Agency or the American Red Cross can also activate and deploy its medical personnel. According to the Pandemic and All-Hazards Preparedness Act, HHS is the lead federal agency for public health and medical responses to emergencies and disasters. The act specifies that ASPR must carry out certain functions during a response, including registering federal public health, medical personnel who are deployed under the injuries or symptoms. HHS provided additional information about ASPR’s responsibilities and activities under the pandemic and all-hazards act, which we incorporated as appropriate. For example, HHS discussed ASPR's establishment of the Center for Responder Safety, Health, and Risk Management. The ASPR recently established the Center for Responder Safety, Health, and Risk Management. The Center is working to develop a system to register responders and record their health problems and make referrals. An ASPR official told us that the Center is exploring how to use the system in an emergency or a disaster. The ASPR is also exploring how the system could be used in an accident or disaster, the official said. For confidential support call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. FEMA collaborates with HHS on health issues related to disasters. FEMA is responsible for assigning work and providing funding to other federal agencies for performing operations included in the NRF. To execute this responsibility, FEMA uses mission assignments, which are interagency agreements with otherFederal agencies intended to meet the needs of the agency at the time of the assignment. For more information, go to FEMA.gov or call 1-800-621-FEMA (8255) or go to www.fema.gov. FEMA entered into interagency agreements with HHS agencies to distribute funding to government and private organizations to implement health screening and monitoring programs for responders and other affected groups. In fiscal year 2006, not design and implement FDNY's and the Consortium’s monitoring programs to conduct research because of restrictions that FEMA placed on the funding for the programs. Because FEMA primarily provides funding for programs to address the short-term effects of a disaster, in its interagency agreement with NIOSH to establish the monitoring programs. federal government response plans into a single coordinated national response plan. In December 2004, DHS issued the National Response Plan (NRP), which detailed missions, policies, structures, and responsibilities of federal agencies for coordinating resource and programmatic support to states, localities, and other entities. The NRP was to be invoked when the U.S. government faced a national emergency or emergency situation. The U.N. Security Council passed the NRP in December 2004; it was adopted by Congress in January 2005. the President issued a major disaster or emergency declaration under the Stafford Act. The NRP was first invoked in August 2005 in response to Hurricane Katrina and was subsequently updated in May 2006. In January 2008, DHS issued the NRF to supersede the NRP. The NRF is intended to provide emergency assistance in the event of a major natural disaster or major emergency. It was first used in the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina in 2005 and was updated in 2006. It has been superseded by the National Response Force (NRF) immediate and short-term needs. When a disaster or emergency is declared under the authority of the Stafford Act and FEMA issues a mission assignment, a federal agency has 60 days after the declaration to complete tasks described in the mission assignment. Unless time is extended by FEMA due to unusual needs, the 60-day deadline is set by the FEMA mission assignment and not the disaster declaration. The deadline is 60 days for tasks to be completed, unless the disaster is declared as a national emergency or as a state of emergency. and other federal organizations, such as the United States Army Corps of Engineers, to obtain their perspectives on the project. HHS said that it was possible to infer from our draft report that long-term monitoring and treatment, including referral for treatment, are appropriate each time a Stafford Act declaration is made. The report was based on a request from the Department of Health and Human Services for information on the use of the Stafford Act for the construction of a new medical facility in the state of Texas. The project is expected to be completed by the end of the year. provided an initial screening examination followed by monitoring examinations every 18 months for firefighters and other workers and volunteers. From 2002 until summer 2007, NIOSH did not consistently ensure the availability of screening and monitoring services for nonfederal responders residing outside the NYC area. Responders who traveled to NYC from around the country following the attack have testified before the Congress about having difficulty receiving services. For example, from August 2004 until June 2005, NIosh did not fund any organization to provide screening or monitoring services outside of the NYC metropolitan area. HHS’s WTC Federal Responder Screening Program provides screening services to federal responders nationwide through its network of FOH clinics. Beginning in late 2002, NIOSH funded services for nonfederal responders residing outside the NYC metropolitan area. Table 1 provides information on the numbers of responders who have used the WTC program for screening. The WTC program is funded by the federal government, not by the state or local governments. It provides screening for federal responders in the New York City area, as well as non-Federal responders outside of the city. services as other responders did. We also reported on the service interruptions in the WTC Federal Responder Screening Program. HHS established the program in June 2003, suspended it in March 2004, resumed it in December 2005, and suspended it again in January 2007. Similarly, NIOSH’s services were suspended in May 2007, and resumed in May 2008. We reported on these interruptions as well as others in this series of articles. For more information, visit the National Institute of Health and Human Services’ website. NIOSH took steps to increase the availability of services to nonfederal responders outside the NYC metropolitan area. In June 2007, NIOSH arranged for QTC Management, Inc., to provide QTC services to WTC responders outside of the NYC area. NIOSH has been making efforts to provide comparable services to all WTC responders, and they have been making steps to provide similar services to those outside the New York area. For more information on NIOSH, visit their website at: http://www.nihos.org. authority of the Secretary of HHS. These personnel include members of the National Disaster Medical System (NDMS) Section 709 of the Security and Accountability for Every Port Act of 2006 (also known as the SAFE Port Act) provides that the President, acting through HHS, may establish and implement a program to help victims of natural disasters in the United States. The program is called the National Emergency Medical Services Program (NEMSP) and is administered by the National Institute for Disaster Medical Services (NIDMS) NIOSH will help HHS determine how it would respond to an activation of the NRF. One of the objectives of the project would be to ensure responder safety and health. A NIOSH official told us that the purpose of theproject would is to help HHS. determine how to implement the SAFE Port Act. The project is expected to be completed by the end of the year. For more information on the project, visit NIOSH.org or call 1-800-273-8255. a proposal for a project to develop strategies to ensure responder safety and health. Using experience gained from the WTC disaster, HHS’s ATSDR has developed and tested a Rapid Response Registry (RRR) survey instrument. In 2005, NIOSH posted interim guidance on its Web site to help occupational health and other clinicians conduct postexposure medical screening of workers leaving disaster recovery areas. The NIOSH project would address some aspects of the lessons from the World Trade Center disaster, including the need to register responders. control potential hazards and determine the need for long-term monitoring. NIOSH partnered with other HHS components, such as ASPR and NIEHS, to develop the proposal. As part of the project, NIOSH officials plan to meet with ATSDR officials about adapting the RRR and other surveillance tools to collect more specific information about potential hazards in the environment. The project is expected to be completed by the end of the year, according to the National Institute of Occupational Safety and Health. surveillance and monitoring and for evaluating the need for longer-term medical monitoring of response and recovery workers. OSHA and NIOSH have established an interagency agreement that broadly describes NIOSH’s role in carrying out the Worker Safety and Health Support Annex. FEMA issued a mission assignment to OSHA for such activities and OSHA in turn assigned activities to NIOSH. In addition to the NRF, there are certain statutes that are relevant to HHS's responsibilities concerning responder health. information about a responder’s occupation and exposure. NIOSH officials plan to meet with state health department representatives in May 2008 and to conduct a focus group with risk managers with an interest in responder safety and health in June 2008. The recommendations and guidance that it plans to develop are intended to reach a larger audience than HHS and that NIOSH has held or is planning meetings with state Health Department representatives, risk managers, and others with interest in responding to health emergencies. The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) is a division of the Department of Health and Human Services. NIOSH is the HHS administering agency for all the WTC health programs, except the WTC Health Registry. In February 2006 the Secretary of HHS designated the Director of NIOSH to take the lead in ensuring that the WTC's health programs are well coordinated. NIOSH is responsible for administering all the health programs for the World Trade Center complex. The WTC has received various health services from the U.S. government since 9/11, including medical care, mental health care, and other services for the families of those who lost their lives. to develop a broader mental health component to the screening program. With the additional funds, the program was able to develop and use a more extensive mental health questionnaire and have a trained mental health professional conduct in-person interviews. Screening and monitoring programs that integrate physical and mental health assessments are called integrated screening and monitoring. The program's goal is to identify and treat at-risk children and young adults in need of treatment and support. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. and monitoring can also prevent some mental health conditions from progressing to more serious disorders. For example, obtaining treatment for mild depression might prevent a major depressive disorder from developing. Treating depression might also prevent alcoholism. Including a treatment referral process in screening and monitoring programs could improve. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. Mental health screening can improve the ability to accurately diagnose and differentiate physical and mental health conditions. Mental health conditions sometimes present as physical symptoms. For example, gastrointestinal problems can sometimes be a sign of psychological stress. Timely mental health screening.can have several benefits. For more information, visit www.mentalhealthscreening.org or call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-TALK (8255) or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. was initially assessed with a short written questionnaire, and depending on a person’s score, individuals were referred for an in-person clinical mental health evaluation. Recognizing the seriousness of mental health problems among responders, the Mount Sinai School of Medicine Department of Psychiatry sought private funding from the Robin Hood Foundation. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. Lesson 2: Designing and implementing screening and monitoring programs that foster the ability to conduct epidemiologic research could improve the understanding of health effects experienced by responders. Research can help public health officials determine occurs following a disaster, the authors say. They say implementing these lessons would help public Health officials determine whether a specific disaster resulted in health effects and whether long-term monitoring was needed. The authors conclude that the lessons on the importance of registering responders and of designing responder health programs to foster epidemiological research should be implemented. conduct epidemiologic research but rather were established as clinical programs focused on the health of individual responders. For example, the programs were not designed to test specific hypotheses about health effects or to compare participants’ health with the Health of a comparison group. A NIOSH official told us NIOSH did not conduct any epidemiological research but did conduct clinical programs that focused on individual responders' health. The study was published in the Journal of the American College of Public Health, published by the American Council on Public Health. The mental health protocol used by the NY/NJ WTC Consortium focused on delivering good clinical services. One clinician noted that there was not enough emphasis on making the protocol scientifically sound for drawing definitive conclusions about the mental health effects of responders. Data from the protocol was used to conduct research about the health effects on responders. The protocol was developed by the New York/New Jersey WTC Consortium and the New Jersey Department of Health and Human Services. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. registry, studying short- and long-term health effects through epidemiologic and other health studies, and providing assistance to individuals in determining eligibility for health coverage. The act also authorizes the President, acting through HHS, to establish cooperative agreements with a medical institution, including a local health care center. It also provides assistance in identifying appropriate health services and identifying eligible individuals for coverage and assistance in selecting appropriate health care providers. It was signed by President Barack Obama on July 31, 2013. would help ensure that responders are contacted before some scatter and become more difficult to locate. Having a complete registry could improve the ability of responder health programs to conduct outreach for screening and monitoring services, improve efforts to plan services and allocate resources, and provide data for epidemiologic research. It could also help with planning services and allocation of resources, as well as providing data for research. For more information, visit www.nhs.org.uk or call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255. services for nonfederal responders residing outside the NYC area were not continuously available for all responders. In addition, some of the screening and monitoring programs initially faced difficulties referring responders for treatment. Throughout the history of these programs, program officials have raised concerns about whether the duration of federal funding efforts. Over the past several years the federal government has provided significant resources to support screening, monitoring, and treatment services for these responders. We have identified lessons from this experience that include both practical issues, such as the need to need to provide treatment. to provide screening and monitoring services for certain individuals affected by a presidentially declared disaster, including responders. The act specifies that such a program may include collecting exposure data, developing and disseminating information and educational materials. A second objective would be to develop a responder surveillance system to document and integrate data on exposures and health effects to identify ways to help those affected by the disaster, the act says. The goal is to produce a guidance document for federal, state, and local governments and private businesses and organizations to assist them in providing services. guidance states that all responders should receive some basic screening services. identity and contact information should be obtained on their completion of or return from response activities. The guidance outlines minimum screening information needs, including contact information, health status information, type of response work, exposure information, and. and exposure information. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. Almost all firefighters who responded to the attack experienced respiratory effects, including WTC cough. One study found that exposed firefighters on average experienced a decline in lung function equivalent to that which would be produced by 12 years of lower respiratory symptoms among responders. The FDNY WTC program initiated its own research on the health effects of the WTC disaster on firefighters and quickly published a series of papers about the health effect experienced by firefighters in peer-reviewed journals. It was able to do this because the FD NY WTC program collected the data. We have identified five important lessons from the experience of the WTC health programs. These lessons relate to activities during the response to a disaster as well as during the recovery period. A proposed guidance document would include guidelines for tracking responders during an event, including their activities, exposures, and physical and mental health effects. In the first lesson, Registering all responders during a response to an event could improve implementation project would address some aspects of the Lessons from the WTC Health Programs. The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services would be asked to carry out this program. Responders to the WTC disaster were at high risk for mental health problems. Screening and monitoring programs are designed to foster epidemiologic research. The project’s objective to develop a responder surveillance system acknowledges aspects of the second lesson. Many workers and volunteers worked for extended periods of time after the disaster. They experienced an unprecedented, highly traumatizing event. It is hoped that the project will help prevent more serious mental health conditions from developing. It will also help to improve the ability to accurately diagnose physical and mental health condition. periods of time without sufficient respite. Some of them did not have training in disaster response and were therefore more vulnerable to the stress of the event. Despite the early recognition of the need for mental health services, the mental health status of responders did not receive as much attention as it should have, the study found. The report was published in the Journal of the American Medical Association (JAMA) on November 14, 2013. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. that there remains some uncertainty and controversy about the health risks associated with the disaster. In addition to a lack of information about the number and identity of responders and their exposures, another serious limitation to understanding the health effects of the WTC disaster is health effects experienced by responders. Officials involved in the WTC health programs and other experts have learned that screening and monitoring programs need to be able to scientifically document the health effect of a disaster. They have observed that to achieve this goal the programs should be designed to have. after the disaster, which affected the ability of participants to remember their exposures accurately. For example, WTC Health Registry officials told us they did not begin surveying responders until 2 years after the WTC disaster. WTC health program officials tell us that registering responders during a response to a disaster can be a difficult process. For more information, visit the WTC health registry website or go to www.wtchealthregistry.org. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. WTC Health Registry researchers found that responders’ risk of newly diagnosed asthma increased with greater exposure to the WTC disaster site. Study indicated by arriving at the site at an earlier date or working there for a longer duration. The Mount Sinai School of Medicine found that the risk of developing asthma increased as responders were exposed to the site for longer periods of time. The study was published in the Journal of the American College of Physiotherapy and was published by the journal of the College of Physicians and Surgeons. Secretary of Health and Human Services, congressional committees, and other interested parties. If you or your staffs have any questions about this report, please contact me at (202) 512-7114 or bascettac@gao.gov. Contact points for our Offices of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of this report. GAO staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix III. National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health. September 11: Improvements Still Needed in Availability of Health Screening and Monitoring Services for Responders outside the New York City Area. September 11: HHS Has Screened Additional Federal Responders for World Trade Center Health Effects, but Plans to Screen More. September 10: HHS Needs to Ensure the Availability of health screening and monitoring for all Responders. September 9: HHS needs to ensure the availability of Health screening and Monitoring for All Responders, but plans to screen more. July 23, 2007. Washington, D.C.: HHS Has screened Additional Federalresponders for world trade center health effects, but. plans to Screen more. for Awarding Funds for Treatment Are Incomplete. September 11: Monitoring of World Trade Center Health Effects Has Progressed, but Program for Federal Responders Lags Behind. Washington, D.C.: September 8, 2006. September 10, 2005: Health Effects in the Aftermath of the World trade Center Attack. September 9, 2004: Health effects in the aftermath of the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks on the U.S. Capitol and the White House. September 12, 2004. Health effects after the attacks. have been fewer studies conducted by researchers affiliated with the Consortium, and it has taken longer for the studies to be published. The NY/NJ WTC Consortium serves a more heterogeneous responder population of workers and volunteers and lacks baseline health status information on this population. Officials from this program said that identifying providers available and willing to treat participants was a major part of their operations. They said it was especially difficult when participants lacked health insurance, which was often the case. In addition, in our discussions of Health Services, which provided treatment, the NY/ NJ WTC Consortium did not have a similar option. Surveys of self-reported health status to collect health information on responders, as well as people who resided, worked, attended school, or were present in the vicinity of the WTC. Because these the ability of responders to gain access to needed treatment. Less is known about the health effects experienced by federal responders than is know about other categories of responders. Officials involved with the WTC health programs have recognized the value of designing responder health programs that provide comparable services to all responders and their families. WTC health program officials had to compile a list of responders who were potentially eligible to receive services. Screening and monitoring programs for responders to the WTC disaster were set up as separate programs. According to services available to all responders, regardless of their employer or geographic location, could ensure more equitable access to services for responders and help ensure that data collected about responders’ health are consistent and comprehensive. The WTC Health Registry officials and WTC Federal Responder Screening Program officials tried to compile the list of potentially eligible responders. Not registering responders during disaster response efforts affects outreach activities and hinders efforts to plan services. Without a definitive list of responders, the program had to issue widespread and costly public service announcements to identify and enroll eligible responders. The lack of a list of eligible responders has led to a lack of coordination and coordination in the response to the September 11 terrorist attacks in New York and Washington, D.C. and other major U.S. cities. It has also led to an increase in the cost of the response, which has been put on the shoulders of taxpayers. of a complete registry with demographic and exposure information also made it difficult to quantify the needs for screening, monitoring, and treatment services for responders. For example, a WTC health program official told us that not knowing where responders are located around the country has made it hard to determine where they need to be screened, monitored, and treated. "It's a very difficult thing to do. It's a lot of work," the WTC official said. "You have to be able to go out and do it" Without a complete registry of responders, it is difficult to accurately determine the incidence and causes of health problems experienced by the responder population. An epidemiologist involved in the NY/NJ WTC Consortium told how to design services and allocate resources for the responders living outside the NYC metropolitan area. How to design Services and allocate Resources for the Responder population living outside of the NYC metro area.how to design Service Plans for Responders in New York and New Jersey, New Jersey and Long Island, New York. responders constitute a self-selected population, program officials have not been able to determine the incidence of health effects among the total population of responders. There was no registry with reliable information on the amount, duration, and types of exposure experienced by responders. The program is funded by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services and the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. The effort to compile a list of responders potentially eligible for the WTC Health Registry cost about $1 million and took about 19 months. Some government agencies and many employers did not cooperate with program officials, primarily because of concerns about confidentiality, an ATSDR official says. The program is intended to help those affected by the 9/11 terrorist attacks in New York, Washington, D.C., Los Angeles and other major cities in the U.S. and Europe. It is not intended to be a replacement for the National Institutes of Health. Workers who carried out cleanup services after the WTC attack often did not have health insurance. Construction workers often lost their health insurance when they became too ill to work the number of days required to maintain eligibility. Case.case.case: WTC cleanup workers often had no health insurance, labor official says. case.case.: WTC cleanup worker didn't have health Insurance, laborofficial says. Case: WTC workers didn't know how to get health insurance; lost it when they got too sick to work. program is based in FDNY’s Bureau of Health Services, which has an established research infrastructure. In contrast, the NY/NJ WTC Consortium has had more difficulty conducting research. There indicated a need for treatment. Some responders required additional diagnosis or treatment for physical or mental health conditions. Although the FDNY WTC program was able to refer firefighters to its Bureau, the New Jersey WTC Consortium was not able to do the same. There was no evidence that the WTC Consortium had done as much research. categories of responders (e.g., firefighters, federal responders, and other workers and volunteers) The programs also varied in their geographic coverage. For example, the WTC Federal Responder Screening Program provided an initial screening examination for federal responders. The FDNY WTC program and the NY/NJ WTC Consortium primarily serve, respectively, firefighters and other Workers and Volunteers who reside in the NYC area or travel to that on the basis of the responder’s employer and geographic location. The types of services available and information collected about responders varied by program. federal funding for research, the FDNY WTC program and the NY/NJ WTC Consortium relied on other resources to conduct research. The programs vary in the type and amount of studies they have published. Many of the studies have been descriptive, such as reports of the incidence of upper and lower body injuries. The studies have also been descriptive of the effects of the WTC on the community and the community at large. The reports have been published in the New York Times, the Washington Post, and the Wall Street Journal. Federal funds from October 2001 through December 2007 have totaled about $369.2 million. There are four key WTC health programs that currently receive federal funding to provide voluntary health screening, monitoring, or treatment services to responders at no cost. The four programs are the FDNY WTC, the WTC Foundation, the World Trade Center Medical Center, and the WTC Medical Center. The WTC Foundation is a non-profit organization based in New York City that provides free health screenings and treatment to WTC responders. It was established in the wake of the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks. WTC, FEMA provided funding to establish certain WTC health programs. HHS’s disaster response and recovery activities operate within an administrative and legal framework that helps to define federal agency roles and responsibilities and gives HHS certain authorities. Following the attack on the WTC, the Congress appropriated approximately $8.8 following the 9/11 terrorist attacks on the U.S. and the World Trade Center in New York and Washington, D.C. The WTC was the target of the attacks on September 11, 2001. WTC Health Registry does not provide in-person screening or monitoring services. Instead it uses periodic screening and monitoring examinations nationwide for 1 year. CDC issued a request for organizations to indicate their interest in coordinating a national program for WTC responders that would ensure that all WTC responders who reside outside the NYC metropolitan area have access to federally funded screening, monitoring, and treatment. The WTC Consortium comprises five clinical centers in the NY/NJ area; HHS’s WTC Federal Responder Screening Program; and the WTC Health Registry. initially as their physical health status. For example, when the Mount Sinai School of Medicine, one of the clinical centers in the NY/NJ WTC Consortium, implemented its federally funded screening program in July 2002, the emphasis was on conducting a thorough physical health assessment. The mental health status of responders was also a focus of the screening program. The screening program was funded by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services and the New York/New Jersey WTC Consortium. It was funded through a federal grant. HHS officials, clinicians involved with the WTC health programs, and other experts said that an integral part of screening and monitoring is the establishment of a linkage to treatment services. Some indicated that as professionals they also felt an ethical obligation to be able to refer people in and monitoring plan that defines the roles and responsibilities of HHS components. This plan should facilitate the registration of all responders and ensure that screenings and monitoring services are designed to foster epidemiologic research; provide information about the condition and treatment options. whether long-term monitoring is needed. Providing timely mental health screening and monitoring that is integrated with physical health screening. In 2007, NIOSH officials identified a need for additional funding to allow the monitoring programs to conduct research and answer important scientific questions about the health of WTC responders. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. the fact that the WTC screening and monitoring programs were not explicitly designed and implemented to conduct research, in particular epidemiologic research. The FDNY WTC program and the NY/NJ WTC Consortium were not designed to collected by the program had to go through a protracted data cleaning process before it could be analyzed. WTC health program officials and others also noted that there was a lack of previously tested, scientifically based protocols for conducting physical and mental health screening, making it difficult to obtain conclusive results. NIOSH officials told us that the FDNY. WTC program was not specifically designed to collect and analyze data. with clinicians and researchers affiliated with the NY/NJ WTC Consortium, they raised concerns such as the program lacking sufficient in-house experience for conducting research. For example, it did not have an adequate electronic medical records system. In addition, information about the program was not available on the WTC website. The program was set up by the New York/New Jersey WTC Consortium to conduct research in New York and New Jersey. For more information on the program, visit www.wcwc.org. depression, and anxiety. Behavioral health effects such as increased alcohol and tobacco use were also reported. In previous reports we noted limitations of the WTC health programs and problems with their implementation. For example, we reported that federal responders were eligible only for screening services and did not receive monitoring by responders. It has been difficult to determine the relationship between level of exposure and changes in physical and mental health. Most of the federally funded WTC health Programs were not started immediately, but rather months after 9/11. clinical center of the NY/NJ WTC Consortium found that about half of the participants in its screening program met the threshold criteria for being referred for a clinical mental health evaluation. Commonly reported mental health effects among responders and other affected individuals included symptoms associated with post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), according to the study. The study was published in the online edition of the Journal of the New York/New Jersey WTC Consortium, a peer-to-peer publication. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org.