military departments. 10 U.S.C. 2216 established a Defense Modernization Account and granted authority for its use to the Secretary of Defense and the Secretaries of the military departments. The FY2017 NDAA ( P.L. 114-328 , §2447d) granted a new reprogramming authority, referred to as a special transfer authority. This authority is intended to expedite the selection of prototype projects for production and rapid fielding. In the FY2018 NDAA, the Department of Defense was required to submit a report on the acquisition authorities available to the military department. services enables a more focused, operations-oriented acquisition culture. USSOCOM is a combatant command with special operations capabilities. The U.S. Navy has a direct relationship with USSOCom for the acquisition of only services and equipment that are unique to special operations. The Navy has an acquisition culture that is focused on special operations services, according to a National Defense interview with James Smith, the director of the Navy's special operations branch. The Pentagon has a culture that focuses on special ops services, Smith said. can get that solution into the fight sooner. The services, on the other hand, have a much broader acquisition mandate. The acquisition of business systems, weapon procurement programs that must be integrated into joint operations, extensive logistic contracts, large- and small-scale platforms, and substantially more complex systems with multiple systems. The military is looking for a solution that can be delivered to the battlefield in a matter of days, rather than years, as has been the case in the past, officials say. programs are given an Acquisition Category (ACAT) designation based on dollar figures and program scope. These designations determine the level of oversight required for the program. SOCOM and the military departments adhere to the same oversight standards and dollar threshold for categorizing programs. (For more information on program categories and the ACAT designation, visit: http://www.som.mil/programs/acquisition-categories/acat-designation.html. For more information about theACAT designation and how to apply for it, visit www.SOCOM.gov/Programs/ACAT. size, culture, and close proximity to the warfighter as factors that can contribute to more effective acquisitions. According to the congressional report: The successful use of the Special Operations Command acquisition authority below the acquisition category (ACAT) 1 level illustrates the transformation benefits of having a joint buyer, close to a warfighter. The report was released by the House Armed Services Committee on Wednesday, and the Senate Armed Service Committee released it on Thursday. For more, go to www.cnn.com/military. in discussions with the military departments regarding acquisition programs for which the command is a customer. Work with military departments to ensure that thecommand is appropriately represented in any joint working group or integrated product team. These include working with the command to ensure the command's interests are represented in the joint working groups or integrated products teams. For more information, visit the U.S. Air Force's website at: http://www.airforce.mil/commander/command-and-cadre. all of the same oversight and policy as the rest of DOD. Our workforce operates professionally within the same DOD 5000 directives, the same Federal Acquisition Regulation and the same Financial Management Regulation. Give credit to our acquisition workforce for the results they get. I think it's important to understand that... Give credit for the work that they do, and the results that they get, and give credit to them for their hard work and dedication to the job. I'm proud of what they've done. I hope they'll continue to do so. chain of command allows for rapid communication on purpose, intent, and decisionmaking (see Figure 1 ). The structure's design is similar to that of the other services, which also follow a Secretary/Commander-AE-PEO-PM structure. One difference is that in the services, the Service Acquisition Executive reports to the Secretary of the Navy, rather than to the Commander of the Army, as is the case with the Commander/AE/PEO/PM structure in other services. modified to include SOCOM? Appendix A. Comparison of Chains of Command with SOCOM. Appendix B. Comparison between SOCOM and other chains of command. Appendix C. Discussion of SOCOM's role in the U.S. national security state. Appendix D. Discussion about SOCOM as a part of the military-industrial-security complex. Appendix E. Discussion on the role of the United States military in the global security environment. Appendix F. discussion on SOCOM in the military. SOCOM was established and granted its own acquisition responsibilities in the Fiscal Year (FY) 1987 National Defense Authorization Act (NDAA) SOCOM was the first combatant command endowed with acquisition authority and its own budget line for training and equipping its forces. The FY2016 NDAA ( P.L. 114-92 ) granted limited acquisition authority to the U.S. Cyber Command, making CYBERCOM the second command to have current independent acquisition authority. However, SOCOM's acquisition authority is more expansive. Department of Defense Reorganization Act of 1986 ( P.L. 99-433 ) reorganized DOD's command and control structure. There are 10 combatant commands: 6 geographic and 4 functional commands. SOCOM possesses unique acquisition authorities when compared with other combatant. commands. The U.S. Central Command is the largest of SOCOM's 10 commands, with a strength of more than 100,000 personnel. The Central Command has the largest acquisition authority of any combatant command. SOCOM has authority to negotiate memoranda of agreement with the military departments to carry out the acquisition of equipment, material, and supplies. The military services have the authority to acquire any necessary goods and services. When SOCOM does exercise its authority, it adheres to the same oversight and documentation requirements as the services. As James Smith, the current SOCOM Acquisition Executive, reportedly stated: We are absolutely subject to the military services' oversight and requirements. The acquisition must be executed through one to special operations-specific requirements. The military services are responsible for funding certain types of SOCOM training, service-common equipment, and professional services. SOCOM, in turn, can modify these systems military departments. The definition of military departments, codified in 50 U.S.C. 3004, does not include SOCOM. As a result, SOCOM may not receive new acquisition authorities provided by Congress and must work through the Secretary of Defense to obtain these authorities or seek a legislative change, potentially resulting in lost authority. Logistics (SOF AT&L) is the organization within SOCOM that leads internal major procurement efforts. The SOCOM Commander is directly responsible for all portions of the command and the Acquisition Executive (AE) reports directly to the Commander. Falling under the AE are the Program Executive Offices (PEOs) and Directorates. This direct line of command is known as the SOCOM Commanding Officer (COCO) COCO is the highest-ranking officer in SOCOM. The regulations governing acquisition are found in the Federal Acquisition Regulation (FAR) and the Defense Acquisition Regulations Supplement (DFARS) SOCOM is not referenced or discussed in the FAR; the DFARS includes a brief definitional reference to SOCOM. Each military service and many DOD components also have their own acquisition regulatory supplement that provides unique acquisition guidance. There are no unique authorities granting SOCOM exemptions or waivers from acquisition requirements. The Office of the Secretary of Defense's issuances establishing policy, defining authorities, and assigning responsibility for acquisitions across all military services and defense agencies include The Defense Acquisition. delegation enables more rapid decisionmaking and accelerates the acquisition process. The method SOCOM uses for acquisitions is similar to the acquisition processes used by the military services. SOCOM benefits from being a smaller organization with a more focused mission set and limited scope of acquisition authorities. This broader acquisition portfolio requires the services to manage acquisition programs across domains, using multiple acquisition processes, and to use different acquisition competencies. Other SOCOM attributes, such as access to Defense Acquisition University and National Defense University, are also important. SOCOM's acquisition workforce consists of approximately 500 civilian and military personnel, less than 1% of the total DOD acquisition workforce of 156,000. In some instances SOCOM may in fact have fewer acquisition authorities and flexibilities than the military departments. This occurs where legislation grants acquisition authorities or flexibilities to the SOCOM. In cases where statute specifically provides acquisition authorities to the size and scope of the acquisition efforts result in SOCOM having a substantially smaller acquisition workforce than the services.achieve, and you might dismiss using USSOCOM as a benchmark for how to do acquisition. the user, maintain a streamlined acquisition process to deliver low dollar threshold systems rapidly to the warfighter. In discussing the SOCOM acquisition culture and the benefits of a flatter organization, a number of current and former SOCOM officials have stated that the lack of bureaucratic overhead allows the organization to operate more efficiently. The organization's acquisition culture has been described as more focused on the user rather than the acquisition process. The acquisition culture of SOCOM has been called the "SOCOM culture" and has been compared to that of the U.S. Army. the Service Secretary, whereas in SOCOM the AE reports to the Commander. Internal to SOCOM, the Commander generally delegates acquisition decision authority to the Acquisition Executive. The Acquisition Executive in turn generally further delegates the majority of Milestone Decision Authority (MDA) to the PEOs. SOCOM officials have asserted that this is not the case in the U.S. military. The U.N. Secretary-General has called for a review of the acquisition process in the United States. delegating more decisionmaking to lower levels and promoting a more risk-taking culture, may be transferable to the services. A number of current senior acquisition officials in the military services recently served in SOCOM and appear to be promoting more delegation of authority and cultural risk- taking in the services, including General John Allen. General Allen is the former head of the U.S. Army’s Special Operations Command (SOCOM) and served in the Gulf War in the 1990s. SOCOM's statutory acquisition authorities are more limited than those of the military departments. As such, SOCOM acquisition personnel are bound by and act with the same freedoms and restrictions as the military services and defense agencies. For example, all large DOD acquisition is subject to the same oversight regime as SOCOM. However, there are also significant differences, many of which relate to the size and scope of SOCOM and its authorities. Table 1 summarizes select similarities and differences between SOCOM's acquisition authorities and those of DOD. In recent years, observers have suggested that United States Special Operations Command (SOCOM) is generally more effective at acquisitions than the U.S. military departments. The Goldwater-Nichols statutory authorities enable SOCOM to manage and oversee its acquisition programs. Potential associated issues for Congress may include the following: Should additional acquisition authorities should be granted to SOCOM? Should the definition of military departments as they relate to acquisitions be widened or narrowed? The report explores whether SOCOM has unique characteristics that influence how it conducts acquisition. one of SOCOM's largest with a total estimated procurement cost through FY2023 of at $391.7 million. FY2017 actual procurement funding budget for the program was $34 million. In comparison, the military services have numerous major programs with significantly higher procurement appropriations. The Navy's 2017 appropriation for the Virginia Class submarine program ($5.39 billion) is 250% larger than SOCom's entire FY2017 procurement appropriation ($2.08 billion). In FY2017, the SOCOM procurement appropriation was 1.5% of DOD's total procurement appropriation of $132.2 billion. dollar thresholds, see Table A-1. SOCOM has a total of six programs that exceed the category II dollar thresholds. Currently, the Silent Knight Radar program is developing a SOF-common terrain following/terrain avoidance radar system for use in SOF fixed wing and rotary wing aircraft. The Silent Knight radar program is being led by the U.S. Air Force and is based at the Air Force Base at Lackland, Texas. The program is funded by the United States Air Force. single year than SOCOM's entire procurement budget for FY2017. If SOCom's current CAT II program (Silent Knight Radar) experienced 100% cost growth (from approximately $391 million to $782 million), it would still not require a Nunn-McCurdy notification to Congress. In comparison, the cost growth associated with the procurement of the Silent Knight Radar would be greater than the entire SOCOM budget for fiscal year 2017. If the cost of the program increased by 100% in a single year, SOCOM would not need to notify Congress. CVN-78 Gerald R. Ford aircraft carrier ($1.4 billion) was approximately 70% of SOCOM's entire FY2017 procurement budget. Some analysts believe that these lower dollar thresholds allow SOCOM to operate below the radar, thus enabling a more nimble acquisition process and a culture that promotes "failing fast" Despite these challenges, the U.S. Navy remains committed to the fight against terrorism, according to U.N. Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon. For more, visit CNN.com/Heroes. and higher-profile programs of the military services. There are currently more than 150 MDAPs in DOD; many of these programs have a larger budget in a given year. For example, the Nunn-McCurdy Act (10 U.S.C. §2433) requires DOD to report to Congress when an MDAP experiences cost overruns of 15% or more. For more information, visit the Department of Defense's MDAP website or go to: http://www.dod.mil/mdap. identify emerging issues, modify programs that are underway, or, in certain cases, divest from programs more rapidly. This point has been highlighted by James "Hondo" Geurts, current Assistant Secretary of the Navy for Research, Development, and Acquisition (and former SOCOM Acquisition Executive) Another factor that potentially enables SOCOM's culture of change is that SOCOM has the ability to divest more rapidly from programs that it finds to be in trouble. SOCOM also has the capability to make changes to existing programs more quickly. Paul Ostrowksi, formerly a SOCOM PEO and currently the Principal Military Deputy to the Assistant Secretary of the Army (Acquisition, Logistics and Technology), and James Guerts, formerly the SOCOM Acquisition Executive. One potential issue for Congress may be how to pay for the military's new weapons system. The U.S. military is currently building a new fleet of F-35 Joint Strike Fighters. The new fleet will be armed with F-16 fighter jets and F/A-18 Hornets. that SOCOM benefits from its size relative to the military services. The current SOCOM Acquisition Executive also reiterated this point when he reportedly stated that "[SOCOM's] ability to move relatively fast is a function of scale" When compared to themilitary services, SOCOM can be seen to operate like a large government agency. The U.S. military is the largest in the world, with a population of more than 100 million people, according to the U.N.’s latest estimate. Small organizations can be more effective in communication, innovation and redesign, customer service, and risk-taking, analysts say. A 2004 congressional report identified SOCOM's unique innovations.about innovations that can change entire industries. Small organizations can also be more agile and less bureaucratic, according to analysts. The U.S. Small Business Administration is a non-profit organization based in Washington, D.C. It was founded in 1947 by a group of business owners who wanted to start a small business that could compete with big companies. innovation and risk-taking in its acquisition programs is its general ability to execute programs below statutory and regulatory dollar figures. Because SOCOM programs have lower dollar thresholds, its programs do not generally receive the same level of scrutiny brought to bear on the more expensive programs. This program illustrates observers' argument that it is not only the ability to succeed faster, but also to fail faster and adapt requirements or acquisition strategies faster, that gives SOCOM the able to execute acquisitions more efficiently and effectively. Additionally, SOCOM's statutory restriction to procure strictly SOF-peculiar equipment, modifications, and. perceived organizational advantages, SOCOM has experienced challenges in executing its acquisition programs. The Advanced SEAL Delivery System Program, intended to develop a covert submersible insertion vehicle, was documented by both the Government Accountability Office and RAND as experiencing considerable cost, schedule, and performance issues before finally being cancelled in 2009. The U.S. Navy has been involved in the development of a number of programs, including SEAL Team Six, SEAL Team Seven, and SEAL Team Eight. The Navy has also been involved with the acquisition of the U.N.’s Special Operations Command. small business. Many analysts argue that small businesses and organizations can be more nimble, more innovative, and more adaptable than large enterprises. As Sir Richard Branson, founder of the Virgin Group, reportedly stated, "Small businesses are nimble and bold and can often teach much larger companies a thing or two" Small businesses are often more innovative and nimble than large businesses. Small businesses can often be more innovative than large business. Small business can often learn from much larger businesses, analysts argue. The Virgin Group is one of the world's largest and most successful companies. an extremely relevant ongoing mission. We're fully co-located and integrated with the staff here. We have a firsthand understanding of priorities and urgency that gives us a different appreciation for schedule emphasis. It's not a cliché to say that our operators will often accept the "80 percent" solution if we say it's the only way to get the job done. We don't want to be in a position where we have to do it all ourselves. We want to make sure we get it done as soon as possible.