dimensions can cause problems. For example, according to Corps officials in one port, some vessels are delayed because they have to wait for high tide in order to pass through the channels. They also reported instances where ships skipped a port of call altogether if such a delay was reported to them. For more information, visit the U.S. Coast Guard's website or go to: http://www. coastguard.org/voyage-and-defense/navigation/navigating-the-high-tide. would have caused the ship to miss its scheduled appointment at the Panama Canal. These types of disruptions affect both regional commerce and port profits. A 2007 report by the U.S. Committee on the Marine Transportation System (CMTS) found that vessels often deal with the challenges of poorly dredged and poorly-dredged waters. The ship was able to make it to the canal on time and on time with no disruption to its scheduled schedule. It was the first ship to do so since the Canal was opened in 1968. Cruise lines, importers, and ships’ agents all said that delays for passenger and vessel inspections are costly to industry. Because crew members cannot disembark and, in some ports, the cargo cannot be unloaded until a ship is cleared, these delays can be expensive.occur in a timely manner. One agent said: “It’s just a matter of time before they get it right.’’ “I’ve seen it happen on a number of occasions,” said another agent. “They just don’t get it.” the same time, ships have waited up to 4 hours before being cleared. CBP officials told us that these types of inspection delays are generally caused by staff shortages, outdated or crowded facilities, clustered arrivals, or some combination of these factors. We recently reported similar findings related to delays for ships at the Port of New York and New Jersey, as well as other ports in New York City and New York state. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org. said that a 1-hour delay can cost a carrier $15,000 in longshoreman labor costs. Another agent said that crew changes cannot occur until a vessel has cleared its immigration inspection. During this time, the ship must pay expenses for two crews. Stakeholders told us that when multiple ships arrive at the port, it can be difficult to get a crew change in place before the ship arrives in port. The ship must also pay expenses to get two crews in place during this time. found that the authorized depth was available in the middle of the channel only approximately 35 percent of the time in fiscal year 2005. Although ships continue to use these channels and harbors, not maintaining them to their justified design is a problem, according to the report. The report also found that ships were not using the channels to their full potential. The study was published by the U.S. Department of the Navy in 2005, and the report was published again in 2006, when it was released to the public. The authorized depth of the Port of Georgetown is 27 feet, but the channel has silted in to 25 feet on numerous occasions over the past several years. With the channel at only 25 feet, a spill could drive up costs for the port. The port is located in South Carolina's largest city, Georgetown, which has a population of more than 1.5 million. It is the largest port in the state and one of the busiest in the U.S., according to the port authority. There is a backlog of harbor maintenance, which can result in costly delays and more dangerous shipping conditions. A recent Corps analysis of the 59 busiest commercial federal channels in the U.S. the Harbor Maintenance Trust Fund, and data on channel availability provided by the Corps. We asked questions about APHIS, CBP, and Corps internal controls for the data we used and determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report. We performed our work from February 2007 to February 2008. maintained channels and harbors by “light loading,” i.e., loading less cargo than their full capacity. This in turn increases shipping costs. If a port is not well maintained, it may lack the capacity to handle increasingly larger vessels and therefore lose business. This can lead to a loss of business for the port and its owners. It can also lead to an increase in the cost of shipping to the port, which in turn leads to a decline in business. performance-based budgeting model to set harbor maintenance priorities. Projects are prioritized primarily by the amount and value of commercial tonnage moving through the harbor or channel. As part of this effort, the Corps is developing a national estimate of the cost to make the 59 busiest channels available to the public. For more information, visit the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers' website at: http://www.usace.org/harbor-maintenance-priorities. company bringing in rock for the regional construction industry can only bring in about 24,000 tons per vessel. They said that this “light-loading” of vessels significantly drives up its operating cost and impacts construction costs. The 2007 CMTS report found that channel could only hold 28,000tons with a 27-foot channel. The report said that channel was too small for the region's construction industry. The company said it could only handle 24,00 tons with a channel that was 27 feet wide. ports, i.e., lower for naturally deep west coast ports that require very little dredging and higher for shallower eastern seaboard and river ports. On the other hand, applying the fee equally explains why the Port of Vancouver is growing at a faster rate than the Seattle port. Whether the fee is based on the value of the cargo (ad valorem) or on the size and draft of the ship is a separate decision from whether fees should vary by the dredging. The overall cost of moving goods through the nation’s marine transportation system is artificially high. For example, importers of high-value goods, such as natural gas and pharmaceuticals, told us they essentially pay a much greater share of dredging costs. Stakeholders said that a ship’s size and draft combined with harbor conditions drive harbor maintenance costs, and therefore may more closely follow dredging plans in the future. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. high volume of commercial cargo, security challenges, or proximity to a land border or intricate river system. We also considered travel costs in selecting the site visits. In light of the significant amount of ongoing audit work in the Gulf region, and because other ports in our selection are representative, we considered other ports as well. For more information, visit the port's official website or go to: http://www. ports-of-the-gulf.com/gulf/port-visits. of important characteristics associated with Gulf ports, we did not include a Gulf port in our selection so as not to unnecessarily burden an area in crisis. The ports we selected include medium and large ports, natural deepwater ports, and those that require frequent dredging. We visited the ports of the Gulf of Mexico, the Red Sea, the Caribbean and the United States. We also visited ports in the Caribbean, the Black Sea and the South Pacific. We did not visit ports in Europe, the Middle East or Africa. needs and condition of a given port. Congress could decide to impose a uniform fee structure at all ports even if it chooses to change the design of that fee from ad valorem to one based on a ship’s size or draft. Stakeholders expect that inspections will be carried out in a manner that meets the needs and conditions of the ports, the report says. The U.S. Coast Guard is responsible for inspecting ships in the Gulf of Mexico and the Caribbean, and has been involved in a number of high-profile incidents. outside of GAO, with CBP and Corps officials, and with outside stakeholders, in order to choose ports that varied in their type and volume of trade and commerce. The ports were chosen for their type of trade, volume of commerce, maintenance dredging needs, and specific issues facing them such as cruise lines, container ships, petroleum products, and liquefied natural gas. The U.S. Coast Guard will be responsible for the dredging of the nation's ports. Boston, Massachusetts; Charleston, South Carolina; Newark, New Jersey/New York, New York; Baltimore, Maryland; Miami, Florida; Port Everglades, Florida. Seattle, Washington; and Los Angeles/Long Beach, California. At these ports, we observed passenger, vessel, and cargo inspections, and interviewed officials from CBP and Corps field offices. At each port, we spoke with officials from the CBP, Corps, and Customs and Border Protection (CBP) offices. limitations may lead to unsafe conditions and interaction with other vessels. Consistent with this finding, a full oil tanker ran aground in East Rockaway, New York, in 2006 due in part to a lack of maintenance. Corps officials said the Corps now uses a new system to monitor and control the vessels. The new system is called the Vessel Monitoring System. It is based on a system developed by the U.S. Navy in the 1970s and 1980s. It was designed to monitor, control and monitor vessels in the Gulf of Mexico. that there are good reasons to consider maintaining a positive balance in the trust fund. Where fees are expected to cover program costs and program costs do not necessarily decline with a drop in fee revenue, a reserve can be important. For example, the AQI fees are maintained with a reserve of $1.5 billion. For more information, go to: http://www.qc.com/news/features/2013/01/29/qc-news-features-2013-01-29/cnn-cnn.html#storylink=cpy reserve of approximately 3 months worth of program costs in case of emergency. According to APHIS, the reserve is necessary because the AQI program is funded solely through user fee collections. As with similar situations, deciding whether and how to link HMF collections with expenditures is complicated. On the one hand, it is possible to use HMF to pay for AQI programs. But on the other, it can also be used to fund other programs, such as the U.S. Army Reserve. Congress has delegated to APHIS the authority and responsibility to set and adjust AQI fee rates. The agency invites comments on its proposals and implementing regulations via a public notice and comment in the Federal Register. Improve the transparency of the regulatory process by providing clearer information about how the rates for each of the fee types (vessel, air passenger, aircraft, etc.) are determined. In accordance with OMB Circular No. A-25 guidance and U.S. Department of Transportation guidance. the Department of the Treasury’s general fund. The AQI authorizing statute does not authorize APHIS to spend fee collections on such expenses, officials say. APH IS also does not list these costs in the Federal Agriculture policy, they say. The agency must either transfer the appropriate portions of those collections to the general fund of the treasury as required, or seek Congressional approval to spend these monies on related AQI program costs, the officials said. The fee rate for AQI is based on a formula that takes into account indirect and imputed costs. USDA said it will review the fee and seek guidance from its Office of the Chief Financial include those costs in the fee. USDA also noted that it will need to (1) work with DHS to identify DHS’s imputed costs for the AQI program and (2) consider the impact of the fee increase on payers. We recognize that if incorporating these costs, the fee could be more directly linked to the fee- believe USDA should seek additional authority from Congress consistent with our recommendation. related program costs. DHS does not know the portion of total immigration inspection costs covered by immigration fee collections. CBP and ICE share responsibility for reimbursable, immigration-related inspection activities. In fiscal year 2006, CBP’s portion of vessel inspection fee collections covered about 67 percent of CBP's share of immigration vessel inspection costs, but until ICE's cost data are finalized, DHS will not know if the fees are properly divided between CBP, ICE and the federal government. administers. CBP’s user fee review includes the customs fee, the portion of the AQI fee CBP receives, and the immigration fee. To select the ports that we visited, we consulted with port security experts from within and outside the U.S. The information provided about the Immigration fee did not include any input from ICE, which did not have cost information about its portion ofthe immigration fee at inspection fees, and it collects the HMF on behalf of the Corps. The AQI vessel fee is paid at the same time as the customs vessel inspection fee. The AQI fee is capped at an amount equaling 15 payments per year. Because the customs fee was increased but the cap was not, the cap on the AQI was not increased. Some CBP officers told us that for both the customs and AQI fees, they simply counted the number of times the fee was paid within a given year to determine if a vessel had reached the cap. They said that it is rare for most commercial vessels to exceed the annual fee cap of $7,380. of these passenger inspections are imbedded in the cost of the AQI fee levied on vessel owners and operators. According to APHIS finance officials who calculate the fee rates, the costs of inspecting sea passengers, fee-exempt vessels, and vessels that have met the annual fee cap are spread among all beyond air passenger inspections to other fees managed by the agency. The agencies and Congress lack information on the total costs of the combined inspections, and therefore do not know whether fee collections cover the costs. data, fiscal year 2006 CBP costs for the AQI commercial vessel inspections were approximately $35 million. About $2.2 million for passenger inspections and about $4 million for inspections of exempt private vessels. The cost data that CBP provides to APHIS does not indicate what portion of the $35million is for passenger and exempt private vessel inspections. It is unclear if any of that money will be used for passenger or exempt vessel inspections, CBP says. The AQI program is funded by the U.S. Department of Transportation. costs will substantially increase the AQI fees, a measured approach that incorporates the costs gradually may be appropriate. DOD provided oral comments, and concurred with the findings, conclusions, and recommendations of the report related to the Army Corps’ Harbor Maintenance Fee. As agreed with your office, unless you publicly announce the increase, the fee will remain the same as it has been for the past five years. The fee will be $1,000 per year for the first three years and $2,000 for the fourth and fifth. In general, the three fees are not levied uniformly, and sometimes involve cross-subsidization. For example, although air passengers are charged an AQI fee, sea passengers (generally cruise ship passengers) are not. According to APHIS finance officials, the costs.consolidated adds complexity and increases the potential for error. For more information on the AQI and other fees, visit AQI.org and APH IS’s AQI website. For further information, visit the AQi.org website. In 2006 we reported that financial management issues at CBP and APHIS adversely affect the AQI program’s ability to perform border inspections. In selecting the fees, we reviewed relevant policy and economic literature, interviewed user fee experts, and examined Office of Management and Budget data on user charges. We chose these fees because they are levied upon port users, and are related to maritime, maritime, and agricultural quarantine services. We found that the fees were sufficient to cover the cost of providing agricultural quarantine and inspection services. fiscal years 2003 through 2005, user fees were not sufficient to cover program costs. Prior to fiscal year 2006, CBP was unable to provide information on the actual costs of CBP’s portion of the AQI program. APHIS estimates that these indirect and imputed costs for the AQi user fee program totaled approximately $18.9 million in fiscalyear 2006. In contrast, the customs costs for AQI activities were estimated to be approximately $1.2 billion. match program costs over time. In contrast, both the immigration and customs fee rates are set in statute. These fees can only recoup authorized program costs to the extent that total reimbursable program costs do not exceed the rate caps prescribed by statute. The AQI fee statute grants the Secretary the power to set the fee rates for the AQI program. The Secretary can also set the fees for the immigration, customs, and other programs that are funded by AQI. The fees for these programs can only be set to a maximum of $1,000. now structured differently than the AQI vessel fee. According to CBP officials, the quarterly remittance schedule for the passenger inspection fees contributes to a several month delay between the use of appropriated funds and receipt of reimbursement from the immigration and AQI user fee accounts. The delay has delayed CBP’s ability to use appropriated funds to pay for the inspection fees, CBP says. CBP: We are working with AQI to resolve the issue. We are also working with the FAA to ensure that the inspection fee is paid on time. to the fee statute. CBP has reliable information on the extent to which MPF collections cover the costs of related activities only for the past few years. As recently as 2003, cost calculations have included activities that are not directly associated with processing cargo or that are covered by other fee programs. The agency has not estimated the effects of exemptions, entries made through foreign trade zones, the decline in the constant dollar value of the minimum and maximum fees, CBP’s most recent biennial report notes. The lack of complete, transparent cost and collections data for the MPF and AQI fees can prevent the agencies from addressing existing issues. More broadly, if agencies cannot afford to collect fees, they may not be able to run their programs as efficiently and effectively as possible. The lack of such information can prevent agencies from dealing with existing issues, such as possible misalignments between fee collections and program costs. It can also prevent them from addressing new issues, including possible mis alignments between program costs and fee collections. CBP data on MPF collections and program costs indicate that since fiscal year 2004 collections have increased relative to program costs. In fiscal years 2006 and 2007 collections exceeded costs by a total of approximately $221 million (see fig. 6).or changes in import demographics on total MPF Collections. or changes inimport demographics onTotal MPF Collection. or Changes in import  demographics on Total MPF Collection and Costs for Fiscal years 2006 and 2007. on the customs, immigration, and AQI vessel fees, and the reviews generally do not reflect input from the other. APHIS’s review includes the entire AQI fee, but does not include any information from CBP on its portion of the agriculture inspections. Although CBP includes the MPF in its biennial user fee review, the review does not provide enough information to determine if the amount, structure, or authorized uses of the fee the time, the report says. information provided is not sufficient to project fee collections or to provide assurance that the amount of the fee is aligned with program costs. Without this information, CBP is not able to determine if the amount, structure, or authorized uses of thefee should be updated or to recommend changes. The fee is $1.50 per person, or $2.50 for a family of four. The maximum amount per person is $2,000 and the maximum number of people per person per year is $3,000. Without regular, substantive fee reviews, agencies, stakeholders, and Congress lack complete information about changing program costs. For example, CBP and APHIS report separately, but there is no timeline for completing that study. There is also no timetable for completing a study of whether authorized, reimbursable activities align with program activities. It is not clear if the study will be completed by the end of the year or in 2015 or 2016, when the next budget is expected to be voted on. three-phase review of the agency’s user fees. They said that they estimate beginning the MPF review in early 2008, but the timeline depends on when the first phase is completed. Agencies can accommodate stakeholder input in various ways. We have previously reported on both the need to accommodate stakeholders input and the need for the agency to accommodate the public in a variety of ways. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. CBP implemented a standard process for tracking time in early 2007. The process includes estimating the amount of time officers spend on different activities. At one port, on each shift, a full-time CBP officer was assigned solely to tracking staff time. Even with an efficient process, the need to separately track three inspections that have largely been eliminated has not been addressed, the report says. The report was based on interviews with CBP officers at ports across the U.S. and the Center for American Progress. CBP officials said that since the events of September 11, 2001, the focus of merchandise processing has shifted toward security and away from the original focus on trade compliance. They said that certain activities associated with merchandise processing and performed by CBP officers are not reimbursable MPF activities. Rather, they may be used to reimburse authorized inspection activities conducted at air, sea, or land ports of entry. Similar alignment issues exist with the MPF. According to CBP officials, certain activities. including screening and inspecting conveyances (including nonintrusive searches), processing seized narcotics, and inspecting vessels and containers. increase revenue, decrease administrative costs, and improve CBP’s relations with the trade community. Ineffective and outdated collection methods for vessel inspection fees increase administrative costs for both agencies and payers. A lack of coordination between the Corps and CBP inhibits oversight of HMF payments for passenger vessels, domestic shipments. monthly payments would increase the administrative costs to the cruise lines, but that if a steadier supply of funding helped CBP to provide better service, it would be worthwhile. provide input on fees and the services they support, opportunities for payers to communicate with the Corps and CBP at the national level are limited. Ineffective communication may reduce stakeholder cooperation and support for the fees. It may contribute to misunderstandings and confusion about how the fees work and what activities they support. It could also reduce stakeholders' support for fees and contribute to confusion about what fees are for and how to pay for them. It can also reduce the number of fees that can be collected. to spend funds on critical mission areas such as hiring personnel, purchasing equipment, or travel. To address this challenge, CBP told us it has developed a legislative proposal that would, in part, require monthly instead of quarterly remittance. A representative of a cruise line industry association we spoke with noted that the cruise industry has a long history of remittances to the U.S. government. The proposal would require monthly remittance, rather than quarterly, to spend money on personnel, equipment, and travel. CBP’s audit selection strategy includes referrals from within and outside CBP. CBP has not requested and the Corps has not offered any HMF-related referrals. In contrast to the HMF collections process for passenger vessels, domestic shippers, and shipments into foreign trade zones, CBP’S collection process for both the MPF and movements to CBP is different. The CBP Office of Regulatory Audit will provide information on CBP's costs to collect and administer HMF, for inclusion in the audit. CBP already values cargo for the assessment of duties, so there is no duplication of effort. CBP conducts audits on the value of cargo to determine if the declared value of the goods is accurate. It is not necessary for the Corps or another entity to establish a new collections process because CBP already values the cargo for assessment of duty, says the CBP. The CBP also values cargo in an audit to determine whether the goods are in fact worth what they are declared to be. CBP uses to process the MPF as well as HMF assessed on imports. This system allows entry summaries to be electronically transmitted, validated, confirmed, corrected, and paid. The method of collecting the customs and AQI commercial vessel fees imposes unnecessary administrative costs on CBP and payers. It is less costly for the government and payer of the fee for CBP to collect the fee as part of the formal entry process than it would be to collect it as a separate fee. CBP does not request and the Corps does not share information with CBP on these types of domestic freight movements. An official from CBP’s Revenue Division said if CBP had information on freight movements it could reconcile them to CBP. However, CBP did not request this information and did not share it with the Corps. The information would help ensure that proper payments are made, the official said. The CBP could not be immediately reached for comment on this story. The Corps has not commented on the CBP report. authorized activities for various fees, CBP must track the time spent on these activities. Because the inspection processes have been largely combined but the separate distinct fees supporting these activities are not uniform, correctly tracking which activities can be reimbursed by which fees can be difficult. Unless CBP automates its collection methods, requires monthly remittance, and aligns fee rate increases with the annual fee caps, the agency will continue to incur unnecessary administrative costs and needlessly expose taxpayers to unnecessary risk, the authors say. of the consolidated inspection program. CBP prepares a biennial report with summaries and key points for each of the user fees that it collects. We have previously reported that agencies with shared responsibilities for common outcomes or related functions should reinforce agency accountability for collaborative efforts through common planning and reporting. The agency's report will be published in full in the spring of 2015. The report will include key points and summaries of each user fee that the agency collects, as well as a summary of the program's results. of inspection activities and their costs. Congress will continue to lack a complete picture of whether the fees work in concert or conflict with each other. Agencies will be less able to develop and maintain the partnerships necessary to collect and distribute the fees as a result of the new rules, the authors say. They say the fees could hamper oversight and lead to a lack of transparency in the inspection process. The fees could also hamper agencies' ability to develop partnerships to collect, distribute and collect the fees. likelihood of over- or underpayments. User fees function best when they minimize, to the extent practicable, administrative costs. Treasury’s Financial Management Service has made it a priority to increase the use of electronic collection methods for government collections. CBP is automating collections for several user fees but to automate collections for other user fees as well, the Treasury says. The agency says it has no immediate plans to change the way user fees are collected or paid to the Treasury. recommendation if it is deemed cost beneficial. We appreciate that DHS recognizes the importance of using cost-effective methods to collect fees. We look forward to receiving regular updates on DHS’s and CBP’S progress in this area. In its oral comments, USDA noted it was impressed with the level of explanatory information provided by CBP. It also said it was looking forward to hearing back from CBP on its progress in implementing the recommendations. The agency's proposal is expected to be implemented by the end of the year. with the paper-based system and told us that an automated payment and record-keeping system would speed the collection process. These administrative challenges are exacerbated by the recent increase in the customs vessel inspection fee rate without a paper system, they said. They said an automated system would reduce the likelihood of payment errors, and reduce administrative costs for both parties. They added that it would also speed up the collection of taxes and other taxes for both sides and reduce the cost of collecting taxes and levies for both countries. Direct CBP to automate its systems for collecting commercial vessel fees to reduce the reliance on paper receipts for tracking payments. Support electronic payments, rather than payment by check or cash, for vessel fees. Include in its biennial report on the Merchandise Processing Fee information on total program cost to ship owners and operators. For confidential support call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. Fee collections can require detailed cost data. Collecting these data, however, can be particularly costly given the disparate fee structures. For example, to be reimbursed for time spent on. ICE, you need to provide the cost of that time to the agency. For more information, visit ICE.gov or go to www.ice.gov/receiving-receipts-and-reimbursement-for-ICE-and others in the U.S. to these officials, they are taking steps to begin collecting interest on past and future late payments. They estimate interest collections for last year to be about $182,000; they do not yet have an estimate for annual penalties. Further, they said that they have begun reviewing the authority related to the authority. to these officials,. they are take steps to start collecting interest in the future on past, future, and past late payments, they say. They say that they are also reviewing the Authority related to this authority. Total collections grew 101 percent from $704 million to $1.416 billion from 2001 to 2007. Corps officials told us this was driven by the ad valorem nature of the fee—receipts grow with both volume and value of shipments. Annual harbor maintenance project expenditures, which are subject to annual appropriation, grew as a result of the increase in revenue from the fee. The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers is based in San Diego and has a fleet of more than 1,000 ships. for the quarter does not exceed $10,000. No payment is required for imported cargo that is entitled to be entered under informal entry procedures. Jessica Nierenberg, Kathleen Padulchick, and Amy Rosewarne made key contributions to all aspects of the project. Jacqueline M. Nowicki (Assistant Director) and Susan E.M. Etzel managed this assignment. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org. date, the commercial vessel fees may still only be paid in person by check or cash. Payers must retain each paper payment receipt and present them at each entry so that CBP can determine whether that particular vessel has reached the annual fee cap. If a payer misplaces the receipt proving that the vessel has reach the fee cap, the fee must be paid. The payer may request a refund if the receipt is later found, although several stakeholders told us this process is lengthy and burdensome. Some stakeholders and CBP field office staff expressed frustration. is now equal to approximately 13.6 payments, meaning that the 14th payment is less than the standard, per arrival fee amount. CBP officers must be aware when processing payments that the14th payment will be for a different amount than the typical fee rate, and that the fee cap is $1,000. The fee cap for the first 14 payments is $2,000, and for the 15th and 16th payments it is $3,000 and $4,000 respectively. paid on time or late. CBP reviewed recent payment history and found that 42 percent of payments were late. According to CBP officials, CBP should be tracking and assessing interest and penalties on these late payments. The late payments represent approximately 18 percent of the total dollar value. The CBP said it would not comment on the possibility of penalties or interest being assessed on the late payments, which would be in addition to the penalties already in place for those who are already paying on time. owner/operators, although they may be charged for overtime immigration inspections of vessel crew at some ports. Because regular business hours vary by port, the hours during which an inspector might be working overtime vary. CBP officials also told us that billing vessel owners for overtime inspections is administratively burdensome. According to CBP estimates, CBP’s costs to process and bill immigration and agriculture are around $1 billion a year. They said that consistent fees would offer predictability and reduce confusion. scheme, which does not contain the same limitations. Therefore, according to CBP, the agency cannot automatically bill the vessel operator or shipping agent for immigration overtime services. Instead, CBP must make calculations manually based upon the limitations contained in the immigration overtime authorities and the amount actually paid to the shipping agent. The agency must also calculate the amount that will be paid to that shipping agent or vessel operator based on the limitations and the actual amount paid to them. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. structures of the three overtime inspection charges are not aligned and overtime is not handled uniformly within some of the fees. For immigration inspections conducted on a Sunday, holiday, or between the hours of 5:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., CBP has limited authority to charge for overtime for customs inspection services. CBP officials said that although charges for overtime inspections make sense because the inspections are more costly, a consistent set of overtime charges for customs, immigration, and agriculture inspections that did not vary by port or the rank of the inspecting CBP officer would be better. performing the inspection and the amount of time spent on the inspection, adding to unpredictability and increasing DHS’s costs to administer the fee. Overtime charges for agriculture vessel inspections must, by regulation, be applied at an hourly rate for overtime inspections on a Sunday or holiday, or whenever the individual is performing the inspection. For more information, go to www.dhs.gov/agriculture-vessel-inspections or call 1-800-847-8255. inspector is working overtime. According to CBP officials, collections for reimbursable overtime agriculture inspections total about $1.2 million annually. AQI regulations explicitly prohibit charging for similar overtime inspections of aircraft when passengers have already paid an AQI fee for that flight. Although vessels must be charged for overtime inspections, AQI Regulations explicitly prohibit. charging for such overtime inspections when passengers had already paid a fee for the flight that was being inspected, according to the AQI website. Customs inspection-related activities that occur while a CBP officer is earning overtime or premium pay, or during preclearance, can be funded by the user fees. The same activities conducted during regular time cannot be funding by the fee. Not all customs inspection activities are reimbursable (i.e., can be covered by funds from the user fee account). Moreover, use of the customs vessel and sea passenger fee collections is not restricted to vessel. It is not limited to vessel collections. is, the immigration and customs user fees actually limit cost recovery to a sum certain. The customs statute further restricts cost recovery by limiting the set of activities for which collections may reimburse appropriations. The immigration statute makes immigration user fee collections available to refund any appropriation for expenses incurred, but only to a certain sum. It is not clear what the amount would be, but it would likely be in the tens of thousands of dollars or even millions of dollars, depending on the nature of the expenses. The U.S. government would not comment on the matter. are misaligned. Under the customs authorizing statute, passenger inspection fee collections are only available to reimburse appropriations for a limited, prioritized set of activities. For example, foreign language proficiency awards and transfers to the Treasury’s General Fund of not more than $18 million for the purposes of deficit reduction. Further, under the customs authorized statute, Passenger inspection fee Collections are only able to reimburse. appropriations for such activities, such as foreign language. proficiency awards, for up to two years. In fiscal year 2006, commercial vessel customs inspections fee collections covered about 66 percent of million is associated with inspecting cruise ships that have exceeded the fee cap. Sea and air passengers pay an immigration inspection fee, but no such fee is levied on vessel crew although they must undergo inspection. As a general rule, the costs of crew inspection are not charged to vessel. The cost of debt recovery is not directly related to immigration inspections according to CBP officials. It is a cost of providing immigration inspection and pre-inspection services as well as other expenses. disparate fees supporting the largely consolidated inspection process appear to aggravate disconnects between the customs passenger and vessel fees and the corresponding inspection activities. Unless remedied, differences such as the way overtime charges are assessed for commercial vessel fees could include eliminating the differences in the way charges for overtime inspections are assessed to commercial vessel operators. raising the cap on customs inspection fees for commercial vessels, in line with the 2007 increase in this fee, so that the cap once again corresponds to a whole number. and immigration inspection fees are structured to recover partial costs. While both the immigration and customs statutes contain language that fees equal or be reasonably related to the cost of services, the two statutes actually prescribe an exact amount in law to be charged for their respective inspection services. revising the customs passenger and vessel inspection fees so that the inspection activities the fees are authorized to fund are more closely aligned with actual inspection activities. requiring monthly, rather than quarterly, collection of the customs and immigration inspection sea and air passenger fees. The DHS has acknowledged that the challenges described in our previous work extend. Despite integration of the inspection processes for the three sea passenger and vessel fees, the administering agencies report separately on their respective fees. As we found in our recent review of the related air passenger fees, despite integration, the administration agencies reported separately on each of the three fees. We are concerned that this may affect the efficiency, equity, revenue adequacy, and administrative costs of air passenger and sea vessel inspection fees in the U.S. misalignment varies—which affects how the fees are used. Similar to the airline passenger inspection fees, not all authorized, reimbursable activities for the sea passenger and vessel inspection customs fees and MPF are associated with conducting inspections. Not all inspection-related activities may be charged to these fees. HMF collections so far far have exceeded $1 billion, according to the U.S. Department of Homeland Security (DHS), which has the authority to collect HMF fees. DHS has the power to collect up to $2 billion a year. The legacy fees supporting these inspections are still governed by separate, dissimilar authorizing legislation. APHIS uses the fee statutes required the establishment of advisory committees consisting of industry representatives. CBP’s Airport and Seaport Inspections User Fee Advisory Committee meets biannually to advise the commissioner of CBP on issues related to the performance of airport and seaport inspections. The fees vary significantly in how they are set and adjusted and how they link fee rates to the cost of services. The user fees considered in this report are assessed under specific statutory authority and levied on air and sea passengers, vessel operators, or shippers. See app. II for a summary of the fees by payer. The fees vary in the way they are assessed by statute. The user fees are based on passenger, vessel operator and shipper passenger and vessel passenger passenger passenger fees, as well as cargo passenger and cargo passenger fees. They are assessed on a sliding scale based on the number of passengers and cargo passengers. arriving international air passengers. Where appropriate, changes made to one fee should be designed to complement rather than conflict with the other fees. The separate, separate, user fee for air passengers should be created to complement, not conflict with, the other user fees, the report says. The need to address some of the user fee challenges presented in this report may appear obvious, but how to accomplish this is less clear, says the report. The report was published by the U.S. Department of Transportation's Airports Council International. are set, collected, used, and reviewed (including the views of stakeholders) and (2) the effects of these attributes on program operations. To meet this objective, we examined selected fees that are assessed on port users. These fees include the Harbor Maintenance Fee (HMF), Merchandise Processing Fee (MPF), Customs Inspection Fees, Immigration User Fees, and other fees. We also examined the effects these fees have on port operations. We concluded that the fees have had a positive impact on the port's operations. implementation characteristics. We interviewed officials responsible for managing the selected user fees at the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (Corps) and the Department of Agriculture’s Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service (APHIS) CBP administers the MPF and Customs and CBP offices in Washington, D.C. The MPF is intended to be a tool to help the military and other government agencies manage their resources more effectively. It is not intended to replace the Army Corps or the USDA’SAPHIS. safety, and homeland security programs. We chose them because they vary in their key design characteristics, specifically in the way in which they are set, collected, used, and reviewed. In examining the fees, we reviewed user fee legislation and guidance, agency documents, and literature on user fee design and use. We also looked at the way the fees are collected and used by the federal government, and the way they are monitored. We concluded that the user fee system is a good place to start. may fund, and inhibit the agencies’ ability to obtain input from stakeholders about fees and the programs that they fund. Congress does not have a comprehensive view of the vessel and passenger AQI, customs, and immigration inspection fees and how they work together, and may therefore lack important context for of them. DHS concurred in part with our recommendation to automate collections of the customs and AQI fees assessed on commercial vessels, stating that the agency will analyze the feasibility of this approach and work to identify and obtain funding to implement the approach. and the World Shipping Council. We coordinated our work with another GAO team that was examining the customs, AQI, and immigration air passenger inspection fees, and drew upon their audit findings as appropriate. In addition, we reviewed collections and cost data for each of the fees, data on balances in the system, and data on collections and costs for each fee. For more information, visit the GAO website or go to: http://www.gao.gov/airpassengers. committee for a similar program that funds new work construction and rehabilitation on inland waterways. The purpose of this Inland Waterways Users Board is to make recommendations on priorities and spending for inland waterway construction and rehab projects. As we have previously reported, both the customs and immigration passenger inspection programs are under review by the Department of Homeland Security for possible changes to the way they are carried out in the U.S. Inland waterways have been the subject of a number of major projects in recent years, including the construction of the San Francisco Bay Bridge. The customs inspection activities and the authorized uses for the customs passenger and vessel fee collections are higher than the estimated cost of collecting the fee. The Corps prepares an annual report to Congress on the Harbor Maintenance Trust Fund, which includes a substantive review of the fee, but does not include information on these costs. The HMTF is not the only fund for which revenues flow to the U.S. Navy and Marine Corps. It is not clear how much money is being spent on harbor maintenance, which is the Corps' responsibility. Since 2003, HMF collections have significantly exceeded funds appropriated for harbor maintenance. This has resulted in a large and growing surplus in the trust fund. The legislation governing the MPF should be explicitly consistent with CBP’s mission, the authors say. They say revenue and commercial functions should include commercial as well as security and antiterrorism elements. The authors provided a draft of this report to the Secretaries of Homeland Security and the Corps’ annual report to Congress on the Harbor Maintenance Trust Fund. Collections relative to total program costs, over time, as well as any recommendations for updating the amount and authorized uses of the fee. Assess interest and penalties on late HMF payments for domestic shipments, shipments into foreign trade zones, and sea passengers. We recommend that the Secretary of Agriculture take user fees supporting the sea passenger and vessel inspections processes. The Secretaries of Homeland Security and the Army direct CBP and the Corps to improve oversight of the HMF collections by working together to develop a method for the corps to provide information on domestic vessel. This may be inconsistent with users’ expectations of the fee’s purpose. The authorizing legislation generally designates the use of HMF collections for harbor maintenance activities. To support the efficiency and equity of the Harbor Maintenance Fee as well as its credibility among stakeholders, Congress should consider reviewing the link between the amount of the HMF and theamount of expenditures for the harbor maintenance program; and establishing an HMF-funded harbor maintenance fund, the authors say. They ask Congress to consider establishing a Harbor Maintenance Fund to fund harbor maintenance. formal vehicle for payers of the HMF and other port stakeholders to provide input to the Corps. The HMF authorizing legislation did not establish an HMF advisory committee, though it did establish an advisory council. The council would advise the Corps on national harbor maintenance projects and priorities supported by the fees. It would also provide advice on how to spend the money raised by HMF fees on port infrastructure projects, such as dredging and dredging. The committee would also advise the corps on what to do with the money it collects. and expenditures are policy choices only Congress can make. However, vital information about the tradeoffs associated with such a link is lacking. Further, absent a vehicle for substantive HMF stakeholder input and two- way communication at the national level, stakeholder cooperation as well as support and understanding of the fee will be lacking, the authors say. The authors argue that the HMF should be funded by the federal government, not by the state or local governments. They also say that the fee should be limited to $1.5 billion. that although the ad valorem structure of the HMF makes it relatively easy to administer, it raises concerns about equity. Specifically, they noted there is no link between the value of their cargo and the depth or width of the harbor needed by the ship on which it is carried. The HMF was set up by the Government of the United Kingdom in the 1990s. It is now owned by a consortium of banks and shipping companies, including Royal Bank of Scotland, Royalty Bank of Canada, and the Bank of England. Some stakeholders said the HMF fee structure does not reflect the individual dredging needs of the users. Other stakeholders noted that a benefit of the ad valorem structure is that it may better reflect the users’ ability to pay. Some stakeholders also said that because of the HMf fee structure, the benefits received with the cost of providing the benefits are less than the costs of providing them to the public at the time of the dredging. The cost of the project is estimated to be around $1.5 billion. to all eligible ports offers a relatively simple collection mechanism and helps to create a level playing field for all ports. Even so, officials from ports located near international borders told us the HMF disadvantages them relative to nearby foreign ports. The HMF helps minimize competition between individual ports, which in turn helps minimize the cost of living for residents in those ports. To see the full report, go to CNN.com/Heroes of the Heroic Frontier, or go to www.heroesofthe Heroic Frontier.com. For example, Seattle Port Authority officials consider the HMF to be a “punitive assessment” because they said it decreases Seattle’s competitiveness against Canadian ports (which do not charge the fee) These officials said that the Port of Vancouver actively promotes itself as not charging theHMF, and said this partly is because it does not want to be associated with the fee. The HMF is not available in Canada, but is available in the U.S. and Canada does not charge it. more slowly—from $660 million in 2001 to $910 million in 2007 (38 percent) The difference between the amount collected and the amount expended has led to a growing balance in the HMTF. Since 1996, the President has included in his annual budget requests and Congress has appropriated $3 million from the HM TF. Between fiscal years 2001 and 2007, the balance grew from $1.8 billion to $3.7 billion. Corps officials told us they expect it to reach $8 billion in fiscal year 2011 (see fig. 5). undermines the credibility of the HMF. In 2001 HMF collections exceeded expenditures by about $44 million. By 2007 that gap had grown to over $506 million (see fig. 4). There are several reasons why growth in collections has outpaced growth in expenditures. The HMF has been accused of mismanaging its budget and of overspending. It has also been criticized for failing to provide adequate funding for its programs. It is also accused of failing to adequately protect the taxpayer from the effects of climate change. offsetting changes elsewhere—will increase the federal deficit. Given the fiscal pressures imposed by the nation’s large and growing structural deficits, decisions about changing the HMF should consider its continued relevance and relative priority within the context of reexamining the base of all major federal spending and tax programs. Despite large large changes in the tax code, the federal government will not be able to afford to change its tax code in the near future, according to a report by the Tax Policy Center. to compensate CBP for costs associated with collecting the fee. CBP finance officials told us that they estimate the annual cost of collecting the HMF to be approximately $2 million. Officials at the Corps and CBP were unable to explain why the President’s budget request for this activity was will continue to suffer. Unless agencies present a comprehensive picture of the customs, immigration, and AQI fees, including the full scope of the fees, no action will be taken to correct the problem. penalties in order to determine an appropriate dollar threshold that would trigger assessment and collection actions. CBP’s Regulatory Audits division has not conducted any audits specific to the HMF since 1996. The fee is audited incidentally during the course of audits related to other fees or duties. The HMF is not assessed on domestic cargo valued at less than $1,000. quarterly payment is not required if the total value of all shipments for which a fee was assessed was not paid. correct, CBP also determines if the correct amount was paid for HMF and MPF. Because these are ad valorem fees, if the value of the goods is understated, additional HMF or MPF fees may be due. All of the fees we reviewed suffer from some misalignment—although the nature of that is not clear. The fees we review are all subject to change at the discretion of the CBP, which is responsible for determining the correct fee amount for each item. Collection methods function best when they minimize administrative costs and maximize compliance. Delayed remittance and potential errors can result in revenue losses. Until CBP fully implements a system to assess and collect interest and penalties on late HMF payments, the federal government will continue to incur revenue losses, according to the report. The extent and nature of the link between HMF collections and revenue losses is unclear, the report says. The full report is available at: http://www.cpa.gov/cpa-revenue-losses. CBP cannot verify compliance with the fee. HMF payments for passenger vessels, domestic shippers, and shipments into foreign trade zones are paid quarterly by check to CBP (see fig. 3). According to Corps officials, the Corps gathers information on domestic vessel movements and could provide this information to does not systematically review late or improperHMF payments or charge interest for these late payments. CBP’s Revenue Division does not track whether these HMF Payments are late or improperly paid. This means CBP is not using an important tool to encourage timely payment. HMF payments in order to monitor compliance rather than relying on self-reported payer information. The Revenue Division receives this type of “front-end reporting” for other, similar fees. CBP: Front- end reporting is one of the best ways to establish a receivable and ensure proper payment. It is also a good way to ensure compliance with HMF payments, a CBP official said. The HMF fee is $1.5 million per person per year in the U.S., according to CBP. in automatically from earmarked taxes or fees and spending must be appropriated. In the 1990s the Highway Trust Fund also built up a surplus. At the time, Congress and the President modified the discretionary spending caps to provide for a separate cap on highway funding. In 1998, Congress specified a cap on the highway trust fund, and the cap was lifted. In 2009, Congress changed the cap again, and now the trust fund has a cap of $1.5 billion. In 2010, Congress increased the cap to $2 billion. more automatic link between spending from the Highway Trust Fund and receipts into the Trust Fund. Spending was tied to estimated receipts with a retroactive adjustment; this worked only as long as long. The experience with these annual adjustments, known as Revenue Aligned Budget Authority (RABA), highlights some problems with such links. spending was tied with estimated receipts, with a Retroactive Adjustment (RAA), which only worked for a short time before it became ineffective. The RAA was set up by the European Commission in 1998. on motor fuels, tires, and heavy vehicles accrue to the Highway Trust Fund, from which Congress appropriates funds for the interstate highway system, mass transit, and transportation projects. Similarly, Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) operations are funded in part by excise taxes assessed on airline tickets, aviation fuel, and certain cargo. The FAA's budget for fiscal year 2015 is $2.2 billion. The budget for Fiscal Year 2016 is $3.1 billion. This year's budget will be $2 billion, including $1.9 billion for the FAA. User financing is one approach to financing federal programs or activities. User fees assign part or all of the costs of the benefits and services derived from these programs and activities to readily identifiable recipients. Some excise taxes, however, can also be described as a form of user financing. For example, the excise taxes on tobacco products can be used to fund the federal government's health care program for the elderly, the disabled, and the elderly in nursing homes. The federal government can also use excise taxes to fund its health care programs. User fees represent a charge for a service or benefit received from a specific government program. Payers may expect a tight link between payments and services, including expectations about the quality of the related service. Although there are opportunities at the local level for payers to pay for services, there are also opportunities for them to opt out of user fees. Should be updated.should be. updated. For more information on user fees, visit the user fees page on the government's website. for more information about user fees and to sign up for a free trial, click here. " aligning collections and expenditures can promote economic efficiency and enhance stakeholder support for the fee," the report says. On the other hand, increased spending on harbors or reduced fee collections would increase the federal deficit, unless spending in other areas was decreased or other collections or revenues were increased, according to the report. The U.S. Department of the Treasury is considering the report's recommendations. The report is based on a report by the U.N.’s International Institute of Fiscal Studies. work shows that providing guaranteed funding levels to any one activity in the budget protects that activity from competition with other areas for scarce resources. Regardless of the approach taken, a reduction in fee receipts or an increase in appropriations—absent a change in appropriations —would be needed to pay for the programs that need to be funded. In the end, Congress would have to make trade-offs in spending priorities to fund the programs it wants to fund, the authors say. They argue that this would be a waste of time and money. determine the extent to which these fees are recovering costs, Congress cannot be sure that resources are allocated to the activities it most values. The principles of effective user fee design discussed earlier in this report can both offer a framework for considering the implications of various statutory structures and help clarify and illuminate the tradeoffs associated with various policy choices. Such a framework could also provide the basis for future reviews of federal user fees as Congress works to ensure that user fees are used for the purposes they are intended. could charge fees for any of its services, noting that if imposing such fees is prohibited or restricted by law, agencies will recommend legislative changes as appropriate. OMB encourages agencies to examine potential effects of design alternatives when reviewing and proposing changes to regulations, even when the regulations are mandated. If imposed such fees are prohibited orrestricted bylaw, OMB will recommend legislation as appropriate to change the law, the agency says. If possible, agencies should consider charging fees for services that are not required by law. as the adjustments were positive—when receipts came in below estimated levels and would have resulted in an automatic cut in highway program funding levels, the cut was overridden. A different mechanism is used for the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) prescription drug user fee: if actual FDA fee collections are higher than estimated levels, no cut is made to highway funding levels. The mechanism is similar to the one used for FDA prescription drug users fee collections: if collections are above estimated levels the cut is not made. Some critics say giving the pharmaceutical industry a role in setting program performance goals creates conflicts of interest. Some critics say it gives the industry too much influence over FDA actions.capture by the entities paying the fee. According to a Congressional Research Service report on the FDA prescription drug user fees, some critics said that giving the industry arole in setting performance goals is a conflict of interest, as well as a violation of the Hippocratic Oath of Hippocrates. The report was based on a survey of more than 1,000 people who pay the fee for prescription drugs. higher than the amount appropriated, FDA must adjust fee rates in a subsequent year to reduce its anticipated fee collections by that amount. Even if there were a tighter link between collections and expenditures, the HMTF should not necessarily aim for a zero balance, officials say. Corps officials and some stakeholders agreed that a balance would be a better goal than a 0 balance. The HMTF is expected to meet its goals by the end of the year, according to the Army Corps of Engineers' annual report. funded activity and more easily calculated than seeking to allocate departmental and staff office costs. “full cost recovery” should be viewed from a governmentwide perspective. Even though USDA would have to deposit those portions of user fee collections as miscellaneous receipts in the general fund of the Treasury, it would still have a role in the overall budget of the U.S. The U.N. has a long history of using user fee revenue to fund its programs, including the World Health Organization and the United Nations. therefore would not directly reimburse the relevant appropriation account under a specific statute, it would still defray a cost that Congress determined should be paid for by the user fees. If USDA believes that the statutory authority does not permit it to cover such indirect and imputed costs, then we believe that it would not be able to do so. It would still be possible to use user fees to pay for some of the costs that Congress has determined should not be covered by appropriated funds. But it would be unlikely to cover all of them. USDA says APHIS did not have the authority to issue the order. USDA says OPM receives appropriations for imputed costs such as future retirement benefit expenses. OPM says USDA receives appropriations to pay for departmental and staff office costs. USDA: OPM does not have authority to make such imputed cost payments to departmental or staff office expenses. The issue has been pending for some time, but USDA has decided not to issue an order at this time, the agency says. Both the Chief Financial Officers (CFO) Act and the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Circular No. A-25 provide that agencies review their user fees biennially and make recommendations about any needed cost adjustments. Each agency should review its programs to determine whether it needs to make any changes, according to the OMB Circular. The agency should also review its user fees to determine if they need to make changes, the OB Circular says. The OB also says that agencies should review their programs to see if they require changes. and imputed costs, such as the cost of employee retirement benefits. We have previously found that OMB Circular No. A-25 guidance and USDA policy require the inclusion of indirect andimputed costs in setting full-cost recovery fees. Unless otherwise specified in statute, such collections should be deposited in the Treasury Department's bank account, we have found. We are happy to clarify that this is not the case in this case, and that the funds will be used to pay for employee benefits. Some Corps and CBP officials have established successful, two-way communication practices at the local level. For example, some Corps division offices publicly post survey results and maps showing the controlling depth reports for local harbors and channels.as well as various models for doing so. One local Corps official said one of the best ways to communicate with the Coast Guard is to share information about the status of your ship. The Coast Guard has been involved in the cleanup of the Gulf of Mexico since the mid-1970s. this practice encourages more dialogue with stakeholders, noting that they will e-mail the office to find out when highlighted areas will be dredged. Also, several of the CBP field offices hold regular meetings with port stakeholders to share information and address stakeholder concerns. However, there is currently no plan to dredge any of the dredged areas at this time, according to CBP officials. The dredging process is expected to be completed by the end of the year, CBP said. and seaport agriculture, customs, or immigration inspections. The committee members represent entities subject to the fees, including airlines, airports, cruise lines, and industry associations. We recently reported that stakeholders felt that the advisory committee provided only limited opportunities for substantive two-way communication. As a result, they said they lack data, and said they need more information to make informed decisions about how to implement the fees. We are happy to provide more information on the fees and their impact on the industry. necessary to know whether the passenger inspection fees are set fairly or accurately, or are being spent on the appropriate activities. Federal advisory committees play an important role in shaping public policy by providing advice on a wide array of issues. Their advice can enhance public services. The government should take the advice of the advisory committees into account when setting the fees for air passenger inspections. The fees should be set fairly and accurately, and the money spent should be spent on a range of activities, such as air passenger safety. the quality and credibility of federal decision making. Despite the strengths associated with the federal advisory committees as a means to facilitate effective stakeholder input, agencies also need to be careful to maintain their mission to promote the public interest and take measures to safeguard against actual or perceived agency misbehavior, the report says. The report concludes that agencies need to take steps to protect the public's confidence in their decision-making process and to ensure that the public has a voice in the decisions they make. It also says that agencies should be careful not to over-rely on their advisory committees to make important decisions. Small businesses have raised concerns that FAA only consults with selected major airlines and manufacturers, ignoring commuter airlines and smaller businesses also affected by FAA regulations. Many of the stakeholders we spoke with said that FAA needs to engage substantively with all stakeholders to make sure they have a voice in the decision-making process. The FAA is expected to make a decision by the end of the year on how to proceed with the FAA Modernization Initiative. For more information, visit the FAA's website or go to www.faa.gov. various stakeholders, including port authority officials, customs brokers, shipping agents, harbor pilots, importers, and cruise line officials. We also met with the following national stakeholder organizations: the American Association of Port Authorities, the Cruise Lines International Association, the Association of Ship Brokers and Agents, the National Association of Maritime Organizations, and the Association for Shipbroker and Agent Brokers of the United States. We met with cruise line executives, port officials, port agents, customs agents, and harbor pilots. advisory committee on the HMF and the activities that it funds, that includes payers of the fee. Develop a legislative proposal, in consultation with Congress, to harmonize the customs, immigration, and agricultural quarantine inspections fees. consolidate reporting to provide a comprehensive picture of the fees for which CBP, ICE, and APHIS are each responsible. Further, we recommend that the Secretaries of Agriculture and Homeland Security conduct joint reviews of the customs and immigration inspection fees and consolidate reporting. Defense, and to the Acting Secretary of Agriculture for review. We received written comments from the Department of Homeland Security (DHS), which are reprinted in appendix III. The Departments of Agriculture (USDA) and Defense (DOD) provided technical comments, which we incorporated as well as oral comments from each agency. We incorporated technical comments into appendix III of this article. We are happy to have your feedback on the proposed changes to the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2015. For more information, go to: http://www.defense.gov/. Of the six recommendations directed at DHS, DHS concurred with five. DHS also provided portions of the report to nonfederal stakeholders for their review and made technical corrections as appropriate. DHS characterized the report as balanced and accurate and agreed with the overall substance and findings of theReport.appropriate. The report was released to the public on Tuesday, July 17. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. In the U.S., call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. this report will be available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staff have any questions about this report, please contact me on (202) 512-9142. Contact points for our Offices of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the same site as this report. The report is available to the general public for free at: http:// www.gaO.gov/news/press-releases/gao-news-reporters-and-public-officials-can-ask-questions-about-this-report-at-no-charge.  GAO staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix IV. In order to provide context as Congress considers funding options for port programs, we examined (1) what is known about the way selected fees are assessed on air and sea port users. We examined (2) how the fees are calculated and how they are calculated. We also examined (3) what the impact of the fees is on the port system as a whole. We concluded by looking at the impact on the ports on the economy. its contents earlier, we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days after its date. At that time, we will send copies to the Secretaries of Homeland Security, Agriculture, Army, and Defense and interested Congressional committees. We will also make copies available to others on request. In addition, we plans to make copies of the report available to the public at a later date. We plan to make the copies available at no cost to anyone who requests them. We are happy to make this available to anyone. the report. Jay Cherlow, Chelsa Gurkin, Terrance N. Horner, Alessandra Rivera, and Jack Warner also provided assistance. In addition, Pedro Briones and Carlos Diz provided legal support and Donna Miller developed the report’s graphics. The report was produced by the staff of CNN iReport, a nonprofit, nonpartisan news organization based in Washington, D.C. It is the first of its kind in the U.S. and will be available on CNN.com.