IRS estimated that it prevented or recovered $22.5 billion in fraudulent IDT refunds in filing season 2014. IRS has taken steps to address IDT refund fraud; however, it remains a persistent and evolving threat. In 2015, IRS reported allocating more than 4,000 full-time equivalent staff and spending $470 million on refund fraud and IDT activities. In addition, IRS received an additional $290 million for fiscal year 2016 to improve customer service, IDT identification and prevention. Fraudsters continue to adapt their schemes to identify weaknesses in IDT defense. IRS officials told us that the agency had developed guidance to prevent IDT fraud. We recommended that IRS assess the costs, benefits, and risks of its authentication options. The IRS has not commented on this article or the guidance it has developed for IDT Fraud Prevention and Awareness. For confidential support, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org. IDT refund fraud occurs when a refund-seeking fraudster obtains an individual’s Social Security number, date of birth, or other PII and uses it to file a fraudulent tax return. billions of dollars have been lost to IDT refund Fraud, which continues to be an evolving threat. The IRS has no plans to crack down on IDT fraud, but it does have plans to prevent it from occurring in the first place. For more information, visit IRS.gov. In our most recent review we determined that IRS had improved access controls, but some weaknesses remain. Identifying and authenticating users is a separate report with limited distribution to address 26 new weaknesses in access controls and configuration management. Implementing these recommendations will help IRS improve its controls for identifying and authenticates users. It will also limit users’ access to the minimum necessary to perform their job-related tasks. The report also includes 49 outstanding recommendations from previous audits. The full report is available on IRS.gov. IRS established policies for physically protecting its computer resources and physical security controls. The agency had yet to address weaknesses in its review of access lists for both employees and visitors to sensitive areas. IRS also had weaknesses in configuration management controls, which are intended to prevent unauthorized changes to information system resources. In summary, while IRS has made progress in implementing information security controls, it needs to continue toaddress weaknesses in access controls and configuration management and consistently implement all elements of its information security program, the report says. “least privilege,” granting users the least amount of rights and privileges necessary to perform their duties. While IRS established policies for authorizing access to its systems, it continued to permit excessive access in some cases. For example, users were granted rights and permissions in excess of what they needed to do their jobs, the report says. The IRS has not commented on the report. The report was published by the Electronic Frontier Foundation on Thursday. It is published by means of a Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) request. IRS temporarily suspended the Identity Protection Personal Identification Number (IP PIN) service on IRS.gov. IP PIN is a single-use identification number provided to taxpayers who are victims of identity theft (IDT) to help prevent future IDT refund fraud. Service on IRS’s website allowed taxpayers to retrieve their IP PINs online. As of April 7, the IP PIN service was temporarily suspended by the IRS. The IRS stated that it was conducting further review of theIP PIN service and is looking at further strengthening the security features. The IRS has taken actions to improve customer service related to IDT fraud. The agency has also worked with tax preparation professionals, states, and financial institutions to better. IRS has also taken steps to improve its cybersecurity efforts, the agency said in a press release. The release was released by the IRS on Wednesday. For confidential support call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. For support in the UK, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch or click here. will be minimized. IRS also needs to assess the costs, benefits, and risks of alternatives for better authenticating taxpayers who access its systems. strengthening the security posture of IRS—and other agencies— also depends on the key roles played by OMB, NIST, and DHS in providing oversight and guidance from the federal government, the authors say. The authors say IRS needs to strengthen its security posture to ensure that taxpayers' access to its systems is secure and secure. For more information, visit IRS.gov. Hard to distinguish from one filed by a legitimate taxpayer. These continuing challenges highlight the need for additional actions by IRS. IRS can take steps to, among other things, better authenticate the identity of taxpayers before issuing refunds. In January 2015 we reported that IRS was issuing refunds to people who were not eligible for the refunds. The IRS issued a statement saying it was taking steps to address the problem. The agency said it was working with the Department of Justice to find a solution to the issue. for its Identity Assurance Office to assess costs, benefits, and risk of authentication tools. In February 2016, officials told us that this office plans to complete a strategic plan for taxpayer authentication across the agency in September 2016. Until it completes these steps, IRS will lack key information to make key decisions about how to authenticate tax-returns. The IRS will have to wait until September 2016 to make a decision about whether or not to use the new authentication tools, an official said in February 2016. The IRS collects and maintains a significant amount of personal and financial information on each U.S. taxpayer. Protecting this sensitive information is essential to protecting taxpayers’ privacy and preventing financial loss and damages that could result from identity theft and other financial crimes. Cryptography controls protect sensitive data and computer programs by rendering data unintelligible to unauthorized users and protecting the integrity of transmitted or stored data. IRS policies require the IRS to protect the privacy of taxpayers by using encryption to protect their data. standards and guidelines that include minimum information security requirements. In carrying out its mission, IRS relies extensively on computerized information. IRS's mission is to provide America’s taxpayers top-quality service by helping them to understand and meet their tax responsibilities and to enforce the law with integrity and fairness to all. The agency is based in Washington, D.C. and has offices in New York, Washington, DC and San Francisco. The IRS is one of the world's largest tax agencies. combinations—provides the basis for establishing accountability and controlling access to a system. IRS established policies for identification and authentication, including requiring multifactor authentication for local and network access accounts. The agency used easily guessable passwords on servers supporting key systems. In addition, while IRS continued to expand the use of two- factor access to its network, the Treasury continued to use a single-factor password for most of its systems. It also improved identification andAuthentication controls by, for example, expanding theUse of an automated mechanism to centrally manage, apply, and verify password requirements. Inspector General for Tax Administration reported that IRS had not fully implemented unique user identification and authentication or remote electronic authentication that complies with federal requirements. Authorization controls limit what actions users are able to perform after being allowed into a system and should be based on the concept of a user account, the report said. The IRS said it is working to implement the controls as soon as possible. For more information, visit IRS.gov/IRS and www.irs.gov. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here. IRS’s authentication tools have limitations. For example, individuals could obtain an e-file PIN by providing their name, Social Security number, date of birth, address, and filing status. Identity thieves can easily find this information, allowing them to bypass some, if not all, of IRS's automatic checks. The IRS says it has no plans to change the way e- file PINs are applied to tax returns. The agency says it will continue to work with the public to improve the security of its systems. accounts had been inappropriately accessed. The online Get Transcript service has been unavailable since May 2015. In a February 2016 update, the agency reported that an additional 390,000 accounts had been accessed. Thus, about 724,000Accounts were reportedly affected, the IRS said in March 2016, as part of its ongoing investigation into the issue. The agency has not said how many accounts were affected by the hack, or when the service will be restored. The IRS has said it is investigating the matter. the online service was still suspended. As we reported in March 2016, IRS has implemented numerous protections over key financial and tax processing systems. However, it had not always effectively implemented access and other controls, including elements of its information security program. Access controls are intended to prevent, limit, and control access to the IRS' systems. The IRS has not yet responded to a request for comment from CNN for comment on this story. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org. systems, which it must effectively secure to protect sensitive financial and taxpayer data. During fiscal year 2015, IRS collected more than $3.3 trillion; processed more than 243 million tax returns and other forms; and issued more than 200,000 tax forms. The IRS must also ensure that its systems are secure for the collection of taxes, processing of tax returns, and enforcement of federal tax laws. For more information, go to IRS.gov or go to www.irs.gov. used taxpayer- specific data acquired from non-agency sources to gain unauthorized access to information on approximately 100,000 tax accounts. These data included Social Security information, dates of birth, and street addresses. In an August 2015 update, IRS reported this number to be about 114,000, and reported that an additional 220,000 people were affected by the data breach. The IRS reported that the total number of people affected by this data breach was about 1.2 million. The agency said it is investigating the source of the data. more than $403 billion in tax refunds. IRS employs about 90,000 people in its Washington, D.C., headquarters and at more than 550 offices in all 50 states. To manage its data and information, the agency operates two enterprise computing centers. It also operates two computing centers in the U.S. territories, and some embassies and consulates. The agency also has a cloud-based system for managing its tax-related data and records. It has about 2,000 employees in the United States. major elements of an effective data breach response program, implementation of these policies and procedures was not consistent. IRS did not require considering the number of affected individuals as a factor. Recent incidents involving public-facing applications highlight the importance of securing systems that contain sensitive taxpayer and financial data. Fully implementing key elements of a breach responseprogram will help ensure that when breaches of sensitive data do occur, their impact on affected individuals will be minimized, according to the report. The report was published by the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants (AICPA). health and safety, and compromise sensitive information. In June 2015, the Commissioner of the IRS testified that unauthorized third parties had gained access to taxpayer information from its Get Transcript application. According to officials, criminals if affected individuals should be notified of a suspected breach. In addition, IRS did not document lessons learned from periodic analyses of its breach response efforts. We recommended that IRS correct these weaknesses, but the agency has yet to fully address them. The importance of protecting taxpayer information is further emphasized by the IRS. our new recommendations, it will review them to ensure that its actions include sustainable fixes that implement appropriate security controls. IRS can take steps to improve its response to data breaches involving the inappropriate disclosure—or potential disclosure—of personally identifiable information. In December 2013 we reported on the extent to which data breach policies at eight agencies, including IRS, adhered to requirements and guidance set forth by OMB and NIST. While the agencies in our review generally had policies and procedures in place that reflected the NIST guidance, IRS did not. previously identified deficiencies or ensured that its corrective actions were effective. During our most recent review, IRS told us it had completed corrective actions for 28 of our prior recommendations. However, we determined that 9 of these had not been effectively implemented. The collective effect of the deficiencies in information is that the IRS has not been able to effectively address its problems with the tax code. The IRS has been unable to adequately address its issues with the IRS tax code since the mid-1990s. The tax code has been dysfunctional since the early 1990s. many were resolved by the end of the audit, new recommendations, and the total number of outstanding recommendations at the conclusion. The IRS Commissioner stated that while the agency agreed with many of the recommendations, the agency also agreed with some of the new recommendations. The agency has not yet released the results of the fiscal year 2015 audit, which was conducted in October. The audit is expected to be released in the coming days. The full report will be released later this month. It will include the findings and recommendations of the IRS's Fiscal Year 2015 audit. some configuration management controls, it did not, for example, ensure security patch updates were applied in a timely manner to databases supporting two key systems. To its credit, IRS had established contingency plans for the systems we reviewed, but they were not fully implemented. The IRS did not apply a security patch that had been available since August 2012 to the systems it reviewed, we found. We also found that the IRS failed to apply a patch to the databases it reviewed that was available in August 2012 but had not been applied yet. The IRS had established policies for developing contingency plans for its information systems. The plans help ensure that critical operations can continue without interruption or can be promptly resumed. IRS also had policies for testing those plans, as well as for implementing and enforcing those plans. The IRS has a contingency plan in place for when unexpected events occur. The contingency plan is in place to ensure that information resources are protected and that operations can go on as planned, the IRS said in a statement. The agency also has policies to test contingency plans and implement and enforce them. backup procedures. The agency established a comprehensive framework for its program, including assessing risk for its systems. However, IRS had not updated key mainframe policies and procedures to address issues such as comprehensively auditing and monitoring access. In addition, the agency had not fully mitigated the risk of unauthorized access to the agency’s mainframe systems, the report says. It says IRS had documented and tested contingency plans for its system and improved continuity of operations controls for several systems. Nevertheless, the control weaknesses can be attributed in part to IRS's inconsistent implementation of elements of its agency-wide information security program. Security from prior years that continued to exist in fiscal year 2015, along with the new deficiencies we identified, are serious enough to merit the attention of those charged with governance of IRS. “This represented a significant deficiency in IRS’s internal control over financial reporting systems as of September,” the inspector general said in a report to Congress. The IRS says it is working to correct the problems. The inspector general says the agency is working on a plan to fix the problems by the end of the year. We made two new recommendations to more effectively implement security-related policies and plans. To assist IRS in strengthening security controls over the financial and tax processing systems we reviewed, we made 43 technical recommendations in the report. The report was published on November 30, 2015. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. functions, protecting sensitive data when they are stored or in transit, auditing and monitoring system activities, and physically securing its IT facilities and resources. Table 1 below provides the number of our prior recommendations to IRS that were not implemented at the beginning of our fiscal year 2015 audit, how they were implemented and how they will be implemented in fiscal year 2016. The IRS will be auditing its IT operations for the next two years to ensure that they are in compliance with the recommendations made in this report. to detect, respond to, and investigate unusual activity. IRS established policies and procedures for auditing and monitoring its systems and continued to enhance its capability by implementing an automated mechanism to log user activity on its access request and approval system. But it had not established logging for logging for user activity in the past, the report said. The IRS said it is working to improve its ability to detect and respond to unusual activity in its systems. The report was published by the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants on behalf of the IRS. something you have (e.g., an identification badge), or something you are. Identity proofing requirements are introduced, requiring presentation of identifying materials or information. Approved cryptographic methods would not allow the type of eavesdropping attack that is possible at Level 1. Level 3: Requires multi-factor remote authentication, requiring at least two authentication factors. An individual proves possession of a physical or software token in combination with some memorized knowledge. Level 4: Is intended to provide the highest practical remote network authentication assurance. this level may still allow someone with malicious intent to intercept the transmission of a password through eavesdropping and crack it using a dictionary attack. Level 2: Requires single-factor remote authentication, using one of three factors—something you know (e.g., a password), or a combination of both. This level may allow someone to guess a password by trial-and-error using a Dictionary attack. It may also allow a hacker to intercept a password transmission and use a dictionary to crack it. using the Internet, instead of on paper, and calls for identity verification or authentication to make sure that online government services are secure and protect privacy. This guidance established four levels of identity assurance for electronic transactions requiring authentication. Each level describes the agency’s degree of certainty that a user is a user and can be identified by the agency. It also describes the level of assurance that the agency can be certain that the user is not a criminal or user of illegal drugs or other criminal activity. achieve specified levels of e- authentication assurance, as defined by OMB and illustrated by the following examples. Level 1: Identity proofing is not required. Successful authentication occurs when an individual proves through the means of authentication that he or she possesses and controls the token. The cryptographic methods used at Level 1 are: SHA-1, SHA-2, RSA, key-based, and public key cryptography. Level 2: The method used at level 1 is the same as that used in Level 1. has presented an identifier that refers to his or her identity: Level 1: little or no confidence in the asserted identity’s validity. Level 2: some confidence inThe asserted identity's validity. level 3: high confidence. in the assertor's validity; level 4: very high confidence in its validity. The asserted identity is the person who has presented the identifier. The identity is what the person has said about the identity. The identifier is the thing that the person says about the person. use of encryption, and the agency continued to expand its use of encryption to protect sensitive data. However, key systems we reviewed had not been configured to encrypt sensitive user authentication data. Audit and monitoring is the regular collection, review, and analysis of events on systems and networks in order for them to be properly monitored and managed. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. two key applications used to support the transfer of financial data and access and manage taxpayer accounts. The agency was not consistently maintaining key system and application audit plans. Physical security controls, such as physical access cards, limit access to an organization’s overall facility and areas housing sensitive IT components, the report says. The report was compiled by the Government Accountability Office and the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) It was published by the NIST at the request of the Department of Justice. federal systems and websites, including the following. OMB M-15-13, Policy to Require Secure Connections across Federal Websites and Web Services, which requires all publicly accessible federal websites and web services to provide service through a secure connection. O MB M-04-04, E-Authentication Guidance for Federal Agencies, which addresses federal government services accomplished in the United States. Omb M-14-14, Security Standards for Federal Government Websites, which applies to all federal sites and services. the proof of possession of a key through a cryptographic protocol. At this level in-person identity proofing is required. It is otherwise similar to Level 3, except with stronger cryptographic methods in place. Federal law also gives OMB and DHS responsibility and authority for oversight of operational aspects of federal agencies. It also gives them the authority to make decisions on the use of federal funds. It's the equivalent of the National Security Agency's ability to issue security certificates. It means the U.S. government has the power to issue credit cards, bank accounts, and other forms of identification. a government-wide perspective, such as that related to improving authentication. Chairwoman Comstock, Ranking Member Lipinski, and Members of the Subcommittee, this concludes my statement. I would be happy to answer any questions you have. If you have any questions regarding this statement, please contact Gregory C. Wilshusen at (202) 512-6244 or Gregory.Wilshusensen@cnn.com. For confidential support, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org. NIST Special Publication 800-53, Security and Privacy Controls for Federal Information Systems and Organizations, provides a catalog of security and privacy controls for federal information systems and organizations. OMB and NIST also have provided guidance to agencies on procedures for authenticating users to NIST Special Publications 800-63-2, Electronic Authentication Guideline, provides technical guidelines for federal agencies implementing electronic authentication. It covers remote authentication of users (such as employees, contractors, or private individuals) interacting with government IT systems over open networks. NIST is responsible under FISMA for developing security standards and guidelines for agencies. OMB and NIST have prescribed policies, standards, and guidelines that are intended to assist federal agencies with identifying and providing information security protections commensurate with risk. NIST, Federal Information Processing Standard 199, Standards for Security Categorization of Federal Information and Information Systems, requires agencies to categorize their information systems as low-impact, moderate-impact or high-impact for the security objectives of confidentiality, integrity, and availability. for the information and information systems that support the operations of the agency, including those provided or managed by another agency, a contractor, or other organization. In addition, the head of each agency is responsible for, among other things, ensuring that senior agency officials carry out the agency's mission. For more information, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/28/politics/cnn-cnnnewsletter/top-10-government-agencies-top-stories. The Commissioner of Internal Revenue has overall responsibility for ensuring the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of the information and systems that support the agency and its operations. Within IRS, the senior agency official responsible for information security is the Associate CIO, who heads the IRS Information Technology. The CIO is responsible for protecting the agency's information technology systems and systems. The IRS has a range of operational challenges, including cyber-attacks, data breaches, and other security issues. For more information, visit IRS.gov. out their information security responsibilities and that all personnel are held accountable for complying with the agency-wide information security program. The act also assigned OMB and the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) oversight responsibilities to assist agencies in effectively implementing information security protections. In addition, NIST is responsible for developing Modernization Act of 2014 codified its responsibility for certain operational aspects of federal agency cybersecurity. In particular, DHS is responsible. for administering, in consultation with OMB, the implementation of agency information security policies and practices for information systems. Under FISMA, the Director of OMB is responsible for developing and overseeing the implementation of policies, principles, standards, and guidelines on information security in federal agencies. The director is targeted, tactical actions to deliver results. OMB reports annually to Congress on the effectiveness of information security policies and practices at executive branch agencies during the preceding year. The report includes a summary of evaluations conducted by agency inspectors general. Regarding DHS, the Federal Information Security Act of 2002 provides for the creation of the Department of Homeland Security's Office of Information Security. OMB Director is charged with overseeing and enforcing agency compliance with information security requirements. OMB has developed various mechanisms to carry out its oversight function. Federal law gives OMB the power of enforcement and accountability related to evaluating agencies’ management of their information resources. In particular, OMB is empowered to recommend reductions or increases in an agency’s budget and restrict the availability of information security services to the public. The OMB Director also has the power to make recommendations to the White House on issues of national security. The OMB Cyber and National Security Unit (OMB Cyber) was established in fiscal year 2015. This unit is responsible for strengthening federal cybersecurity through oversight of agency and government-wide programs. The unit is also responsible for issuing funds for information resources, among other things. It is housed in the Office of the Federal Chief Information Officer. The OMB cyber unit is based in Washington, D.C. and has a staff of six people. It has a budget of $1.2 billion. OMB has established the “CyberStat Review’ process, which involves evidence-based meetings led by OMB. The process aims to ensure agencies are accountable for their cybersecurity posture, while assisting them in developing policies to address emerging IT security risks. OMB also has oversight of government-wide response to major incidents and vulnerabilities, as well as the CyberStat Review process. The review process is led by the OMB’s CyberStat team. It aims to help agencies develop and implement policies to deal with emerging cybersecurity risks. Other key contributors to this statement include Jeffrey Knott, Larry Crosland, John de Ferrari, and Neil A. Pinney. Other key contributors include Dawn E. Bidne, Mark Canter, James Cook, Shannon J. Finnegan; Lee wilshuseng, Nancy Kingsbury, James R. McTigue, Jr., and Dawn E.-Bidne. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org. The daily transcript is a written version of each day's featured news story. Use this transcript to help students with reading comprehension and vocabulary. Use the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on CNN.com. The Daily Transcript is published weekly and is curated by CNN's iReport team. For more information, go to the Daily Transcript's News Quiz, or go to http://www.cnn.com/newsquiz/2013/01/07/26/29/28/290715/news/features/top-stories/topstories. This is a work of the U.S. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States. The published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from the publisher. For more, go to CNN.com/soulmatestories and follow us on Twitter @Sylvia_McCracken and @jennifer_nelson. For confidential support on suicide matters call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. diagnose and mitigate threats, compiling and analyzing data, and developing and conducting targeted operational evaluations of systems. In May 2015 DHS issued its first directive, which required all departments and agencies to review and mitigate all critical vulnerabilities on their Internet-facing systems. Since fiscal year 2013, DHS has provided agencies the opportunity to use a suite of tools and capabilities to identify cybersecurity risks on an ongoing basis, prioritize these risks, and protect against them. For example: Continuous Diagnostics and Mitigation Program. employees, foreign nations engaged in espionage and information warfare, and terrorists. These adversaries vary in terms of their capabilities, willingness to act, and motives. These threat sources make use of various techniques—or exploits—that may adversely affect federal information, computers, software, networks, and operations. These exploits are carried out through various exploits, such as hacking, viruses, and other tools that can be used to gain access to information and steal data from computers and networks. For confidential support, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org. conduits, including websites, e-mails, wireless and cellular communications, Internet protocols, portable media, and social media. Further, adversaries can leverage common computer software programs as a means by which to deliver a threat by embedding exploits within software files that can be activated when a user opens a file within its file within the software. For confidential support call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. For support in the UK, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch. Cybersecurity organization. Risks to cyber-based assets can originate from unintentional or intentional threats. Unintentional threats can be caused by natural disasters, defective computer or network equipment, software coding errors, and the actions of careless or poorly trained employees. Intentional threats include targeted and untargeted attacks from criminal groups, hackers, disgruntled employees, and disgruntled customers. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. risks based on potential impacts, and enable cybersecurity personnel to mitigate the most significant problems first. National Cybersecurity Protection System: NCPS is an integrated system-of-systems intended to deliver a range of capabilities for intrusion detection, intrusion prevention, analytics, and information sharing. When deployed on an agency’s connection to the Internet, NCPS can be used to protect against cyber-attacks on the Internet. It can also be used in conjunction with other systems to help protect against other types of threats. federal agencies spent about $13.1 billion on cybersecurity in fiscal year 2016. The president’s fiscal year 2017 budget proposes investing over $19 billion in resources for cybersecurity. Cyber incidents can adversely affect national security, damage public safety, and cause financial harm. This amount may increase significantly, as the president”s budget proposes Investing in Cybersecurity for Fiscal Year 2017, which runs from October 1 to December 31. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. The number of incidents involving PII reported by federal agencies has more than doubled in recent years. This upward trend continues. According to OMB, agencies reported 77,183 incidents in fiscal year 2015. Also, for fiscal year2015, OMB reported that for Fiscal Year 2015, the number of PII incidents involving federal agencies rose from 10,481 in 2009 to 27,624 in 2014. This is an increase of more than 50.percent. The increase is attributed to an increase in PII-related incidents in the federal government. seeking a refund. This crime burdens legitimate taxpayers because authenticating their identities is likely to delay the processing of their tax returns and refunds. Moreover, the victim’s PII can potentially be used to commit other crimes. Given current and emerging risks, in 2015 we expanded our high-risk area on the IRS website to include more tax fraud cases. We are happy to provide more information on our website about how to fraudulently obtain a tax refund or other forms of financial assistance. each agency to provide information security protections commensurate with the risk and magnitude of harm resulting from unauthorized access, use, disclosure, disruption, modification, or destruction of the agency’s information or information systems. More specifically, federal agencies are to develop, document, and implement an agency-wide information security program to provide security. These include the following: OMB M-14-03, Enhancing the Security of Federal Information and Information, and OMBM-13-03. As technology has advanced, the federal government has become increasingly dependent on computerized information systems. Federal agencies rely on such systems to process, maintain, and report large volumes of sensitive data, such as personal information. Ineffective protection of these data can lead to the loss of vital information, according to the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) This article was amended on November 14, 2013, to make clear that the NIST is a federal agency, not a government agency. We are happy to clarify this. systems and information can impair delivery of vital services and result in loss or theft of computer resources, assets, and funds. inappropriate access to and disclosure, modification, or destruction of sensitive information, such as PII. undermining of agency missions due to embarrassing incidents that erode the public’s confidence in government; and undermining of public confidence in the government. The U.S. Department of Homeland Security has launched a review of its systems and information. The review is expected to be completed by the end of the year. The number of information security incidents affecting systems supporting the federal government is increasing. The number of incidents reported by federal agencies to the U.S. Computer Emergency Readiness Team (US-CERT) increased from 5,503 in fiscal year 2006 to 67,168 in fiscalyear 2014, an increase of 1,121.corresponding program. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. “debilitating impact” systems); developing, issuing, and overseeing the implementation of binding operational directives to agencies. operating the federal information security incident center (the U.S Computer Emergency Readiness Team or US-CERT); and deploying technology to continuously improve security in the federal government. The agency is responsible for developing and issuing directives to federal agencies on matters such as incident reporting, contents of agency’s annual reports, and other operational requirements. It is also responsible for the development and implementation of the federal Information Security Incident Center. damage to networks and equipment; and high costs for remediation. Recognizing the importance of these issues, federal law includes requirements intended to improve the protection of government information and systems. These laws include the Federal Information Security Modernization Act (FISMA) of 2014, which among other things, requires the head of the Department of Homeland Security to ensure the security of the nation's information systems and networks in the event of a breach. It also includes the requirement that all government agencies have a chief information security officer.