More Transparency Needed to Facilitate Oversight of VBA’s Compensation and Pension Staffing Levels. VA Benefits: Other Programs May Provide Lessons for Improving Individual Unemployability Assessments. VA Disability Benefits: Board of Veterans’ Appeals Has Made Improvements in Quality Assurance, but Challenges Remain for VA in Assuring Consistency. Veterans Benefits: Despite Recent Improvements, Meeting Claims Processing Goals Will Be Challenging. VA Needs Plan for Assessing Consistencies of Decisions. Bertoni at (202) 512-7215 or Bertonid@gao.gov. Also contributing to this statement were Shelia Drake, Martin Scire, Greg Whitney, and Charles Willson. GAO-07-310. High Risk Series: An Update. Washington, D.C.: January 31, 2007. VA Can Improve Its Procedures for Obtaining Military Service Records. VA can improve its procedures for obtaining military service records. VA: VA Can improve its Procedures forObtaining Military service Records. the Social Security Administration lagged behind the scientific advances and economic and social changes that have redefined the relationship between impairments and work. For example, advances in medicine and technology have reduced the severity of some medical conditions and have allowed individuals to live with greater independence and function in a more independent way. The Social Security Agency has been criticized for its handling of disability benefits. The agency has been accused of failing to keep up with advances in technology and medicine that have allowed people with disabilities to live more independent lives. Work has changed in recent decades as the national economy has moved away from manufacturing-based jobs to service- and knowledge- based employment. Yet VA’s and SSA’S disability programs remain mired in concepts from the past. The concept that impairment equates to an inability to work in a work setting is outdated, the authors say. They argue that the VA and the SSA need to change their disability programs to reflect today's changing economy and work conditions. The authors say the VA should change its disability program to reflect the changing nature of work. option could have a number of benefits for VA as well as veterans. The lump sum option could reduce the number of claims submitted and allow VA to process claims more quickly. In December 2000, we reported that about one-third of newly compensated veterans could be interested in a lump-sum option. In addition to program design, VA’s regional office claims processing structure may be disadvantageous to efficient operations. VBA and VBA are part of the Government Accountability Office, which publishes The Federalist. of VA’s disability programs and other relevant VA programs and would identify any legislative actions needed to initiate and fund such changes. Another area of program design that could be examined is the option of providing a lump sum payment in lieu of monthly disability compensation. In 1996, the Veterans’ of replacing average impairment in earnings capacity, whether lump sum payments should be made for certain disabilities or level of severity of disability, and how VA's claims processing operation compares to other disability programs, including the location and number of processing centers. The commission asked Congress to consider paying less severely disabled veterans compensation in a lump sum. The commission questioned whether concentrating claims processing resources on these claims, rather than on claims by more severely disabled vets, was consistent with program intent. According to the commission, the lump sum should be $1 million or less.or less. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S., call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. After more than a decade of research, we have determined that federal disability programs are in urgent need of attention and transformation. We found that these programs are poorly positioned to provide meaningful and timely support for Americans with disabilities. We recommended that VA study and report to the Congress on the effects that a comprehensive consideration of medical treatment and assistive technologies would have on its disability programs’ eligibility criteria and benefits package. This study would include estimates of the effects on the size, cost, and management. In November 2003, the Congress established the Veterans’ Disability Benefits Commission to study the appropriateness of VA disability benefits. The commission held its first public hearing in May 2005 and in October 2005, established 31 research questions for study. These questions address such issues as how well disability benefits meet the congressional intent, and the appropriate standard or standards for determining whether a disability or death of a veteran should be compensated. The panel is scheduled to report to the Congress in January 2009, and is expected to make recommendations. medical examinations, and treatment records from VA medical facilities and private medical service providers. Once a claim has all the necessary evidence, a rating specialist evaluates the claim and determines whether the claimant is eligible for benefits. VA is in the process of testing templates for compensation and pension medical examinations for specific types of disabilities to ensure that medical evidence from these examinations will enable consistent evaluations of disabilities. Further, VA formed a on compensation payments, to develop baseline data for monitoring and managing decision variances. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. variation. VA’s Inspector General has studied one indicator of possible inconsistency, the wide variations in average payments per veteran from state to state. In May 2005, the Inspector General reported that compensation payments are affected by many factors and that some disabilities are inherently more susceptible to variations in rating. Some disabilities are more susceptible than others to variation in rating, according to the VA Inspector General's report, which was published in May 2005. The report was published by the VA's Inspector General, and is available online at http://www.va.gov/. benefits based on financial need to certain wartime veterans or their survivors. When a veteran submits a claim to any of the Veterans Benefits Administration’s 57 regional offices, a veterans service representative is responsible for obtaining the relevant evidence to evaluate the claim. Such evidence includes veterans’ military service records, such as service records from the U.S. Army and the Army National Guard, among other things. The VA is a federal agency that provides benefits to veterans and their survivors in wartime. some of its pension income and eligibility verifications at three regional offices. VA consolidated decision making on Benefits Delivery at Discharge claims, which are generally original claims for disability compensation, at the Salt Lake City and Winston-Salem regional office. However, VA has not changed its basic field structure for pension and disability claims. The VA is also consolidating decision-making on benefits delivery at discharge claims at two regional offices in Utah and one in North Carolina. The move is expected to save the VA money in the long run. VA pays monthly disability compensation benefits to veterans with service-connected disabilities. VA also pays compensation to some spouses, children, and parents of deceased veterans and service members. VA’s pension program pays monthly to veterans and their dependents. VA pays monthly compensation benefits according to the severity of the disability. The compensation benefits are based on severity of injuries or diseases incurred or aggravated while on active military duty. The benefits are paid to veterans, their dependants, and their spouses and children. a workgroup to study variances in the rates of benefit grants and denials, and in assigned disability evaluations. Despite these efforts, VA may be limited in its ability to make and sustain significant claims processing performance improvements. We have recommended that the VA undertake a comprehensive review of its field structure for processing disability compensation and pension claims. While reexamining claims processing challenges may be daunting, there are mechanisms for undertaking such an effort, including the congressionally chartered commission currently studying veterans’ disability benefits. The complexity of claims is also increasing. Some veterans are citing more disabilities in their claims than in the past. Because each disability needs to be evaluated separately, these claims can take longer to complete. VA notes that they are receiving more disability claims, such as those related to mental health issues including post-traumatic stress disorder. Additionally, claims processing timeliness and decisional accuracy can be hampered if VA cannot obtain the evidence it needs in the time it needs to make a decision. The claims process can also take longer if VA can't get the information it needs. Claims Adjudication Commission noted that most disability compensation claims are repeat claims. Most repeat claims were from veterans with less severe disabilities. About 65 percent of veterans who began receiving disability compensation in fiscal year 2003 had disabilities rated 30 percent or less. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. VA plans to pilot paperless Benefits Delivery at Discharge. Service members’ disability claim applications, service medical records, and other evidence would be captured electronically prior to discharge. VA expects that this new process will reduce the time needed to obtain the evidence needed to decide claims. To resolve appeals, the VA plans to use a new system that uses a computer system instead of a paper system. The new system is expected to be in place by the end of the year, according to the VA. be deferred, many for 90 days or longer. Also, VA notes that legislation and VA regulations have expanded benefit entitlement and added to the volume of claims. For example, in recent years, laws and regulations have created new presumptions of service-connected disabilities for many Vietnam veterans and former prisoners of war, the VA says. For more information, go to www.va.gov or call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-TALK (8255) or go to http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. To obtain information needed to fully develop some post- traumatic stress disorder claims, VBA must obtain records from the U.S. Army and Joint Services Records Research Center (JSRRC) Average response time to VBA regional office requests is about 1 year. This can significantly increase the time it takes to decide a claim. In December 2006, we recommended that VBA assess whether it could systematically utilize an electronic library of historical military records. VBA agreed to determine the feasibility of regional offices using an alternative resource before sending some requests to the JSRRC. rely on a VBA unit at the National Personnel Records Center to do thorough and reliable searches and analyses of records. However, VBA does not systematically evaluate the quality of these searches. We noted that VBA doesn't systematically evaluate these searches for accuracy. We also noted that the VBA is not systematic about evaluating the results of its searches of veterans' records. We concluded that the search was not thorough and that the results were not accurate. We are happy to make clear that this was not the case in this case. processing compensation and pension claims at 57 regional offices. Unless more comprehensive and strategic changes are made to its field structure, VBA is likely to miss opportunities to substantially improve productivity, accuracy, and consistency, especially in the face of future challenges. VBA has more than 1,000 regional offices across the U.S. and Canada. It has a workforce of more than 100,000 people, with more than half of them based in the Midwest, Northeast, and Southeastern regions of the United States. The company has a market share of over 40 per cent. previous studies of VBA’s disability claims process. The commission is scheduled to report to the Congress by October 1, 2007. Mr. Chairman, this concludes my remarks. I would be happy to answer any questions that you or other members of the committee may have. For further information, please contact Daniel at [email protected] or call the VBA at (844) 615-8255. For more information on VBA disability claims, visit: www.vba.gov/disability. because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material. permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. For support in the Middle East, call the Salvation Army in the region of the country where you live on the continent of Africa. in the last 3 years. The number of pending claims increased by almost one-half from the end of fiscal year 2003. Rating-related claims, including those filed by veterans of the Iraq and Afghanistan conflicts, increased steadily from about 579,000 in fiscal year 2000 to about 806,000  in fiscal year 2006. During the same period, the number of claims pending longer than 6 months increased by more claims, and their average time pending is due in part to an increase in claims receipts. due in part to increased filing of claims, including those filed by veterans of the Iraq and Afghanistan conflicts. Questions remain about consistency of VA’s decisions across regional offices and at the Board of Veterans’ Appeals. VA attributes some of the increase in the number of claims pending and the average days pending to a September 2003 court decision that required over 62,000 claims to be processed. The VA says it has increased significantly responsibilities to assist veterans in developing their benefit claims have significantly affected VA's ability to process claims in a timely manner. than three-fourths, from about 47,000 to about 83,000 (see fig.1). VA reduced the average age of its pending claims from 182 days at the end of fiscal year 2001 to 111 days in fiscal year 2003. However, the number of pending claims continued to rise. The average age for pending claims increased from 182 to 111 in a year. The number of outstanding claims rose from about 46,000 in 2001 to about 80,000 by 2003. The increase was due to an increase in the number and length of claims that were still pending. fiscal year 2006 average days pending had increased to 127 days. Meanwhile, the time required to resolve appeals remains too long. The average time to resolve an appeal rose from 529 days in fiscal year 2004 to 657 days in 2006. The increase in VA’s inventory of pending appeals has led to an increase in the number of appeals that need to be resolved, the VA says. In fiscal year 2006, the average time for an appeal to be settled rose from 657 to 661 days. VA reports that it has improved the accuracy of decisions on rating related compensation claims from 80 percent in fiscal year 2002 to 88 percent in Fiscal Year 2006. VA also continues to face questions about its ability to ensure that veterans receive consistent decisions across regional offices. We have identified the need for VA to systematically address this issue to achieve acceptable levels of.percent. The VA acknowledges that regional office decision accuracy needs further improvement. This figure remains well short of its strategic goal of 98 percent. It has identified a need forVA to systematicallyaddress this issue. percentage rating based on degree of disability. A veteran who disagrees with the regional office’s decision can appeal to VA’S Board of Veterans’ Appeals and then to U.S. federal courts. If the Board finds that a case needs additional work such as obtaining additional evidence or contains procedural errors, it will appeal to the federal courts as well as the regional offices. It can take up to two years for a case to be heard by a federal court, according to the VA. VA reports that it has improved the productivity of the Board’s judges. The Board attributes this improvement to training and mentoring programs. To improve decision consistency, VA has contracted for a study of the major influences. The board expects productivity to improve to 752 decisions in fiscal year 2008. It expects to reduce the percentage of decisions remanded from about 57 percent in fiscalyear 2004 to about 32 percent in Fiscal Year 2006. It also expects to decrease the number of appeals decided from 604 appeals decided in fiscal 2003 to 698 in fiscal 2006. determinations. Further, we reported in May 2005 that the Board of Veterans’ Appeals had taken actions to strengthen its system for reviewing the quality of its decisions. But VA still lacked a systematic method for ensuring the consistency of decision making within VA as a whole. VA has recently taken steps to improve the system, including the creation of a new board of directors to review quality of decision-making in the VA. For more on this story, go to CNN.com/Vets. VA is taking actions to address its claims processing challenges. There are opportunities for more fundamental reform that could dramatically improve decision making and processing. These include reexamining program design, as well as the structure and division of labor. Incomplete and inaccurate reports could affect decisional accuracy.and analyses. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S., call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. faster, VA has been working to reduce the number of appeals sent back by the Board of Veterans’ Appeals for further work. VA has established joint training and information sharing between field staff and the Board. VA reports that the Board has sent back more than 1,000 appeals since the start of the year. VA says it is working to send back less appeals and more appeals in the future. The Board has also been sending back more appeals than it has received in the past, VA says. volume and complexity, and challenges in acquiring needed evidence in a timely manner. VA identified an increase in claims processing staff as essential to reducing the pending claims inventory and improving timeliness. Since 1999, several court decisions and laws related to VA’s claims processing have suggested that consolidating claims processing into fewer regional offices could help improve claims processing efficiency, save overhead costs, and improve decisional accuracy and consistency. We noted in December 2005 that VA had made piecemeal changes to its claims processing field structure. VA made progress in fiscal years 2002 and 2003 reducing the size and age of its pending claims inventory, but has lost ground since then. VA continues to experience significant service delivery challenges including lengthy processing times and inaccurate and inconsistent decisions. This is a list of issues that need to be addressed by Congress by October 1, 2007. For more information on the VA's pending claims system, go to: http://www.va.gov/pending-claims/Pending-Claims-System.html. several steps to improve service delivery, but their potential to lead to significant improvements may be limited by several factors. These steps include requesting funding for additional staff, initiatives to reduce appeal remands, and initiatives to assess and monitor decision consistency. However, limitations on potential improvements include increases in claims, which could lead to a reduction in the number of appeals heard by the court. The court will also have to decide whether or not to grant an appeal, which may lead to an increase in the amount of time the case takes to be heard. cites near-term initiatives to increase the number of claims completed, such as using retired VA employees to provide training. VA expects a temporary decline in productivity as new staff are trained and become more experienced, but expects productivity to increase in the longer term. VA’s budget justification provides information on actual and planned productivity, in terms of claims decided per full-time equivalent employee. Also, VA has identified additional initiatives to help improve productivity. For example, the use of overtime is being increased. VA expects additional claims receipts based on the enactment of legislation allowing certain military retirees to receive both military retirement pay and VA disability compensation. VA cautions that ongoing hostilities in Iraq and Afghanistan, and the Global War on Terrorism in general, may increase the workload beyond current levels. VA has also noted that claims have increased in fiscal years 2000, 2005, and 2006, and that rating-related claims continue to increase, from about 579,000 in fiscal year 2000 to about 806,00 in 2006. correctly balanced, it can successfully meet the veterans’ needs while ensuring good stewardship of taxpayer funds. The fiscal year 2008 request would fund 8,320 full-time equivalent employees working on compensation and pension, which would represent an increase of about 6 percent over fiscal year 2006. In addition, the budget justification for the 2008 request is that it would be the first time the VA has spent more than $1 billion in a single fiscal year on a single program. It would also be the second time in the agency’s history that it has spent over $1billion on one program.