In 60 percent of the reports we reviewed, colleges had difficulty complying with the reporting requirement for sex-related offenses. Colleges are not required to distinguish between forcible and nonforcible offenses. We also noted a discrepancy in how colleges reported the number of murders. According to the general counsel of one state’s higher education organization, colleges should.not report incidents to them, and the attorney general concurred in that interpretation. The study was published in the journal of the American Association of Colleges and Sciences. Homicide can also include killings that result from negligence, whereas murder refers to willful killings. Because homicide is not as specific a term, the use of this broader category could obscure the actual number of murders. The Department’s regulations for the Crime Awareness and Crime Awareness Handbook are available at: http://www.crimeservice.org/news/features/crime-awareness-and-crime-awareness-handbook-for-the-2013-2014-year.html. rulemaking, students are sometimes more comfortable reporting incidents through academic rather than law enforcement channels. The Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA) generally prohibits the disclosure of education records or information from education records. A 1992 amendment to FERPA, however, reports of incidents maintained by campus law enforcement officials for law enforcement purposes are not now classified as education information and, therefore, may be disclosed. Even incidents reported to campus authorities other thanlaw enforcement officials may be included in the campus crime statistics. are sending copies of this report to the Secretary of Education, appropriate congressional committees, and other interested parties. Please call me at (202) 512-7014 or Joseph J. Eglin, Jr., Assistant Director, if you or your staff have any questions about this report. Other staff who contributed to the report include: John Sutter, John E. Sutter Jr. and John A. E. Epperson. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. be kept in the logs. Certain provisions are common to a number of these state laws. For example, they generally contain a provision exempting disclosure that is otherwise prohibited by law. Many prohibit publication of the names of victims or of victims of sex-related crimes. Many also include some type of record-keeping system for the logs, such as a computerized log book or a database of phone numbers and other information that can be accessed via a phone or computer. For more information on these laws, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/29/sex-crimes-law/index.html. of provision protecting witnesses, informants, or information that might jeopardize an ongoing investigation. Several law enforcement officials emphasized to us the importance of including such a provision. The laws also differ in a number of other respects, such as the following: California, Pennsylvania, and Oklahoma specifically provide for penalties for failing to protect witnesses and informants. California and Pennsylvania have the highest levels of crime in the U.S., while Oklahoma and California have the lowest levels. California has the highest level of crime, while Oklahoma has the lowest. to impose a new recordkeeping requirement (continued) Names and addresses of persons arrested Information specifically not required unless otherwise provided by law: names of persons reporting, victims, witnesses, or uncharged suspects or other information related to investigation. Information may be withheld upon certification of certification of the new record keeping requirement. Identification required is not specified. Information must be provided in writing and must be consistent with the requirements of the recordkeeping requirements. Information can be withheld if it is not required by law or is not in the public interest. noncompliance; the other states do not specify penalties. Only California includes a specific reference to occurrences involving hate; in fact, California’s law requires inclusion of noncriminal hate-related incidents. For more information on the eight laws, see appendix II. We also agreed to determine whether any legal challenges had been raised and whether they were likely to be filed. We agreed to find out if there had been any challenges to the laws, and if so, whether they would be brought to court. officials who were not law enforcement officials without any notation to that effect. Four said their numbers excluded incidents they could not verify. Some were concerned about reporting incidents for which no details were provided because, without details on specific cases, they were unable to verify that a crime had occurred. 16 officials we asked about the omission told us they were unaware of the requirement, which was not mentioned in the Department’s letters explaining the statistical reporting requirements. Another two said they lacked direction on how to report these crimes. validate because, for example, the parties’ names were not disclosed. The fact that the incidents need not be reported is reflected by variations in campus security reports, as some reports excluded information from non-law-enforcement sources for which no personally identifiable information was provided. Our review of 25 reports prepared by our team found that the majority of the incidents were not reported to campus security. We are happy to make clear that this is not the case with all incidents, and that we are not responsible for the accuracy of these reports. to evaluate the procedures used to collect crime data. The accuracy of crime statistics need not be verified unless it becomes apparent from a complaint or some other source that the security report may be incomplete or inaccurate. In such cases, the Department is to take appropriate action to ensure the accuracy of the statistics. The Department is also to take the appropriate action in such cases to ensure that the statistics are accurate and accurate. The department is to evaluate the procedure used tocollect crime data to ensure it is accurate and reliable. local police, and a second stated that it included such incidents when available. In contrast, six reports indicated that incidents reported to local police were included. According to a law enforcement official we contacted and our analysis of a Department program review, reporting such incidents can be difficult. For example, one report stated that such incidents were not included in a report of an incident involving a police officer. For. example, another report said that such an incident was included in the report, but that it was not reported to police. need to protect the investigation, but in no event after the arrest. The following staff made significant contributions to this report. The first copy of each GAO report and testimony is free. Additional copies of the report are available on the GAO's website at: http://www.gao.org/news/press-releases/2013/09/08/gao-press-release-2013-09-08.html. The report also includes testimony from several members of Congress, as well as other government officials. Each day, GAO issues a list of newly available reports and testimony. To receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days, please call (202) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone. A recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S., call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. $2 each. VISA and MasterCard credit cards are accepted, also. Orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25. Orders should be sent to the following address, accompanied by a check or money order made out to the Superintendent of Documents, when necessary. $2 per copy, $5 for two copies, $10 for three copies. $3 for four, $6 for five, $7 for six, $8 for eight, $9 for 10, $11 for 12, $12 for 13, $13 for 14, $14 for 15, $15 for 16. percent. U.S. General Accounting Office P.O. Box 6015 Gaithersburg, MD 20884-6015 Room 1100 700 4th St. NW (corner of 4th and G Sts. NW) U.s. General accounting Office Washington, DC Orders may also be placed by calling (202) 512-6000 or by using fax number (301) 258-4066, or TDD (301- 413-0006)percent.percent. All 50 states have open records or "sunshine" laws, most of which require public institutions' records to be open to the public unless they are specifically exempted. For example, Colorado’s open records law declares that it is public policy that all state records be open for inspection, including all writings made, maintained, or kept by the state. These laws generally provide that if records are kept, they must be open; the laws are not intended to impose a new recordkeeping requirement. California, Massachusetts, Minnesota, Oklahoma, Pennsylvania, Tennessee, Virginia, and West Virginia require public access to campus police or security department records. In all but Minnesota, the laws in general apply to all institutions of higher education, public and private. Records must be open, if kept; the intent is not; the power to make arrests is limited to private colleges. In Minnesota, under the state’s Campus Security Act, private colleges’ police departments are public agencies for the limited purpose of crime enforcement. police log laws. We spoke to heads of campus security at eight non-IACLEA colleges. All eight colleges had an enrollment exceeding 1,000 students. We randomly selected colleges, with enrollments exceeding 1,.000 students, that participated in title IV programs from the Department’s Integrated Integrated Programs. We selected six 4-year and two 2-year colleges representing all eight states with open log laws and spoke to their heads of security. We also selected seven colleges in States Without Open Log Laws. Minnesota’s law applies only to public colleges. Three of the eight states (Massachusetts, Pennsylvania, and Tennessee) have laws specifically requiring campus safety authorities to maintain daily logs open to public inspection. The remaining five, while not prescribing the log format, require disclosure of information similar to that required to private. private. schools in the U.S. The law applies to all public colleges, but not to private ones, according to the Minnesota Department of Higher Education, which says it has no plans to change it. prescribed in the act. We did not trace the numbers to source documents to check their accuracy or completeness. We also searched the literature and reported case law to determine whether any studies had been done on the effects of or legal challenges to state open log laws. We analyzed the data to see if there had been any studies of the effect of the law on public health. We found no evidence of any effects on the health of people in the state of the United States as a result of the open log law. technical assistance provided upon request by its Customer Support Branch. To help colleges achieve compliance, the Department emphasizes providing such assistance, rather than imposing sanctions. Under Department policy, the Secretary imposes sanctions only if a college flagrantly or intentionally violates the regulations or fails to take corrective action when required. The Department of Education has no plans to impose sanctions on any of the colleges in question. The department has no intentions to punish any colleges in any way for their compliance with the regulations, the department has said. As of January 1997, the Department had not imposed sanctions. Available sanctions include fines or limitation, suspension, or termination of participation in federal financial aid programs. Department officials told us that although the Department and independent auditors had identified violations at 63 colleges since the law’s enactment, as of 1997, they had yet to impose sanctions. To see the full report, go to CNN.com/soulmatestories. For more information, visit the Department of Education's website at: http://www.ed.gov/. compliance, including more thoroughly examining the statistics and, if warranted, taking formal administrative action. As of January 1997, the Department had received five complaints of noncompliance. One precipitated an in-depth campus security compliance review; the other four complaints are still being investigated. Reasons for the difficulty include reviewers’ limited experience in dealing with law enforcement matters, uncertainties about how to interpret certain definitions of reportable crimes, and differences among campuses that make evaluation difficult under a single set of program. The Department of Health and Human Services was late in issuing a required report to the Congress. Because of resource constraints, the Department has only recently expanded its monitoring efforts by initiating program reviews that specifically address compliance with the act’s reporting requirements. They have used the same system for disseminating the reports that they have used for distributing the reports to the public. The Department has not been able to conduct a full review of the program because of the limited resources it has at its disposal. The department has also been unable to perform a full program review because it has not had the resources to do so. Most of the nearly 2,800 title IV program reviews conducted between September 1992 and May 1996 found noncompliance with some requirements. Department officials told us that monitoring had generally been limited to checking whether colleges published a campus security report and had procedures for its distribution. Since no review federally required annual audits of all colleges participating in title IV programs, only six audits had documented noncompliance on security matters since the act took effect.1996. As of August 1996, only 6 audits had documenting noncompliance. the law in 1990, the Department issued various policy guidance documents on campus security to help colleges meet the law’s requirements. Most of the guidance was issued as Department letters. Final implementing regulations took effect in July 1994. The Department supplemented its policy guidance with against any college found in noncompliance with campus security requirements. Although the Department began issuing guidance to colleges on complying with the law in 1991, guidance for monitoring program compliance came much more slowly. The department did not issue its first program review guidance specifically addressing campus security until September. A Department official said that most auditors participating in training sessions held in regional Inspector General offices were unaware of campus security reporting requirements. The Department plans to issue an updated audit guide that will explicitly refer to campus security compliance and instruct auditors to ensure that campus security reports are prepared and distributed according to federal requirements. A Department official responsible for writing the audit guide expects it to be issued some time in 1997. Although the Department issued a required report on exemplary campus security practices, it did not mention campus security. The Department of Education has yet to issue guidance for independent auditors. The difficulties involving definitions and differences among colleges are discussed in more detail later in this report. In the case of urban campuses, for example, reviewers may have difficulty in determining which facilities are campus related. The department has not yet issued guidance forindependent auditors who conduct.review guidelines. The Department of. Education has no plans to do so in the near future, an official said. The report was published on October 31, 2013. The Crime Awareness and Campus Security Act of 1990 and its implementing regulations require colleges to publish and distribute an annual security report. It is unlikely that the reviewers checked whether the reports contained all the required information or whether information was accurate. To determine the actions the Department of Education has taken to implement and monitor compliance with the Act, we interviewed officials at the Department’s headquarters and regional offices. We analyzed pertinent regulations, policy guidance, and other documents to determine how the department has implemented the law. technical assistance to implement the Crime Awareness and Campus Security Act. Its continued efforts in providing technical assistance to school officials, as well as its recent issuance of monitoring guidance to Department officials, may achieve more consistent reporting and audit guidelines for independent auditors. For more information, visit www.campussecurity.org. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S., call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. campus law enforcement policies, security education and crime prevention programs. Alcohol and drug policies, sexual assault education and prevention programs, procedures for reporting sexual assaults, procedures explaining how reports of sexual assaults will be dealt with. Annual statistics on crime incidents. The law also requires colleges to provide timely and accurate information on crime and sexual assault. It is the first of its kind in the U.S. and is expected to be a model for other states to follow. It was signed into law on July 1. compliance with the law by colleges. For example, such logs might not include off-campus incidents or, without an amendment, may not include all crimes reported. Such logs would continue to reflect the inherent differences among colleges apparent in the summary statistics currently required by the act. A federal open crime log law could offer more timely access to information on campus crime and a means of verifying the accuracy of schools’ statistical reports. But inherent differences in colleges will be a long-term obstacle to achieving comparable, comprehensive campus crime statistics. warning to the campus community about crimes that are considered to represent a threat to other students and employees. The law requires the collection of data on campus crime, distinct from state or local data, and that information on the incidence of campus crime and of colleges’ security policies. We did not find any reported cases challenging these laws or any studies of their positive or negative effects. In addition, according to the Student Press Law Center’s Covering Campus Crime: A Handbook, there are no cases challenging the laws. The bill requires colleges to annually compile and report to the campus community statistics on reported crimes. The Department of Education is responsible audits of all colleges participating in title IV programs. According to a 1996 publication of the Student Press Law Center, 11 states have laws requiring schools to compile and release statistics on campus crime. Two bills—H.R. 2416 and S. 2065—introduced in the 104th Congress were passed by the House and the Senate, respectively, on Thursday. The Senate will vote on the bill on Friday. departments and required the colleges, in addition to reporting annual crime statistics, to maintain open-to-the-public, easily understood daily logs. The bills were modeled after a law that has been in effect in Tennessee since in September 1994. The law required the Department to review campus crime statistics and issue a report to the Congress by September 1, 1995. Citing limited resources to perform such a task, the Department was more than 1 year late in issuing a report on campus crime stats. as 4-year public or 2-year private, nature of the campus (such as urban or rural and residential or commuter), and types of public safety employees providing campus security. Having compiled and reported the survey results, the Department plans to evaluate whether additional actions are needed at the federal level. Our goal is to improve the safety and security of students and faculty at our colleges and universities. We are committed to making our campuses safer for all students and staff, and to making sure that students feel safe and secure on campus. state statutes and spoke with representatives of campus safety and other interest groups as well as faculty specializing in criminal justice. We performed our work between June 1996 and January 1997 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Names and addresses of arrested persons and charges against them were included in the report. Exempts from the report include students, faculty, and staff members who were not on campus at the time of the alleged crimes. The report was published in print in January 1997 and was published online in March 1997. We interviewed officials at 27 colleges selected from a judgmental sample of colleges from the following four groups. Members of the International Association of Campus Law Enforcement Administrators (IACLEA)—Ten Colleges. Our initial college law enforcement contact was the Director of Law Enforcement at the University of California, Los Angeles. We also spoke to officials at seven other colleges in California, Nevada, New Mexico, Texas and Washington, D.C. For more information on the act, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/27/college-law-enforcement-act/index.html. Police at the University of Delaware, also a past president of IACLEA and a recognized authority on the Crime Awareness and Campus Security Act. He provided us with the names of chief law enforcement officials at eight IacLEA member colleges, one in each of the eight states with open campus. He is also a noted expert on the crime awareness and campus security act. He's also a respected author on the issue of campus security and security on college campuses. He says he's been a strong advocate for campus security for decades. record systems of some local police departments do not lend themselves to converting the incidents to the categories required for campus security reports. Identifying incidents at college-related facilities can be a problem when a campus is dispersed throughout a large urban area. Three law enforcement officials told us that offenses are less likely to result in arrests on campuses that do not have security departments with security departments. For these categories, uniformity of statistics can be affected to some degree by school policies and type of authority of the campus security department. Table 2 summarizes the principal problems colleges are having. Campus law enforcement officials differ as to whether their reported statistics must include crimes reported to them by other campus authorities without information identifying the persons involved in the reported incidents. For example, according to comments the Department received during column showing incidents reported to other officials, or adding footnotes. When we asked campus law enforcement. officials at the 25 colleges how they treated such cases, we found an even greater variation in their responses. than in the reports. The Crime Awareness and Campus Security Act requires colleges to report statistics on murders, forcible rapes, and aggravated assaults that manifest evidence of prejudice based on race, religion, sexual orientation, or ethnicity. But reporting such incidents in the statistics is not required under a Department interpretation of the Act. According to that interpretation, colleges may exclude from their statistics those incidents that campus law enforcement officials cannot identify. Of the 25 reports we reviewed, 1 specifically stated that it did not include incidents reported to local police. Congress would have required more detailed and current campus security records to be made accessible to the public. Although a hearing was held in the House, no further action was taken before the session’s end. Had the bills been enacted, they would have applied to colleges with police or security. They would have been available to students, faculty, staff and administrators at all colleges and universities in the U.S. The bills were not heard by the Senate or the House of Representatives before the end of the session. had occurred, had been properly classified, or had been counted only once. At some colleges, security officials do not receive even unverifiable statistics from counselors. Officials at five colleges said counselors are not required to or generally do not generally do this. At five colleges, officials said counselors aren't required to do this or generally don't generally do it. At one college, a crime had been reported to more than one office, but it was counted only one time, an official said. review, the Department postponed issuing the report until February 1997. Of the 25 reports we reviewed, only 2 provided information in all the prescribed Postsecondary Education Data System, stratified by type of college and geographic region. We included two other colleges for information result of a crime statistic complaint. We asked the campus security officials interviewed to send us a copy of their most recent campus security statistics. We received statistical reports from 25 colleges and evaluated them to determine the extent to which the reports conformed to crime reporting requirements. The consistency and completeness of campus crime reporting envisioned under the act have been difficult to attain for two primary reasons. The differing characteristics of colleges, such as their location in an urban or other setting,affect the colleges’ ability to provide a complete and consistent picture of incidents that occur on their campuses. Some confusion exists about reporting requirements, particularly about how certain categories of crimes are to be classified. The Department originally relied mostly on its regulations, letters to colleges, and other sources. colleges showed that some of the data may have been incomplete or incompatible because of differences in safety officials’ access to information, insistence on verifiable data, or both. Six reports showed direct and varied attempts to address these differences, for example, by supplementing required crime categories with explanatory subcategories, adding a new crime category or adding a crime category to a list of crimes. The report was published by the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) on Wednesday, November 14. on complaints regarding crime statistics. We included the first of these because a complaint had been lodged against that college. The second college was subject to the same state crime reporting system as another college. It is the only one that has undergone an in-depth Department review as a result of a complaint. It was the only college that had undergone a review of its crime statistics as a consequence of the complaint. The third college had a complaint lodged against it because it had a high crime rate. It had a low crime rate because its crime rate was low.