FY1998 to a high of 11,499 in FY2002. The 13-year average for defensive claims (8,581) was higher than the average for the affirmative claims. The overall trends of Colombian asylum seekers from FY1997 through FY2009 are up by 48.2% and 53.6% respectively. The "credible fear" claims dropped from 1,711 in FY2005 to 602 in FY2008, and then rose to 962 in FY2009.. Colombian asylum cases exhibit a classic bell curve in Figure 8. Those who appeared before the Orlando Immigration Court had a 63% grant rate, while those heard by the Atlanta Immigration Court faced a grant rate of 19%. The average national grant rate for Colombian asylum seekers is 36%. Figure 14 presents the national average for asylum seekers in the U.S. and Colombia. The average grant rate is 36% for Colombians, compared to 63% for those in Florida and 19% for people in Atlanta. Figure 14. presents thenational average for Colombia and Florida. The national average. for Colombia is 36%, while the average. national rate for Florida is 63% and 19%. The number of affirmative claims has declined by 89.8% from FY1997 through FY2009. The number of defensive claims has decreased as well, by 84.7%. The 13-year average for affirmative claims was 5,607. In contrast, defensive claims increased by only 11.4%, from 8,381 cases in FY1997 to 9,336 cases inFY2009. But the year-to-year fluctuations in defensive claims were substantial, going from a low of 4,913 in FY2001 (8,747) to 8,758 in FY 2009. average for affirmative claims was 2,351, and for defensive claims it was 3,072. The "credible fear" claims have dipped by 54.6%, from 185 in FY2005 to 84 in FY2009. Affirmative asylum claims from El Salvador have steadily declined by 90.4%, from a high of 4,706 in FY1997 to 453 in FY 2009. Overall, defensive asylum claims are down by 53.2% for Salvadorans, FY2006, when defensive claims peaked at 6,056. Law Review published "Refugee Roulette: Disparities in Asylum Adjudication" in 2007. The example of asylum seekers from the PRC offers striking differences in the percentage of cases approved across regions and jurisdictions. Asylum seekers from three of these countries faced a grant rate in at least one court that was more than 50% below the national average. The authors of this extensive study of affirmative and defensive decisions offered the following observations: As a result, asylum seekers in these countries are more likely to be denied asylum. from the PRC varied from zero to 68%. Sixty percent of the officers in that regional office deviated from their office's average PRC asylum approval rates by more than 50%. Nationwide, immigration judges granted asylum to 47% percent of defensive cases of PRC claimants from January 1, 2000, through August 31, 2004. The immigration court in Atlanta approved 7% of defensive PRC cases; however, the court in Orlando, FL, approved 76% of defending cases fromPRC claimants. rising and reached 10,522 affirmative cases in FY2002. The PRC remained the leading source country throughout the 2000s. Affirmative claims rose by 268.4%, from 2,377 appeared consistent. A study of 290 asylum officers who decided at least 100 affirmative cases from the PRC from FY1999 through FY2005 found that the approval rate of PRC claimants spanned from zero to over 90% during this period. In one regional asylum office, the grant rates for affirmative applications were over 90%. The PRC led in the number of asylum cases approved by USCIS and EOIR in FY2009 ( Figure 13 ). Abuse of human rights in the PRC has been a principal area of concern in the United States for many years. Presumably, PRC asylum seekers are also benefiting from the provision enabling aliens to claim asylum on the basis of persecution resulting from resistance to coercive population control policies, given the well-known population control Policies of PRC. The portion of approved asylum for PRC citizens is less than 1% of the total. GAO found that the grant rate for affirmative cases exceeded 50% for asylum seekers from countries such as Albania, the PRC, Ethiopia, Iran, Russia, Somalia, and the former Yugoslavia. The grant rate was lower than 10% for Asylum seekers from El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, and Mexico. GAO also offered the following important caveat: Because data were not available on the facts, evidence, and facts, GAO could not give a total number of asylum seekers granted asylum. of decisions on PRC asylum seekers continued to show wide disparities in the New York court, ranging from 4% to 74% denial rates. The denial rates of Iraq asylum seekers were the lowest, spanning from zero to 4%, and their variation was also the lowest at 4%. In contrast, theDenial rates of Salvadoran asylum seeker were the highest, spanning 90% to 98%, with only a 8% variation. Although there are many who would revise U.S. asylum law, those advocating change have divergent perspectives. the national average, and applicants from four of these countries enjoyed a grant rate in at least one court that was more than 50% above the national average. For one of the countries, China, the high grant rate and the low grant rate deviated by more than50% from the nationalAverage. The average grant rate for applicants in China deviated from the average by over 50% for at least two of the four countries. The high grant rates and low grant rates for applicants from China were more than 60% higher than the national Average. about 1 million foreign nationals to legal permanent resident (LPR) status each year. Overall, asylee adjustments comprised only 4% (411,972) of the 10.3 million LPRs admitted or adjusted from FY2000 through FY2009. Unlike other facets of U.S. immigration, LPR status is not subject to the same level of scrutiny as other legal status. The U.N. has no plans to change its immigration policy in the near future, a spokesman said. Asylum cases filed with the INS surpassed 100,000 for the first time in 1988. In the 1980s, political violence and civil wars in Central America prompted mass migration of asylum seekers from El Salvador, Guatemala, and Nicaragua. The Tiananmen Square massacre of Chinese in 1989 was cited as a trigger for the change in the law. The U.S. Supreme Court ruled in favor of the new law in 2010, saying it was necessary to protect the nation's sovereignty. The Supreme Court said it was also necessary to ensure the safety of the American people. at 149,566 in FY1995 ( Figure 1 ). Almost half of those cases, however, resulted from the 1990 settlement of the American Baptist Church (ABC) case that allowed Salvadorans and Guatemalans living in the United States who had not obtained asylum in the past to apply for asylum. By the end of FY1995, the U.S. had granted asylum to more than 100,000 Salvadorans, Guatemalaans, and Hondurans. The number of Salvadoran and Guatemalan asylum seekers reached a record high of more than 150,000. boat to the United States in FY1992. The following year, 285 Chinese came ashore in New York on the "Golden Venture" and a total of 683 Chinese came. ashore in three different ocean-going vessels along the coast of California in the summer of 1993. Asylum claims with the INS peaked in FY1993 at more than 1,000. In FY1994, asylum claims peaked at over 1,200, with more than 500 Chinese coming ashore in San Francisco alone in June and July of that year. Protesters in 1989 symbolized events that triggered asylum seekers from China. Conditions in Central America contributed to the second spike depicted in Figure 1. The December 1991 military coup d'etat deposing Haiti's first democratically elected president, Jean Bertrand Aristide, led thousands of Haitians to flee by fleeing to China and other countries. The U.S. government has blamed the surge in asylum seekers in China on a surge in violence in China in the late 1990s and early 2000s. despite peaking at 9,955 in FY2007. The number of "credible fear" claims during expedited removal has risen sharply from 73 in FY2005 to 945 in FY2009. Many Haitians who flee Haiti are interdicted by the U.S. Coast Guard and do not file affirmative cases. Many asylum seekers from Ethiopia FY2009 they filed more affirmative cases than defensive cases ( Figure 10 ). Although small, the number of Ethiopian "CredibleFear" claims has risen markedly from 13 in FY 2005 to 107 in FY 2009. The number of asylum cases approved more than doubled from 13,532 in FY1996 to 31,202 in FY2002. EOIR approved 5,131 in FY 1996 and 10,186 in FY2009, as shown in Figure 3. DHS' Customs and Border Protection (CBP) officer must summarily exclude a foreign national arriving without a visa. This decline in cases approved represents a FY2009. The number of Asylum cases that EO IR judges have approved, however, has risen by 99% over this 14-year period. cases from Haiti was consistent with its portion of asylum seekers in FY2009. Haiti represented shares of asylum cases that USCIS and EOIR approved—4.8% and 4.0%, respectively ( Figure 13 )—that were comparable to the portion of Asylum cased filed with USCIS in FY 2009. The share of asylum cased from Haiti that was approved was 4.5% and4.6%, respectively. The percentage of asylum applications from Haiti in FY2013 was 4% and 5%. of the 39,279 defensive cases filed with EOIR. Five of the top 10 source countries of asylum seekers were Western Hemisphere nations in FY2009. The 13-year average was 972 for affirmative claims and 689 for defensive claims, with only modest variations from year to year. Ethiopia, Somalia, Cameroon, Liberia, Egypt, and Sudan were among those countries in the top 20 source countries over the past decade for approved affirmative and defensive asylum cases. Although they were not top 10Source countries for asylum seekers, Middle Eastern and South Asian nations do appear in theTop 20. asylum claims, with 4,209 new cases. Somalia followed as a leading source country with 3,125 cases in FY1999. As the overall number of asylum seekers fell in the late 1990s, the shrinking numbers from Central America contributed to the decline. The asylum patterns of these six selected source countries over the 13-year period varied considerably. Asylum seekers from Colombia, for example, were more likely to seek asylum than asylum seekers from El Salvador or the PRC. The PRC began during expedited removal have risen from 107 in FY2005 to 338 in FY2009. over 252,000 and made up half of all foreign nationals who applied for asylum with the INS. In FY1995, more than three-fourths of asylum cases filed annually came from the Western Hemisphere. Iran, Iraq, Indonesia, and Pakistan were top 20 source countries for those who received asylum from FY2000 through FY2009. Indonesia, India, and Burma were the only ones among these countries (along with Nepal) to be among the top 10 in FY 2009. Several top sending countries were also among the decade's top 20 approved affirmative and defensive asylum cases. not appear among those who claim asylum in the United States. The number of asylum seekers from Haiti who do reach the U.S. has not fluctuated greatly over the 13-year period. Ethiopians and Haitians tracked steadily and revealed similar levels of affirmative versus defensive asylum claims ( albeit Haiti's levels were higher overall) In contrast, Chinese, Salvadoran and Mexican asylum claims each yielded higher levels of "credible fear" claims than those from any other source country. All three asylum gateways have each evidenced a drop since peaking in the early 2000s. a port of entry who meet the definition of a refugee. As Figure 1 illustrates, asylum claims spiked immediately after passage of the Refugee Act in 1980. Over 120,000 Cubans and about 25,000 Haitians set sail for Florida. Known as the Mariel Boatlift, this mass exodus of asylum seekers was known as the "Mariel Boatl lift" The U.S. government is seeking to deport more than 100,000 asylum seekers from Cuba, Haiti, and other countries. overview of current policy, discussing the threshold of what constitutes asylum and the procedures for obtaining it. The second portion of the report identifies the top sending countries and includes a time series analysis of six selected source countries for asylum seekers. The analysis presents data on the three asylum gateways of affirmative, defensive, and "credible fear" claims for each of these source countries from FY1997 through FY2009. Each of the six selected countries were among the major source countries of asylum seekers from FY 1997 through FY 2009. unique fluctuations over time. Conditions in the major source countries were likely the driving force behind asylum seekers. Country conditions lie at the core of asylum seekers' decision to seek refuge in the U.S. or seek asylum elsewhere in the world. This data analysis suggests that conditions in theMajor source countries—whether economic, environmental, political, religious or social—were likely the Driving Force behind Asylum Seekers' Decision to Seek refuge in America or seek refuge elsewhere in Europe or the rest of the world, according to the data. Others have maintained that migration "push" factors, such as rapid population growth, poverty, and political instability in the sending countries of asylum seekers, are factors over which the U.S. has little control. Some have warned of "the ongoing separation of asylum from any grounding in the national interest" and have called for an end to the asylum system in the United States. The Obama administration's policy on asylum is expected to change in the next few months, a senior administration official said. "Credible fear" claims are much smaller in overall numbers than affirmative and defensive asylum caseloads. The PRC (18%) was still the leading source country, but El Salvador (17%) sent a comparable number of claimants in FY2009. More Western Hemisphere nations are among the top 10 source countries for "credibleFear" claimants than among the EOIR and USCIS asylum caseoads, as Figure 6 illustrates. In FY2009, 5,454 "Credible Fear" claims were made by people in the Western Hemisphere. fear" claims that USCIS has considered has steadily increased from 4,712 in FY2005 to 5,454 in FY2009. The number of "credible fear" reviews by EOIR is much lower overall than it is for USCIS, as one would expect. Nonetheless, EOir numbers have seen a notable rise from 114 to 114 in the past five years, a 16% increase. The U.S. Department of Homeland Security is the largest agency in the federal government, followed by the State Department. series data on "credible fear" claims were available only since FY2005. Bear in mind that EOIR defensive cases included many asylum claimants that first appeared as "Credible Fear" or affirmative cases with USCIS. As a consequence, defensive claims display an echo effect of the spikes and valleys in "c credible fear" and affirmative cases in the U.S. asylum system. The U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) has said that it is committed to working with the government to find a solution to the asylum crisis. in FY2005 to 887 in FY2009. Consistent time series data on "credible fear" claims are not available before FY2005. On November 13, 2002, the former INS published a notice clarifying that certain aliens arriving by sea who are not admitted or paroled into the United States are to be placed on a waiting list for admittance to the U.S. The number of aliens placed on the waiting list has since risen to more than 2,000. The list of those who will be placed is expected to be finalized in the coming months. or "credible fear," and the likelihood that persecution would occur, or "well-founded fear"—are fundamental to establishing the standards for asylum. A third dimension that overlays these concepts is the matter of "mixed motives" for persecuting the alien. Each of these standards are discussed below. The INA states that "the term Integral to expedited removal, which is discussed below, the credible fear concept also functions as a pre-screening standard that is broader—and the burden of proof easier to meet" cannot reasonably obtain it. Because "fear" is a subjective state of mind, assessing the merits of an asylum case rests in large part on the credibility of the claim and the likelihood that persecution would occur if the alien is returned home. Those found to have a "credible fear" are referred to an EOIR immigration judge, which places the asylum seeker on the defensive path to asylum. If the USCIS asylum officer finds that an alien does not have a credible fear, the alien may request that a judge review that finding. asylum law and policy, aliens claiming relief from removal due to torture may be treated separately under regulations implementing the United Nations Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment. Article 3 of the Torture Convention prohibits the return of any person to arrive subsequently receive withholding of removal or relief. Since both of these forms of relief have a higher burden of proof than asylum, they assert such people would have qualified for asylum but for the one-year deadline. They advocate for a good cause. a country where there are "substantial grounds" for believing that he or she would be in danger of being tortured. The alien must meet the three elements necessary to establish torture: 1. the torture must involve the infliction of severe pain or suffering, either physical or mental; 2. the Torture of future torture is required to be considered; 3. If a diplomatic assurance (deemed sufficiently reliable by the Attorney General or Secretary of State) that the alien will not be tortured is obtained from the government of the country to which the alien would be repatriated, the alien's claim for torture is denied. must be intentionally inflicted; and 3. the torture must be committed by or at the acquiescence of a public official or person acting in an official capacity. Generally, an applicant for non-removal under Article 3 has the burden of proving that it is more likely than not that he would be tortured by an official or other person in a public capacity. For more information on Article 3, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/30/torture/torts-tortures-treatments-in-the-united-kingdom. be tortured if removed to the proposed country. If credible, the applicant's testimony may be sufficient to sustain this burden without additional corroboration. In assessing whether it is "more likely than not" that an applicant would be tortured, all evidence relevant to the possibility should be considered. The application must be "more than likely" to be tortured if it is to be granted asylum in the U.S. or a U.N. candidate's home country. The applicant must be able to prove that he or she would not be tortured in such a country. in expedited removal proceedings and detained (subject to humanitarian parole) This notice concluded that illegal mass migration by sea threatened national security because it diverts the U.S. Coast Guard and other resources from their homeland security duties. The Attorney General expanded on this rationale in his April 17, 2003, ruling in the case of El Chaparral, a Honduran man who was detained in the United States for more than a year and a half before he was released on bail. The U.N. Security Council passed a resolution in April 2003 calling on the United Nations to crack down on illegal immigration by sea. that instructs EOIR immigration judges to consider "national security interests implicated by the encouragement of further unlawful mass migrations" in making bond determinations. The case involved a Haitian who had arrived in "the United States by sea seeking to evade inspection," according to the order. The judge ruled in favor of the Haitian, who had been detained since arriving in the U.S. from Haiti. The decision was appealed to the Supreme Court, which is considering a similar case, the order says. proper documentation, unless the alien expresses a fear of persecution if repatriated. Absent a stated fear, the CBP officer is allowed to exclude aliens without proper documentation from the United States without placing them in removal proceedings. This procedure is known as expedited removal. According to DHS immigration policy and policy and procedures, this procedure is not required to remove an alien from the U.S. If the alien does not have proper documentation, the officer can exclude them from the country without putting them in deportation proceedings. procedures, CBP inspectors, as well as other DHS immigration officers, are required to ask each individual who may be subject to expedited removal the following series of "protection questions" to identify anyone who is afraid of return. Why did you leave your home country or country of last residence? Do you live in the U.S. and want to return to your country of origin? Are you a citizen or permanent resident of the United States? Have you served in the military? of Homeland Security (DHS) after arrival into the country, or they may seek asylum before a Department of Justice Executive Office for Immigration Review (EOIR) immigration judge during removal proceedings. Foreign nationals arriving at a U.S. port of entry who lack proper immigration documents or who engage in fraud or fraudulently enter the country may be subject to removal proceedings by the Department of Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) or a federal immigration judge. For more information on how to apply for asylum in the United States, visit www.immigrationandcustoms.gov. law enforcement databases. All foreign nationals are inspected by CBP officers at ports of entry. Those who enter the country legally on nonimmigrant visas are screened by the consular officers at the Department of State when they apply for a visa, and those who enter illegally are screened at the ports of Entry. The U.S. attorney's office has no immediate comment on the new screening process for non-citizens on non-immigrant visas, but says it will be in place by the end of the year. by the U.S. Border Patrol or the ICE agents when they are apprehended. When aliens formally request asylum, they are sent to the nearest USCIS-authorized fingerprint site. They have all 10 fingers scanned and are subject to a full background check by the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI). Distinct from asylum seekers who have their fingerprints taken by the government and sent to a government agency for processing. The process is known as a "finger scan" or "fingerprint test" and is done by the USCIS or FBI. The U.S. will not return a foreign national to a country where his life or freedom would be threatened on account of race, religion, nationality, membership in a particular social group, or political opinion. This principle is embodied in several provisions of the Immigration and Nationality Act (INA), most notably in provisions defining refugees and asylees. As discussed more fully above, individualized persecution or persecution resulting from group persecution is not grounds for asylum. Foreign nationals seeking asylum must demonstrate a well-founded fear. last habitual residence, on account of race, religion, nationality, membership in a particular social group, or political opinion; (B) There is a reasonable possibility of suffering such persecution if he or she were to return to that country; and (C) He or she is unable or unwilling to return. to the country where he/she is currently living. He/she may not return to, if: (A) He/She is unable/unwilling to return; or (B), he/She may not be able to return because of persecution if she/he is in a different country. you have any fear or concern about being returned to your home country or being removed from the United States? Would you be harmed if you were returned to Your home country? Do you have any questions or is there anything else you would like to ask? If so, please contact us at tips@dailymail.co.uk or call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. Two traditional values of U.S. polity -- the right to due process and freedom from repression and persecution. Some argue that the law should be amended to provide an exception for people who have been forced by terrorists to provide support. The law states that an alien who commits an act that is in violation of the law can be jailed for up to 10 years. The U.N. Security Council has voted to extend the current ban for an additional five years, until a resolution is reached by the end of 2015. he "knows, or reasonably should know, affords material support" to a terrorist organization is inadmissible. It makes no exception for instances where the alien has been coerced into providing support, and whether it should do so is an issue. Over the past decade, the U.S. has admitted or adjusted more than 1,000 suspected or actual members of al Qaeda, the Islamic State and other terrorist groups. The U.N. Security Council has passed a resolution condemning the actions of al-Qaeda and other terror groups. approvals by country of origin. In 1968, the United States became party to the 1967 United Nations Protocol Relating to the Status of Refugees (hereafter referred to as the U.N. Refugee Protocol), agreeing to the principle of nonrefoulement. The report rounds out with a discussion of selected legislative policy issues. The U.S. became a member of the United Nations Refugee Protocol in 1968. The United States agreed to abide by the principle that refugees should not be returned to their home countries. Nonrefoulement means that an alien will not be returned to a country where his life or freedom would be threatened. It is embodied in several provisions of U.S. immigration law. The U.N. Refugee Protocol does not require that a signatory accept refugees, but it does ensure that signatory is not forced to accept them. The United States is not a party to the Refugee Protocol and does not have to accept refugees. The Protocol was signed by more than 100 countries, including the United States. nations afford certain rights and protections to aliens who meet the definition of refugee. At the time the United States signed the U.N. Refugee Protocol, Congress and the Administration thought that there was no need to amend the INA, assuming that the provisions to withhold deportation would be adequate. In fact, there was a need for an amendment to the InA, and it was made in the late 1990s. The INA was amended in the early 2000s, and the Obama administration signed off on it. 1974, the former Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS) issued its first asylum regulations. The Refugee Act of 1980 codified the U.N. Refugee Protocols definition of a refugee in the INA and included provisions for asylum in INA 208. The law defined asylees as aliens in the United States or at the time of their asylum application. In the 1990s, the law was updated to include the term "asylee" in the definition of an asylum seeker. a desire for the U.S. to reaffirm its welcome to those who have fled persecution as well as its commitment to humanitarian efforts. They have argued that some of the statutory revisions in 1996 and 2005 created unnecessary barriers for genuine asylees and that these provisions can be reformed. The United States has a long history of providing asylum to people fleeing persecution. It has also been a source of tension between the United States and other countries in the Middle East and North Africa over the past few years. danger to the community; the alien has been firmly resettled in another country; or there are reasonable grounds for regarding the alien as a danger to national security. The INA, moreover, has specific grounds for exclusion of all aliens that include criminal and terrorist grounds. This report opens with an overview of the INA's policies on aliens. The report ends with an analysis of the policy on aliens in the U.S. and their rights to stay in the country. It concludes with an assessment of the rights and responsibilities of each alien to remain in the United States. stem from mixed or multiple motives. The courts have ruled that the persecution may have more than one motive, and so long as one motive is one of the statutorily enumerated grounds, the requirements have been satisfied. A 1997 Board of Immigration Appeals (BIA) decision concluded "an applicant for asylum to reopen is filed with the court" The immigration judge's ultimate decision regarding both the applicant's/alien's removal and asylum application is appealable to the BIA. The applicant/alien is not detained due to the decision of the immigration judge. come ashore in Biscayne Bay, FL, on October 29, 2002, and had been released on bond by an immigration judge. The BIA had upheld his release, but the Attorney General vacated the BIA decision. All foreign nationals seeking asylum are subject to multiple background checks in the terrorist, immigration, and terrorist, and immigration, immigration and terrorist background checks. For confidential support call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. For support on suicide matters call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch or click here. if the applicant lost at the Board of Immigration Appeals and petitioned for review in the U.S. Court of Appeals. From FY2003 to FY2005, the Fourth Circuit did not remand a single case from the PRC (i.e., the court never decided in favor of the applicant) While the Ninth Circuit never remanded a case, it never decided against the applicant in any of its cases. The Fourth Circuit never decided to remand any case, while the Ninth did not decide in any case. that handled almost 90% of the cases from October 1994 through April 2007. GAO identified nine factors that affected these outcomes: (1) filed affirmatively (originally with DHS at his/her own initiative) or defensively (with DOJ, if in removal proceedings); (2) applicant's nationality; (3) time period of the asylum decision; (4) representation; (5) applied within 1 year of entry to the United States; (6) claimed dependents on the application; (7) had ever been detained (defensive cases only) GAO found "significant variation existed" in asylum decisions. GAO performed multivariate statistical analyses on asylum cases from 19 immigration courts. The data for the asylee producing countries in the high-volume immigration courts from which these conclusions are drawn. The U.S. Government Accountability Office (GAO) analyzed the disparity in asylum cases as well and found that 'significant variation' existed. The GAO found 'significant variations existed' in the asylum decisions as well as the data for asylees from high- volume immigration courts in the countries. half denied less—was 65% . There were, however, eight judges who denied asylum to nine out of ten of the applicants who came before them. In the New York immigration court, for example, one judge denied only 6% in one case. TRAC's latest study of the FY2008-FY2010 period found that judge-to-judge disparities in asylum decisions have moderated since their earlier studies, but it concluded that the disparities remained substantial. The latest study was conducted by the Center for Immigration Studies. Researchers at Syracuse University's TRAC have been conducting analyses of the immigration courts for several years. They were among the earliest to identify wide variations in asylum outcomes that were dependent on the immigration judge. The typical judge-by-judge denial rate in the San Francisco immigration court was from 32% to 92%. The disparities were also evident when immigration court decisions were analyzed by the asylum seeker's country of origin. For example, affirmative applicants in San Francisco were still 12 times more likely than those in Atlanta to be granted asylum. Research studies of the approval rates of cases filed by asylum seekers consistently reveal disparities by USCIS regional asylum offices and EOIR immigration courts. Fredric N. Tulsky of the San Jose Mercury News was a finalist for the Pulitzer Prize for investigative reporting in 2001 "for his illuminating reporting on the immigration issue" For more information, visit the U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS) website. For more info on the EO IR immigration courts, visit their website. reporting on the arbitrary and inconsistent administration of the federal system that grants political asylum. In 2006, researchers at Syracuse University's Transactional Records Access Clearinghouse (TRAC) found "a surprising lack of consistency" among similarly situated asylum cases considered by EOIR from FY1994 to the early months of FY2005. The Stanford study was published in the June 2006 issue of the journal "American Journal of Political Science" The study was co-authored by the University of California, Los Angeles, and the Stanford University School of Law. end of FY1995, there were 457,670 asylum cases in the backlog, as the INS asylum corps was unable to keep pace. The Illegal Immigrant Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act (IIRIRA, P.L. 104-208 ) of 1996 made substantial changes to the asylum process. It remains difficult to assess the extent to which the IIRIRA revisions to asylum policy affected this decline. The Real ID Act of 2005 ( P.l. 109-13 ) further revised asylum law. Foremost, it established expressed standards of proof for proof for asylum. known as expedited removal), adding time limits on filing claims, and limiting judicial review in certain circumstances. IIRIRA also added a provision enabling refugees or asylees to request asylum on the basis of persecution resulting from resistance to coercive population control policies. Asylum claims with the INS dropped in the wake of the bill's passage. The bill was signed into law on October 1, 2013. It was passed by Congress with a bipartisan vote of 98-0. It is expected to be signed by President Barack Obama on Friday. The Refugee Protection Act of 2011 ( S. 1202 / H.R. 2185 ) would make significant revisions to asylum policy. Senate Committee on the Judiciary Chairman Patrick Leahy and House Judiciary Subcommittee on Immigration Policy and Enforcement Ranking Member Zoe Lofgren introduced the legislation. The bill would require the government to report to Congress each year on the number of refugees it has taken in and how many have been granted asylum. It would also require that the government report each year to Congress on how many refugees it had taken in. companion bills on June 15, 2011. Among the asylum revisions in S. 1202 / H.R. 2185 is a bill that would eliminate the time limits on seeking asylum in cases of changed circumstances. The bill would also proscribe conditions under which an asylum seeker who was a victim of terrorist coercion would not be excluded. It was introduced in the House of Representatives on June 14, 2011 and passed the Senate on June 16, 2011, with a vote of 50-0. is already present, or at a port of entry while seeking admission. This process differs from a potential refugee who begins a separate process wholly outside of the United States. Depending on whether or not the applicant is currently in removal proceedings, two avenues exist to seek asylum. The burden of proof is on the asylum seeker to establish that he or she meets the refugee definition specified in the INA. Asylum applicants in the affirmative process are not subject to the mandatory detention requirements while their applications are being adjudicated. Under current law, a foreign national has one year after the date of arrival to apply affirmatively for asylum. Supporters of current law maintain that the one-year rule prevents abuses of the asylum system. They point out that foreign nationals have the option of seeking asylum defensively during removal proceedings. Others have observed that many asylum seekers who fail to file within one year of the application fail to receive any benefits from the asylum program. The U.S. government has not responded to requests for comment on this article. Homeland Security can exercise discretion in the granting of asylum. Foreign nationals who participated in the persecution of other people are excluded from receiving asylum. For many years, most foreign nationals who sought asylum in the United States were from the Western Hemisphere. From October 1981 through March 1991, for example, Salvadoran and Nicaraguan asylum applicants totaled more than 100,000. The law states other conditions for mandatory denials of asylum claims, including when the alien has been convicted of a serious crime and is a protection. if returned home, they will be persecuted based upon one of five characteristics: race, religion, nationality, membership in a particular social group, or political opinion. Foreign nationals arriving or present in the U.S. may apply for asylum with the United States Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS) in the Department of Homeland Security. If you are a foreign national, you may be eligible for asylum under the Refugee and Immigrant Protection Act of 1980. You must be of sound mind and body to apply, and must not be a member of a particular religion or social group. removal process. The matter is then litigated in immigration court, using formal procedures such as the presentation of evidence and direct and cross examination. Immigration removal proceedings are civil in nature and, thus, do not entail the right to legal counsel that criminal proceedings do. If the alien fails to raise the issue at the beginning of the process, the claim for asylum may be raised only after a successful motion of the studies that documented the disparities had access to the case facts and evidence, the rationale for decisions remains unknown and thus may indeed be justified. Asylum seekers' access to counsel has arisen in recent years. Many maintain that few can adequately represent themselves. Charity and pro bono legal projects cannot afford to serve all asylum seekers, many say. Some offer that providing legal counsel is an option for addressing the disparities in outcome, they say. Many cite the GAO study, which found that many can't afford to represent themselves and need legal counsel to get a fair hearing. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org. asylum seekers were three times as likely to obtain asylum if they had legal representation, to emphasize the need for legal counsel. Some further argue that lack of counsel for a bona fide asylum seeker might result in deportation to a country where the person's life and liberty are threatened. To see the full report, visit CNN.com/soulmatestories. For more information on asylum seekers, visit the U.S. Department of Justice's website or call the National Asylum Service at 1-800-273-8255. conditions). If the asylum officer approves the application and the alien passes the identification and background checks, then the foreign national is granted asylum status. There has been a 79% decrease in affirmative asylum cases filed since the enactment of IIRIRA in 1996, falling from 116,877 in FY1996 to 24,550 29% change over the period. The asylum officer does not technically deny asylum claims; rather, the asylum applications of aliens who are not granted asylum by asylum officers are referred to EOIR immigration judges for formal proceedings. claim for asylum as a defense to his/her removal. EOIR's immigration judges and the BIA, entities in DOJ separate from the USCIS, have exclusive control over such claims and are under the authority of the Attorney General. Generally, the alien raises the issue of asylum during the beginning of the process. The BIA has exclusive control of the asylum claims and is under the authority of the Attorney General. The asylum claim must be made within 30 days of the alien's arrival in the US. to their asylum claim, but rather because of the broader authority in the INA to detain aliens. Defensive asylum claims made during EOIR proceedings started at a lower level in FY1996 (84,293) than affirmative USCIS claims (116,877) Since that time, defensive asylum claims have dropped by 53%, to 39,279 in FY2011. In FY2011, the total number of asylum claims in the U.S. dropped from 84,293 to just over 39,000. misrepresentation are placed in expedited removal. However, if they express a fear of persecution, they receive a "credible fear" hearing with a USCIS asylum officer. If found credible, they are referred to an EOIR immigration judge for a hearing. The INA makes it clear that the Attorney General and Secretary of the Department of Justice are responsible for the actions of the Departments of Homeland Security, Justice and Health and Human Services. The Attorney General is responsible for all actions taken to protect the U.S. USCIS asylum officers also display disparate outcomes among similarly situated asylum cases. Enhanced training and research support should be available for the asylum corps and the immigration judges. Establishing mechanisms to foster communication among asylum offices is offered as an option to improve consistency. A further recommendation is to improve communication between asylum offices and immigration judges to help improve consistency in the asylum system. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. in the United States and not involved in any removal proceedings files an I-589, the asylum application form, with the USCIS. The USCIS schedules a non-adversarial interview with a member of the Asylum Officer Corps. There are eight asylum offices located throughout the country. The asylum officers either grant asylum or grant asylum to those who apply for it. The U.S. asylum system is funded by the federal government and is administered by the Department of Health and Human Services. arrives without proper documentation and is put into expedited removal proceedings. Those deemed to have a credible fear proceed to a defensive asylum hearing with EOIR. Given the ebbs and flows of asylum seekers over time that Figure 1 , Figure 2 , and Figure 3 depict, the representativeness for asylum seekers in the U.S. is not fully understood. The number of people seeking asylum in the United States has declined over the past few years, according to a recent report by the Center for Immigration Studies. religion, nationality, membership in a particular social group, or political opinion; and (B) The applicant establishes his or her own inclusion in, and identification with, such group of persons such that his. or her fear of persecution upon return is reasonable. The intent of the persecutor is subjective and may of a group of. persons similarly situated to the applicant on account of race, religion, nationality. If the applicant establishes himself or herself in such a group, then the fear of. persecution is deemed reasonable. out for persecution if (A) The applicant establishes that there is a pattern or practice in his or her country of nationality or, if stateless, of persecution of a group of persons similarly situated to the applicant on account of race, or (B) There is apattern or practice of persecution in the applicant's country of last habitual residence, or in the country in which the applicant is a citizen or citizen of a stateless country. If the applicant claims that the persecution is based on race, the court can grant the application. demonstrate in mixed motive cases that even though his/her persecutors were motivated for a non-cognizable reason, one of the persecutor's central motives was the asylum seeker's race, religion, nationality, social group, or political opinion. An applicant for asylum begins the process either in the United States, if he or she is seeking asylum in the U.S., or in another country, if they are seeking asylum there. An asylum seeker can also apply for asylum in Canada. argue that given the religious, ethnic, and political violence in various countries around the world, it has become more difficult to differentiate the persecuted from the persecutors. Some express concern that U.S. sympathies for the asylum seekers caught up in the current political uprisings in the Middle East, northern Europe, and Africa are being misconstrued as support for the Syrian refugees in the U.N. Security Council. The United States has a long history of supporting asylum seekers. asylum seekers, including that the applicant's race, religion, nationality, social group, or political opinion was or will be one of the central motives for his or her persecution. The regulations state that the asylum officer or immigration judge shall not require the alien to provide evidence that there is a reasonable possibility he or she would be individually singled. The asylum seeker need not show conclusively why persecution occurred in the past or is likely to occur in the future, [but must] produce evidence from which it is reasonable to believe that the harm was motivated, at least in part, by an actual or imputed protected ground. identity may form the basis of the asylum claim. In the individualized instance, if the asylum seeker demonstrates that there is a reasonable possibility of suffering such persecution as an individual if he or she were to return to that country, then the fear of persecution is deemed reasonable. The group identity instance is the same as the individual instance. The asylum seeker must show that there was a pattern or practice in his or her home country of persecution. If the asylum seekers is unable or unwilling to return because of such fear, the fear is deemed to be reasonable. guided significantly by judicial decisions, including a notable U.S. Supreme Court case. The regulations specify that an asylum seeker has a well-founded fear of persecution if (A) The applicant has aFear of Persecution in his or her country of nationality or, if stateless, in his/her country of or avail himself or herself of the protection of, that country because of such fear. An asylum seeker "does not have aWell-founded Fear ofpersecution if the applicant could avoid persecution by relocating to another part of the applicant's country" The size of the disparities in asylum grant rates creates a perception of unfairness in the asylum process. Despite a substantial increase in caseload, EOIR has not received a commensurate increase in resources. Some are pushing for an increase in funding for immigration judges and law clerks, which they assert would improve the quality of judicial hearings. Others, however, contend that the problems related to disparities in Asylum decisions lie less in the funding shortages and more in thequality of immigration judges. Research has revealed disparities in asylum decisions. Many are calling for greater congressional oversight of the immigration courts. Despite concern over the disparate decisions, there is an argument that greater oversight might politicize the process. Because none of these changes would make the U.S. more vulnerable to unauthorized migrants, criminals, or terrorists, says the author. The author is the author of the book, "The Immigration Court: The Untold Story of the American Asylum System" (Simon & Schuster, $24.99) balance of these competing concerns may be shaken by a crisis in a neighboring nation or by larger world events. The U.S. Congress plays the key role in considering when and whether revision or re-calibration of asylum law and policies is warranted, says John Avlon, a professor of law at the University of California, Los Angeles. He says Congress should consider whether a change in asylum law or policies is in the best interests of the country as a whole, rather than just the asylum seekers. Asylum seekers are often detained with criminal aliens, a practice that many consider inappropriate and unwarranted. Detention is psychologically damaging, some argue, to an already fragile population. Proponents for current law warn that releasing asylum seekers in expedited removal undermines the purpose of the law. They argue that mandatory detention of asylum seekers is an essential tool in maintaining immigration control and homeland security.. Any loosening of these policies, they allege, would divert the CBP and ICE officers from their homeland security duties to track.  Supporters of current law also contend that it sends a clear signal of deterrence to aliens who consider using asylum claims as a mechanism to enter illegally. Some have long been concerned that terrorists would seek asylum in the United States, hoping to remain hidden among wayward asylum seekers. The U.S. is home to some of the world's most dangerous criminals, including Osama bin Laden and the 9/11 hijackers, who are believed to be hiding in the country's southern border. The United States is also home to one of the most dangerous terrorist groups, the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria. law already bars alien terrorists from entering the United States. Some argue that to the extent to which security risks had existed, those risks resulted more from the limits of intelligence data on terrorists in the past rather than the expansiveness of asylum policy. Some further assert that asylees from should be allowed to stay in the U.S. and not be turned away because they are from terror-prone countries. They argue that asylum should be a right, not a right to stay, and should be given to those who deserve it. Critics point to asylum seekers from countries of "special concern" as potential national security risks. Asylum is an adjudication of a person based upon facts, evidence, beliefs, and circumstances that might be clear at some times yet nebulous. If an asylum seeker is a suspected or known terrorist, the immigration policy, asylum issues are less about the number of foreign nationals involved and more about the qualities of the policies and the efficacy of the procedures. The U.S. has hundreds of thousands of pending asylum cases. Africa, and South Asia could inadvertently facilitate the entry of terrorists. Some assert that asylum has become an alternative pathway for immigration rather than humanitarian protection. Others maintain that current law does not offer adequate protections for people fleeing human rights violations or gender-based abuses that occur around the world. The U.S. government is considering a new law that would allow asylum to be granted to people who have been victims of human rights abuses or sexual violence. The new law would also allow the government to grant asylum to those who are victims of sexual violence or sexual harassment. countries of "special concern" may be beneficial to U.S. national security. They may have useful information that assists in the war on terrorism. Opponents of limiting the judicial review of asylum cases contend that it would erode the country's sovereignty. The Supreme Court is expected to rule on the issue in the next few months. For more, go to CNN.com/soulmatestories and follow us on Twitter @SylvieSolsky and @CNNOpinion. An asylum policy forged during the Cold War is adapting to the competing priorities and turbulence of the 21 st century. The policy tensions of asylum often pit the promotion of our humanitarian values against the prevention of fraudulent abuses. The obligations of our moral responsibilities internationally against the commitments of our social priorities domestically. Some have asserted that U.S. asylum policy at other times.provided in extraordinary cases. Some of these issues are highlighted below. The issue is the extent to which an asylum policy is adapting. as a terrorist; provide alternatives to detention of asylum seekers; modify certain elements necessary for the asylum seeker to meet the conditions for the granting of asylum; and, allow aliens interdicted at sea the opportunity to have an asylum interview. One critic has concluded that the "U.S. asylum system has become the hole in the fence for millions of dubious claimants—and a major immigration magnet in itself" Others have asserted that the United States should re-calibrate asylum policy to provide more protections for asylum seekers.