policy reforms by (1) evaluating progress in implementing these policy reforms, (2) identifying problems encountered, and (3) recommending ways to increase the effectiveness of U.S. assistance. While establishing timelines is not a requirement under the amended compact or its subsidiary agreements, we encourage the JEMCO and JEMFAC to consider this idea. We also appreciate the urgency of pursuing policy reform suggests that establishing timelines for such reforms could be a useful method to improve U.N.'s investment and tax income. and tax income, identify problems encountered with policy reform implementation, and recommend ways to improve U.S. assistance for these objectives. We received comments from the Departments of the Interior and HHS, as well as from the FSM and the RMI. A more detailed presentation and response to the comments can this further information, we believe. We believe that sufficient information is available for the committees to begin meeting their requirement to evaluate F SMs and RMI progress in implementing reforms, and identify problems. 2005 JEMFAC meeting, the RMI government provided a brief overview of GDP and employment data, yet the presenting official reported that there was no meaningful discussion of RMI long-term growth issues resulting from the presentation. For example, while the R MI government presented data on migration to the United States, the official said that there were no meaningful discussions about long- term growth issues from that presentation. In the same meeting, a report was made on the U.S.-RMI trade relationship, but the report was not discussed. The RMI estimates that between 500 to 800 new job entrants will need to find employment each year from 1999 to 2009. The RMI’s METO 2000 Statement of Development Strategies and its 2001 Strategic Development Plan entitled “Vision 2018,” are among the documents the JEMFAC may consider when discussing compact grant implementation. To read the rest of this article, click here: http://www.jemfac.org/news/features/features-top-stories/stories/jemFAC-considering-compact-grant-implementation.html. JEMFAC did not discuss the linkage between compact education spending and improving RMI emigrant’s skills to encourage increased remittance income over the long-term. HHS emphasized that an annualized schedule for committee meetings does not provide enough frequency for addressing both grant administration issues and long- term growth issues, according to the agency's comments to the Senate Appropriations Committee. The committee is scheduled to meet again on November 14. The Senate Appropriations committee will hold a hearing on the RMI compact on November 15. the JEMCO and JEMFAC committees have not evaluated the lack of FSM and RMI progress in implementing economic reforms to stimulate investment and improve tax income. Both the F SM and the RMI identified the need for economic reform. Different from the original compact, the legislation implementing the amended compacts specifically directs the JEMco and J EMFAC to address FSM & RMI. The legislation also specifically directs them to address the need to reform the tax system in the country. agreements require JEMCO and JEMFAC to monitor FSM and RMI progress toward budgetary self-reliance and long-term economic advancement. Neither organization has discussed these issues at its annual meeting or defined what actions they will undertake to meet this requirement. As in the original compacts’ fiscal procedures agreements, the JEMco and J EMFAC will monitor F SMi progress toward their long- term development objectives. FSM’s development plans specify the objectives of increased private sector development, strengthened education and training. particularly given the relative lack of communication between JEMCO and JEMFAC members in between meetings. HHS suggested that communication be improved through periodic teleconference and videoconference updates. FSM and RMI officials report that they have implemented a few legislation actions to improve the private sector environment, such as bankruptcy and increased investment in the U.S. The committee's chairman should ensure that they fulfill their requirements in the following three areas: evaluate F SM and R MI progress in implementing policy reforms, encourage increased investment and improve the business environment. Interior, HHS, and the FSM emphasized that the JEMCO and JEMFAC have thus far focused their attention on accountability issues and problems that have arisen within the various sector grants. HHS suggested that, in order to ensure the Jemsco and JemsFAC can address all pertinent short-term and long-term issues, they should focus on the sector grants in question. The JemsCo and JemFAC will work together to address these issues, HHS said. example, to approve the FSM health and education sector grants, JEMCO has required supplementary information on health insurance programs. The JEMco meetings have not included discussion of FSM progress toward its long-term development goals. The FSM’s education grant is spent on textbooks, for example, and a certain amount of the F SMS’S education grant has been used for health insurance. At the same time, the F SM has been spending a large amount of its education grant on textbooks. the issue of FSM progress toward their long-term development goals was not discussed by the JEMCO. We recognize that Interior has contracted with the U.S. Department of Agriculture’s Graduate School to obtain further economic information on the FSM and the RMI. While we agree with the importance of gaining this information, we do not believe it is necessary to discuss the issue at this time. We are happy to provide more information when it is requested by the Department of Interior. meetings, we recognize that the Deputy Assistant Secretary submitted a statement for the record at the opening of the 2005 JEMCO meeting that mentioned the lack of sustainability in the FSM’s economic dependence on government expenditures. However, the deputy assistant secretary did not read his statement to the committee and the committee did not hear it. The committee did hear the statement, but did not consider it part of the record. The FSM is a member of the European Union and the European Council of Ministers. to trust funds—meant to provide an ongoing source of revenue after fiscal year 2023—increase annually by a comparable amount. Under certain conditions, the trust fund revenue available in 2024 may be less than the trust funds consistently earn a higher rate of return. If additional contributions to the funds are provided, the probability rises that the trust Funds could provide a sustainable income source at the level of fiscal year 2024 grants. However, if the trustFunds experience market volatility with years, they may not be able to provide a long-term income source. even the lower level of grant funding in 2024. At an assumed annual 6 percent rate of return, earnings from the FSM’s trust fund would be lower than expiring grant assistance. If that have negative returns, the probability that these funds would yield income sufficient to replace grant assistance declines. Both countries face political and social challenges with regard to improving grant implementation and health and education conditions. U.S. and country officials should work together to improve the situation, the authors say. Total combined compact grant assistance to the two countries is projected at an estimated $3.6 billion over the 20-year assistance period. Public sector expenditures continue to account for almost two-thirds of GDP. As compact grants decline through 2023, government fiscal balances and GDP could self-reliance and economic advancement. The scheduled coming reductions in U.S. grants to both countries create urgency for the implementation economic growth and have clarified the report language. We recognize that the FSM and the RMI were required under the amended compacts. 2003, during negotiations to renew expiring compact provisions, funding levels increased (see fig. 1) to equal an average of the funding provided during the previous 15 years plus inflation. While the RMI also experienced compact delays in 2004, RMI public expenditure increased in both 2004 and 2005, reflecting expected compact funding. Both countries’ 2005 public sector expenditure—about two-thirds of which is the FSM’s—is about two- thirds of what is provided by the compact. For 1987 through 2003, compact financial assistance was estimated, on the basis of Interior data. amended compacts to contribute an initial $30 million to their trust funds. Recent RMI GDP performance may have differed if this funding were used to provide current goods and services rather than for savings. Nonetheless, the RMI’s contribution does not alter the extent of RMI economic dependence on external assistance. We will address amended compact implementation issues and trust- fund issues in two separate reports, which will be published in October and November. The report will be available in English and in French. forthcoming. We have clarified our estimates and figures with regards to funding streams they include and exclude. Section 177 funds are not included in our analysis. Section 211 funds are also not included. The RMI’s concern over delays in setting up its trust fund has also been added to the report. The report has also added language to this report indicating the RMI's concern about delays in the setting up of the trust fund. The full report will be published in full in the coming days. to be about $2.1 billion. Economic development and self-sufficiency were not achieved under the original compact. Total U.S. assistance accounted for more than 50 percent of government revenues throughout the compact period. FSM and RMI GDP estimates reveal that per capita GDP at the close of the compact had not exceeded, in real terms, early 1990s levels in either country (see fig. 2). Although U.s. direct assistance maintained standards of living that were higher than could be achieved without support, we found previously that compact funds spent on economic development were lower. largely ineffective in promoting economic growth. For example, compact funds were used to support general government operations that, among other things, maintained high levels of public sector employment and wages, creating disincentives to private sector growth. Compact funds were also used tosupport business ventures, most of which have failed. Most of the Compact funds have been used for business ventures that have failed, including many that have been in operation for more than a decade. For more information on the Compact Fund, visit compactfund.org. Assuming current population growth estimates from the U.S. Census Bureau, this decrease in grant funding will result in falling per capita grant assistance over the funding period and relative to the original compact. While the level of annual grant assistance to both countries decreases each year, contributions continue to be made to the United States and to the European Union. The level of grant assistance is determined by the amount of money each country contributes to each other. The amount of funding each country receives is based on the number of people living in the country at the time. prepare regular, reliable, and complete data that would allow for a more thorough analysis of social and economic trends, particularly in the future. Trend data on a variety of social indicators, such as teacher qualifications and student drop-outs, could assist in evaluation of the effectiveness of compact education assistance. However, it is important to keep in mind that not all social indicators are equally good or good enough to be used as indicators of social trends. For more information, visit the U.S. Department of Education’s website. connections with the overseas business community may be one way to pursue such opportunities and should be included in meaningful JEMCO discussions. The coming reductions in U.S. grants, paired with current economic realities, also suggests the need for frank assessments of current limited prospects for economic growth in the FSM and what actions need to be pursued to improve those. As we emphasized earlier, the scheduled coming reductions of U.N. grants creates urgency for implementation of policy reforms and for capitalizing on opportunities to leverage compact assistance. the establishment of trust funds for both countries that can provide income after annual compact grants cease. The amended compacts, their subsidiary agreements, and the U.S. implementing legislation also establish numerous reporting and accountability requirements. The legislation’s direction to the JEMCO and JEMFAC to specifically address economic policy reforms to address economic reforms to the United States is also included in the legislation. The agreement also establishes numerous reporting requirements for JEMco and JemFAC. The central government that is represented on JEMCO does not control the majority of compact funds and have been unable to secure agreement from the state governments regarding compact needs. As a result, FSM access to the compact infrastructure grant, for example, has been delayed. The central government does not have authority over budgetary policies. The FSM does not control the majority of compact  funds. The JEMCO does not have authority over budgetary policies. the oversight committees have not defined what actions they will undertake to meet this requirement. At the fiscal year 2004 and 2005 annual JEMCO and JEMFAC meetings, as well as at a March 2006 JEMco meeting, compact management committees focused on approving sector grants and discussing grant administration issues. For more information, visit the JEMCo website or the JemFAC website. For additional information on how to apply for a grant, visit JEMFAAC or JEMMAFAC. compact management committees did not discuss the lack of FSM and RMI progress in tax, land, foreign administration and did not address the status of reforms. Compact grant assistance could be leveraged to improve the policy environment for private sector growth and investment, said the report. The report was published by the European Commission on Wednesday, November 14. It is the first time the commission has published a report on the Compact for Small States and Multinationals (CSM) in more than a decade. with FSM and RMI business environments (see fig. 7). The following are GAO’s comments on the Department of the Interior letter dated May 16, 2006. Regarding our finding that compact management committees have not discussed F SM and R SM progress toward budgetary self-reliance and long-term economic advancement at their annual meetings, GAO says: “We are disappointed that the Compact Management Committee has not discussed these issues.” GAO is also concerned that the compact management committee has not considered F SMs and RSMs’ potential to become self-sufficient in the long term. The FSM’s weak federal structure inhibits compact grant implementation. Because each state has its own constitution economic policy reforms are difficult. Lack of government consensus is also a problem. The U.S., FSM, and RMI annual compact reports for 2004 were reviewed for this report. The FSM and the RMI political and social environment for compact grant Implementation was also reviewed for the 2004 report. It was found that key aspects of the political environments hinder effective compact grant. Implementation of the compact was difficult because each state had its own constitutional reforms. Islands (RMI) as well as the use and oversight of U.S. assistance to those nations. Report examines each country’s political and social environment for compact grant implementation; economic conditions, including overall growth, fiscal balances, and private investment; and status of RMIs. In compliance with the legislation's requirement, this report examines each countries’ political, social, and economic environment for Compact grant implementation. It also looks at each country's status of the RMI, including political, economic, and social conditions. economic advancement, the amended compacts and their subsidiary agreements, along with the countries’ development plans, target grant assistance to six sectors. In addition to providing grant assistance, the amendments provide for with better skills and, therefore, stronger income-earning opportunities abroad. Because the amendments have been in place for only a few years, it is difficult to determine whether the assistance they provide will contribute to the fundamental changes in FSM and RMI economic structures and institutions necessary to achieve budgetary goals. building grant in fiscal year 2004 and less than 1 percent of compact sector grant funding to such a grant in 2005. 7. We discuss remittances in our report as one option that the RMI may consider in pursuing the economic goals under the amended compact and that that the U.S. government may consider using to help meet the goals of the compact. 8. Remittances could be used as a tool to help achieve the goals set out in the compact, the report says. In 1986, the United States, the FSM, and the RMI entered into the original Compact of Free Association. The compact of FSM and RMI citizens had migrated to the U.S. island areas. The United States negotiated separate amended compacts that went into effect on May 1, 2004, and June 25, 2004. The amendedcompacts continue the defense relationship, including a joint defense fund and a joint security fund for the island areas and the rest of the world. for the Compact of Free Association to negotiate amended compact provisions. The amended provisions include assistance provided through grants targeted to priority areas, expanded reporting and consultation requirements, and the ability to withhold funds for noncompliance with compact terms and conditions. The compact also gave citizens of both nations the rights to vote on issues of their choice. The Compact of free association was signed in 1993. It was signed by the United States, Canada and Mexico. It is the largest trade agreement between the U.S. and Canada. estimated $60 million. External grants are the largest income component, providing $54 million in 2005. The structure of RMI revenues remained roughly the same over the past 5 years. In 2005, the RMI’s wage bill comprised 34 percent of total expenditures, compared with the 2000 to 2004 wage bill of 31 percent. In addition to receiving compact grant assistance, the FSM and the R MI receive substantial U.S. program assistance from agencies such as the. Agency for International Development. is small and the growing wage bill is high relative to regional standards. In 2005, FSM taxes provided an estimated $29 million in revenue, or 23 percent of total revenue. The largest income source is external grants, which, at $76 million, accounted for 60 percent of revenues in 2005. In terms of expenditure, the largest FSM expenditure component is public sector wages and salaries at an average of $1.2 billion. The FSM government receives fishing access fees from foreign vessels that fish in its exclusive economic zone. The FSM and the RMI governments have made some improvement in tax administration, but tax revenues have largely stagnated. Tax reform may provide opportunities for increasing annual government revenue in the FSM. However, such increases in assistance are not guaranteed, may vary from year to year, and may not be flexible enough to meet F SMS and RMI budget needs. Revenue potential from further tax reform will also vary by government (national and regional). The FSM is one of the poorest countries in the world. budgets are characterized by a small local revenue base and recent increases in government payroll. As a result, unless other donors provide additional assistance, expenditure reductions will be required as compact grants decline. Although tax revenue in the FSM increased slightly in 2005, the F SM tax base has not increased in recent years. The FSM tax base was $1.2 billion in 2005 and is expected to reach $2.4 billion in 2010. The tax base is expectedto reach $3.5 billion by 2010 and $4.1 billion by 2015. The FSM has agreed on elements of tax reform but has no plan for implementation. The RMI has not agreed on structural change to its tax system. Tax structures in the FSM and the RMI remain complex and unequal and engender business disincentives. The FSM tax system has been criticized for multiple taxation of the same products and weak administrative collection, audit, nor specified an implementation plan. Although the F SMi government has made some efforts to improve tax administration, actions by existing tax authorities in the national government and each state government continue to exhibit duplication and inefficiency. In 2005, the FSM Task Force on Tax Reform developed a tax reform proposal, endorsed by the F SMS President. Such reforms are estimated to require 2 to 3 years for implementation. The FSM government has neither begun to implement the proposal, nor has it proposed a new tax system. The proposal has not been approved by the FSM government. The F SMS government has also not proposed to introduce a new tax system, despite the proposal being endorsed by the FSM President. Business tax schemes in both nations are considered to be inefficient by the IMF, the ADB, and other economic experts owing to a poor incentive structure and weak tax collection. Various expert and country studies have concluded that substantial tax reform could bring revenue growth by tax system is complex and regressive, taxing on a gross rather than net basis. The RMI stated in its comments to this report that their private sector representatives’ most common complaint on the RMI tax system was the need for better and tighter. The RMI Office of Tax and Revenue reported that it has focused on improving tax administration and has raised some penalties and tax levels. Legislation for income tax reform has failed and needed changes in government import tax exemptions have not yet been addressed. Inadequate access to land have added language regarding RMI consultations with the private sector and their desire for improved tax enforcement. The effectiveness of U.S. and ADB technical assistance to the RMI is outside the scope of this report. The RMI allocated no compact funding to a public sector capacity. these points. We have added language to the report to include the volatility in tax income from the fisheries and tourism sectors and the fact that RMI offices related to reform efforts, such as land registration offices, have been funded with compact grants. In addition to the persons named above, we have added the names of a number of others who we believe have played a key role in the development of the country. We are happy to make clear that the report does not include any names of individuals who have played key roles in the country's development. and enforcement capacity (3) taxation on a gross rather than net basis, and (4) duplicative national and state tax administrations. Since 1994, the IMF and other experts have recommended, among other tax reforms, implementing a value-added tax (VAT), a simplified net profit tax, and a single modernized independent tax authority. The IMF has also called for the creation of a single national tax authority for the whole of the country, as well as a single unified national tax system. Some governments have also tried to improve foreign investment processes or created small business development centers. The ADB has also recently assisted both countries in holding several “Dialogue for Action” retreats that enable public and private sector representatives to develop a common vision for the future of both countries. The retreats are intended to create continued and strengthened demand for reform, the ADB said in a statement. It added that the retreats were also intended to build confidence in both countries’ ability to reform. vision for sustainable development through economic reform. The retreats can be helpful for improving the public sector/private sector dialogue on economic challenges facing each society. ADB experts also emphasized that, in developing country commitment to reform, the FSM and the F SMs must work together to achieve the goals of the retreats. For more information, visit the ADB's retreats page on economic reform in FSMs and FSM's retreat page on social media sites such as Facebook and Twitter. the fact that most of the enterprises have drained public finances through poor financial performance, requiring subsidization or entailing debt. In conjunction with the ADB, the FSM prepared a comprehensive program for public sector enterprise reform in 1999. The FSM identified two enterprises per state and identified two enterprises per province. The program identified two firms per state, and two each per provider and service provider. It identified two companies per state for each of the state’s four providers. above; the FSM Tax Reform Task Force 2005 Report to the President; the RMI 2005 Budget Statement; ADB progress reports on the R MI Private Sector Development Project and the F SMS Private sector Development Loan; and RMI Final Reports from the 2005 Dialogue For Action Retreats sponsored by the ADB. We are also looking at the 2005 FSM tax reform task force report to the president; and the 2005 budget statement. We also look at the 2004 and 2005 ADB reports on FSM private sector development projects. national government for privatization. Such privatizations later became a condition for receiving ADB loan assistance. Plans were made for the creation of a Public Sector Enterprise Unit. This unit has not yet been fully staffed, and theADB loan requirement was reduced to one enterprise per state and national government, and one enterprise for each of the states and national governing parties. It is not yet known if the unit will be fully staffed or if it will be able to privatize any of the state or national governments. RMI commitment to, and recommendations for policy reforms in the areas of tax, land, foreign investment, and the public sector have existed since the 1990s. GAO’s comment on the Department of Health and Human Services letter dated May 23, 2006. HHS agreed with our recommendation and requested a review of the tax code in the U.S. and abroad. The review was conducted by the Government Accountability Office (GAO) and resulted in a report published in May 2006. GAO: Economic reforms in each of the areas discussed are needed to improve the RMI’s prospects for long-term. GAO: We believe that tax, land, foreign investment, and public sector reforms are needed. The Republic of the Marshall Islands letter dated June 1, 2006, was sent to President George W. Bush. The letter was sent in response to a request for information from the U.S. State Department. The request was for information on the Republic of The Marshall Islands’ tax and land policies. a condition that has not yet been met. The RMI has yet to prepare a comprehensive policy for public enterprise reform. Although they plan to privatize some public enterprises, they intend to expand others. To date, JEMCO and RMI economies to support its implementation of the recommendation. HHS also agreed with our recommendation and requested that it be expanded to include JEMco and JEMFAC requirements for establishing timelines for. public sector reforms are particularly vital, the report says. The report says the RMI advocated for JEMfAC support in policy reform implementation. market-oriented enterprises that could be more efficiently operated by the private sector. (3) improve government provision of critical support services. One example of a reform success highlighted by economic experts is the RMI’s restructuring of its Social Security Administration to reduce operating costs and improve service provision. However, despite this, despite the reforms, there are still problems in the country, including a shortage of doctors and nurses, as well as a lack of funding for health care services. The RMI has been criticised for not having enough doctors, nurses and midwives. RMI will need to overcome the “aid curse’—or the distorted incentives for effective public sector management through, e.g., public sector downsizing. Despite several years of commitment to, and recommendations for, policy reforms to stimulate investment in the FSM and the RMI, little progress has been made so far. The RMI is still dependent on large external aid flows, which it needs to overcome to improve its economy. The FSM is also in need of reform, and has made progress on this front. Investment, or public sector reform; factors that contributed to this lack of progress; or the interdependence of policy reform implementation with effective compact grant implementation. Opportunities exist to create linkages between grant administration and economic reforms. For example, sector grants in public sector capacity building could be used to address public sector investment and reform. For more information, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/28/world/europe/gives/index.html. of policy reforms if they require fiscal resources and for capitalizing on opportunities to leverage compact assistance to improve social and economic conditions through reform. To maximize FSM and RMI potential for budgetary self-reliance and long-term economic advancement, we recommend that the Secretary of the Interior direct the Deputy Secretary of Interior to work with the FSMs and the RMIs on fiscal reforms. We also recommend that they work with each other to improve the quality of life in their respective countries. mortgage laws, yet progress on key policy reforms required to stimulate investment has been slow. An enabling business environment in either country requires substantial reforms in taxes, land ownership, and foreign investment. According to FSM and RMI private sector representatives and a number of economic and country experts, policy reforms are needed in the areas of tax, land, foreign investment, and the public sector to improve business incentives and create an enabling environment for domestic business. The U.S., IMF, ADB, and country reports say key reforms have not yet been implemented. Despite amendments to foreign investment regulations, the regulations in both countries continue to be confusing and relatively burdensome. Several years of public sector reform efforts have also failed to reduce government involvement in private sector activities. Thus far, thus far, so far, Thusfar, so much of the world's investment in the U.S. has been based on the belief that the United States is an asset, rather than a liability, according to the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund. The World Bank has also been criticized for its lack of focus on the Middle East. to effect reforms that are often politically, culturally, and technically difficult to implement. Tax, land, foreign investment regulation and public-sector reforms, when implemented, will improve the business environment, in turn facilitating the private sector expansion that may help the countries advance their compact goals. However, even with the needed reforms, the need for reforms will be difficult to achieve, according to the World Economic Forum (WEF) The WEF urges countries to work together to achieve the goals of the compact. capacity constraints that have been identified as an obstacle to reform implementation. Compact management committees could establish linkages between, for example, grants to tourism promotion agencies and progress in reforming foreign investment regulations to improve the private sector environment. For more information on the compact management committee, visit compactmanagement.org.uk. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. information by each government on wide-ranging issues, including JEMCO and JEMFAC decisions, departmental budgets, economic reforms, legislative decisions, fiscal positions of public enterprises, and economic statistics. Private sector representatives in several FSM states reported that the public radio station serves as the government’s primary means of disseminating information but also serves as a source of information for the general public. FSM is a member of the European Union (EU) and the European Commission (EC) mechanisms to improve communication and information between annual meetings. periodic teleconferences and videoconferences should be pursued. The FSM viewed the report as a potentially constructive contribution to ongoing efforts to pursue budgetary self-reliance and economic advancement. Yet, the FSM disagreed with our conclusion that FSM development prospects remain limited. In addition to the report, FSM officials also discussed ways to improve the quality of the country’s annual meetings, including the use of video conferencing. HHS’s suggestion to improve communication and information between annual meetings through periodic teleconferences and videoconferences and have added language to the report to reflect this suggestion. We have also added language in the report recognizing HHS’S efforts to improve vaccine coverage. The following is GAO's comment on the Federated States. GAO: We are pleased with the progress made by the federal government in improving vaccine coverage in the Federations of the U.S. and Canada. We are also pleased that HHS has taken steps to improve the quality of vaccine coverage for children. is often nonoperational or censored. The U.S. State Department’s 2004 Report on Human Rights Practices in the FSM. In the RMI, a State official and an official from the R MI Council of NGO's reported that the government had been criticized. Most strongly by environmental NGO's and a leading environmental group. The government has been criticized most strongly by the environmental NGO’’ and a lead environmental group in the country. The FSM has been accused of human rights abuses and human rights violations. FSM and the RMI according to economic experts and U.S. and country officials. In interviews, private sector representatives also expressed concern with poor government provision of power, water, and infrastructure services. Government failures to pay bills owed to the private sector for services rendered are also a complaint confirmed by several government officials, according to experts and officials. FSM and RMI are under investigation by the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank for alleged human rights violations in the country. FMS and R MI are also being investigated by the United States and the European Union. within their national development plans, and both countries have implemented or are pursuing some legislative actions. For example, FSM officials report that newly enacted legislation, although varying by state and national government, include laws for bankruptcy, mortgages, long-term leases, and secured transactions to allow movable assets to serve as collateral. The U.S. and FSM are working together to create a single market for small and medium-sized businesses in the United States. The goal is to create an economy that can compete on a level playing field with the global economy. be found in appendixes IV through VII. We also received technical comments from Interior, State, Treasury, HHS and the RMI. We incorporated technical comments into our report, as appropriate. The Department of Interior concurred with our recommendation and stated that it is pursuing additional information on the FSM and the Interior. All comments are discussed in the report and are reprinted in appendixe IV throughVII. Further, we considered all comments and made changes to the report,as appropriate, to reflect the new information. obtained data on FSM and RMI public sector enterprises from the FSM’s 2005 Statistical Tables. In addition, we held extensive interviews with officials from the U.S. Department of the Interior (Washington, D.C.; Honolulu; the F SM) and the RMI. In each location, we also met with numerous representatives from private sector businesses, banks, and community organizations. To ensure accuracy in this report, we used the most recent available public enterprise audit reports. the RMI) and the Department of State (Washington, D.C.; the FSM; and the RMI). We also interviewed officials from the U.S. Departments of Treasury and Health and Human Services. and experts from the ADB (Manila, the Philippines), the IMF and the World Bank. The RMI is a nonprofit news agency based in Honolulu, Hawaii. It is funded by donations from individuals and foundations, including the Rotman Foundation, the MacArthur Foundation, and the Ford Foundation. the report and related findings were corroborated with other reliable data. For other social and economic data included in the report, we determined they are sufficiently reliable for our purposes. Nonetheless, our interviews with U.S., country, and international officials revealed important constraints to the FSM’s and the RMI’'s capacity to produce future statistics. We requested written comments on a draft of this report from the Departments of the. FSM and Interior. We conducted our review from August 2005 through March 2006 in accordance with generally accepted U.s. government auditing standards. much of this data are just now being collected in a systematic way. Also, given that both nations have weak domestic capacity to produce statistics, they rely heavily on external consultants for this purpose. In the FSM, the contract for statistical assistance from external consultants has now expired. As such, the data collection process is now being carried out in a much more systematic way in both countries. The FSM's statistical assistance contract with external consultants is now expired, and the data collecting process will be carried out more systematically in the future. provide a technical review of our findings and information on the reliability of data used to support those findings. In conjunction with our own assessment, we determined that trade data, remittance data, and data on the private sector profits contained weaknesses. Exact data for these elements were not presented in the report. The report was published by the World Economic Forum (WEF) in London on Wednesday, November 14. The full report is available on the WEF website here: http://www.wef.org.uk/news/features/2013/10/14/world-economic-forum-report-2013-10-14.html. In the FSM, experts report that foreign investment regulations vary between states. Some FSM states require a certain percentage of local ownership in foreign investment. Pohnpei state, for instance, requires 30 percent local ownership for foreign investment and prohibits foreign activity. According to an Interior official, a shipping company with service from competition is not allowed to invest in the F SM. The FSM and the RMI have amended various aspects of their foreign investment laws to streamline the process, according to experts and private sector representatives. the U.S. West Coast to Guam has for years been seeking permission to provide shipping service to the FSM and the RMI but has consistently been refused entry by those nations. The climate for foreign investment is also reportedly affected by private and public interests’ protecting local businesses from foreign. It is also reported that local businesses are being protected from foreign investment by the local government. It has also been reported that the U.N. Security Council has been asked to intervene in the situation. poor information), lack of progress in economic reforms (both legal and financial), and poor government performance in providing services. World Bank national business environment surveys suggest that a high cost of doing business is a common problem for small island states. However, the survey results show that FSM and RMI are doing better than the rest of the world in terms of economic growth and job creation, according to the World Bank. The survey results also show that the majority of small island nations are making progress in their economic reforms. business environments are particularly costly in several areas. For example, of 155 countries surveyed, the FSM and the RMI are among the worst 10 to 20 countries in terms of the cost of enforcing contracts and the degree of investor protection. In interviews with private sector representatives, problems were noted, according to the report. The report was published by the European Council on Foreign Relations (ECFR) and the World Economic Forum (WEF) on November 14 and 15, 2013. For more information, visit www.ecfr.org. in retail, according to its Foreign Investment Board. Interviews with country officials, private sector representatives, and an ADB expert also suggest that local businesses sometimes lobby the foreign investment boards against approval of certain applications. Extensive FSM and RMI government involvement in commercial activities continues to hinder private sector development, the ADB said in a report. The report was based on interviews with FSM officials and private sector officials. It was also based on a report by the Foreign investment Board, which said that the FSM government was involved incommercial activities. the share of employment accounted for by these enterprises, as well as estimated direct public enterprise subsidies, has declined in recent years. IMF and ADB officials expressed concern that the FSM and the RMI governments are not committed to reducing their participation in commercial activities. Despite this, they said, they are not committing to reducing participation incommercial activities, despite the decline in employment and subsidies. The FSM, RMI, and FPRI governments are also committed to reduced participation in economic activities, they added. We reviewed the U.S., FSM, and RMI annual compact reports for 2004 and 2005. To describe the status of economic policy reforms in the FSM and the RMI, we reviewed the documents mentioned our report. We asked experts at the ADB, the IMF, the World Bank, the Boston Institute of Development Economics, and the University of Hawaii’s East-West Center with knowledge of the F SMs and R MI economies. We also asked former FSM members of the Economic Management and Policy Advisory Team. of Micronesia letter dated May 30, 2006. Regarding the FSM’s disagreement with our conclusion that its development prospects remain limited. The FSM confirms the accuracy of our description of its recent economic performance, its constraints to growth, and its need for economic policy reforms. We maintain that given these current realities, we maintain that the country's economic development prospects are limited and need to be improved. The U.S. State Department maintains that the situation in the Micronesian Islands is currently under control. In the FSM, 2004 and 2005 GDP fell owing to compact delays and a lower level of assistance relative to 2003. For the RMI, the IMF estimates that GDP expanded moderately owing to increased public sector expenditure (see funded by external grants) Since 2000, the estimated private sector share of GDP has fallen in both countries and the IMF says private sector activity has remained relatively stagnant and exists largely to provide services to the public sector. The IMF estimates private sector participation in the economy has fallen since 2000. widely from year to year; however, each has had recent budget deficits. RMI government finance statistics reported by the IMF suggest that the RMI fiscal balance deteriorated after 2003 as well, with an estimated deficit equivalent to 2 percent of GDP in 2005. Economic experts emphasize that, structurally, both country’s are not in danger of defaulting on their debt repayments, but they may be in need of financial assistance from the U.S. and other countries in the region. RMI Pacific Island Economic Reports (PIER) prepared in conjunction with the ADB; and expert reviews of FSM and RMI fiscal structures and tax systems. PIER includes data on gross domestic product (GDP), employment, government finances, migration, and private sector development from the IMF; and economic indicators such as employment, migration and government finances. We obtained data on F SMS and R SME economic indicators from IMF. We also obtained data from ADB and FSM. owing to high public sector wages and government enterprises that directly compete with private industry. Early efforts to reduce public sector employment have generally failed in both the FSM and the RMI. Public sector wages also remain about twice the level of private sector wages. FSM’s and RMI”s public sector reform efforts since the 1990s have been based on restructuring government operations to (1) reduce the size and cost of the civil service, and (2) reduce government involvement in government endorsement of public sector reforms. data indicate that the RMI did succeed in reducing public sector employment from about 3,760 jobs in 1997 to 3,530 jobs in 2001. Public sector employment has risen to about 4,320 jobs in 2005. 10. We have modified language in the report to clarify each of the points made in this article. We are happy to clarify these points for the benefit of the public in any way we may be able to do so in the future. We apologise for any confusion caused by the use of this language. only Pohnpei state in the FSM has had modest growth in private sector employment, principally in wholesale and retail operations. Institutions such as the IMF and the ADB characterize the private sector in both the F SM and the RMI as isolated from international opportunities, given each economy’s high dependence on each other. The FSM and RMI are the only two countries in the region to have a private sector of more than 10 per cent of its GDP. The RMI is the only country in the world to have more than 5 per cent private sector jobs. Prospects for long-term economic growth in the FSM remain limited. We do not assert, however, that economic development cannot be attained. If key policy reforms were implemented, the business environment would likely improve and facilitate private sector expansion that may help FSM advance its compact goals. Further, we agree that FSM should focus on the development of its infrastructure and other key infrastructure assets to meet its development goals. We also agree that the country should focus its efforts on the education and health sectors. of private sector wages, contributing to the large government wage bill and effectively drawing the most skilled employees out of the private sector into public sector jobs. The FSM and the RMI face notable challenges to achieving budgetary self- reliance and long-term economic advancement, given their current health and education hardships. The countries continue to conduct a wide array of commercial enterprises that compete with private enterprises, although for investment or grants to private sector development offices and progress in reforming public enterprises that competition with private industry. had failed basic English literacy tests. In the past 2 years, the FSM and the RMI economies have performed modestly and have been characterized by continued dependence on external assistance. Private sector employment has largely stagnated. The FSM has had limited prospects for achieving development goals of budgetary self-reliance and long-term economic advancement. The RMI has had a limited prospects of achieving development Goals of Budgetary self- Reliance and Long-term Economic Advancement. The country has had little economic growth in the past two years. offices have been established. Such offices have lacked a systematic method for registering parcels, instead waiting for landowners to voluntarily initiate the process. Landowners have shown little interest in land registration, partly owing to the cultural issues associated with traditional land ownership structures. The functionality of land registration offices in both the FSM and the RMI has also been limited by a lack of registered surveyors and trained surveyors. Only 5 parcels have been, or are currently being, registered by the land registration office. lease transactions, such that banks are unable to effectively conduct mortgage secured lending. Foreigners are prohibited from owning land in both nations and are also unable to secure a valid lease when land values or ownership is uncertain. Land reform issues have been discussed in the FSM and the RMI for several years, and land registration has been discussed as part of the plan to reform the two nations' economies. Using land for foreign investment is even more difficult, according to experts in the two countries. The inability to use it to secure financing for development is problematic, they say. In attempts to modernize complex, traditional land tenure systems, land registration offices have been established in both countries. In both countries, inadequate access to land and uncertainties over land ownership and land values continue to create costly disputes, disincentives for investment, and problems regarding the use of land as an asset. Land tenure systems in each nation are complex and based on traditional and customary rights, often in the form of land rights. In the FSM and the RMI, land rights are based on customary and traditional rights. for multiple individuals, such that most parcels do not have a registered, legal title. Land values are also uncertain owing to the lack of a developed land market or price data on land. Our interviews with FSM and RMI officials and private sector representatives suggested that costly boundary disputes are common. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. FSM and the RMI, many citizens have taken advantage of U.S. migration rights established by the original compact and extended by the amended compacts. As of 2005, RMI data suggest that about 15,000 Marshallese have immigrated to the United States. FSM data suggests that almost twice as many Micronesians live in the FSM than in the U.N. territory of Micronesia, which has a population of about 1.5 million people. The FSM has a total population of 1.7 million people, while the R MI has about 2.2 million people in its territory. of funds. RMI and FSM emigrant populations have limited income-earning opportunities abroad. This is largely because of inadequate education and vocational skills. The 2003 U.S. census of FSM and RMI migrants in Hawaii, Guam, and the Commonwealth of the Northern Marianas Islands (CNMI) confirms this characterization, says the authors of the study. The study was published in the Journal of Migration and Intercultural Studies, a journal of the Association for the Study of Migrants. live and work in the United States as ‘nonimmigrants’ and to stay for long periods of time. The compact exempted FSM and RMI citizens from meeting U.S. passport, visa, and labor certification requirements. In 2001, we reported that during the compact, a significant number of FSM citizens were living and working in the U. S. as “nonimmigrant’s” and to “stay for long period of time” Meet this objective, the ready access provided under the compact for Marshallese to live and work in the U.S. must be preserved. Economic experts have emphasized that the RMI’s free education system needs to equip Marshallese for success in RMI and abroad. These documents also emphasize that the education system must be equipped Marshallese with the skills they need to succeed in the R MI and abroad, as well as the skills needed to succeed elsewhere in the world. The compact is expected to be signed by the end of 2014. provided a framework for the United States to work toward achieving its three main goals. The first goal was met; the FSM and the RMI are independent nations. The second goal has also been achieved with the compact’s establishment of several key defense rights for all three countries. The defense relationship continues with, among other things, U.S. access to military equipment and training. The third goal was to assist the F SM and RMI in their efforts to advance economic development and self-sufficiency. After more than 40 years under U.S. administration, the FSM and the RMI became sovereign nations in 1978 and 1979, respectively. For the last 20 years, the United States’ relationship with the two countries has been defined by the U.N. Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands. The FSM was once part of the United Nations Trust Territory, but became its own sovereign nation in 1978. The RMI was once a United Nations trust territory, but it became a sovereign country in 1979. The FSM and the RMI are members of the Forum Fisheries Agency and the South Pacific Applied Geoscience Commission, respectively. Despite the two countries’ stable democratic systems, interviews with U.S., FSM, and RMI showed a lack of trust in the U.N.’s decision-making process. The FSM was the only country in the region to have a president who was not a member of the United Nations Security Council. The RMI was the first country to have an elected president, and the first to hold a presidential election. by nongovernmental organizations such as Transparency International and the University of Hawaii. Information from the Pacific Islands Forum regarding FSM and RMI participation in regional agreements and organizations. We identified key areas of concern in delivery of health and education services by reviewing F SMs and R MI development plans, and by looking at their participation in the Pacific Forum for Pacific Islands (PFPI) nations. We also looked at their involvement in the PFPI nations' development plans and regional organizations, such as the PFFI. and the Pacific Islands Development Program at the East-West Center (Honolulu) We traveled to all four states in the FSM and to the RMI (Majuro) We met with the governor’s and legislature’’ offices in each of the F SM states. We had detailed discussions with the President of the R MI and the governor of the state in which we were visiting. We also met with each state's governor and legislature and the president of the State in Majuro. of the Republic of the Marshall Islands. We will make copies available to other interested parties upon request. If you or your staff have any questions regarding this report, please contact me at (202) 512-3149 or gootnickd@gao.gov. Contact points for our Offices of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of this report. GAO staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix VIII. The amended compacts implementing legislation requires that we report on political, social, and economic conditions in the Federated States of Micronesia. providing copies of this report to your offices, we will send copies of the report to other appropriate committees. We will also provide copies to the Secretaries of the Interior, State, and Health and Human Services, as well as the President of the Federated States of Micronesia and the President. The report will also be sent to the Secretary of State, State Department, Interior, and State Department Secretaries, and to the President and Vice Presidents of the United States of America. further permission from GAO. However, because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material, permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S., call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline on 1-800-273-8255 or visit www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org. facilities on Kwajalein Atoll in the RMI through 2016. To promote FSM and RMI budgetary self-reliance and to strengthen immigration provisions. To provide direct financial assistance, in the form of grants, to the F SM and the R MI for fiscal years 2004 to 2023 (see table 1) and to provide U.S. military access to the atoll through 2086 and 2002 and new agreement for 2002 to 2086. to promote FSSM and RMSM budgetarySelf-Reliance. to strengthenimmigration provisions. told us that political conditions, including a weak federation in the FSM; disputes over public institutions’ and government use of land on Kwajalein Atoll in the RMI; and both governments’ lack of communication with their constituencies have hindered compact implementation and service delivery. At the same time, despite relatively high. relatively high taxes, the country has a relatively high rate of unemployment, according to the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. The U.N. estimates that the number of unemployed people in the country is at an all time high. for more than 2 years owing to national and state disagreements over infrastructure priorities. Similarly, the RMI government and landowners on Kwajalein Atoll have been disputing government use of leased land and management of public entities on the atoll. Such tensions have negatively affected the construction of schools funded by the government. The RMI Government and landowners have been fighting for more than two years over the use of lease land andmanagement of public entity on the Atoll. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. In our examination of a wide range of projects funded under the compact, we found that many projects experienced problems due to poor planning and management, inadequate construction and maintenance, or misuse of funds. In 2000, we recommended, among other things, that the Secretary of State direct the Special Negotiator to negotiate with the European Union on behalf of the U.S. We found that this was not the case and recommended that the Specialnegotiator be replaced with a more senior member of the European Commission. compact grants and the management of the Kwajalein utility company. Lack of government communication. A lack of communication and dissemination of information on compact grants. A failure to communicate about compact grants to private sector representatives, NGOs, and external economic experts. A shortage of communication between the government and the private sector. a failure to share information about Compact Grants with the public. a lack of information about compact Grants to the public, and a refusal to share this information with thepublic, including the public and private sector, about compact grant funds. women’s NGO (Women United Together Marshall Islands)—for not holding public hearings or disseminating sufficient information regarding a proposed dry dock. According to the World Bank, Transparency International, and other development experts, lack of information about government activities creates uncertainty for public, private, and community leaders. This uncertainty can inhibit grant performance, according to development experts. For more information, go to www.wuocity.org/Marshall-Island-Dry-Dock-Proposed-Docks. This report is a work of the U.S. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States. It may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without the permission of the Government. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. In the United Kingdom, call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255 or visit www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org. sanitation—a service necessary for improved health outcomes. Only 28 percent of FSM citizens have access to improved sanitation, compared with an average of 57 percent in all lower-middle income countries. In the RMI, the 1999 census suggests that 85 percent of the population has access to safe immunization rates are significantly higher. Private sector representatives in the FSM and RMI characterized the business environment in their nation as obstructive and costly. They attribute this characterization to elements of the political environment. both countries in the bottom third for a key health indicator, immunizations. The FSM and the RMI are established democracies with free and peaceful elections. According to State and Interior, each democracy is stable despite the challenges of having hierarchical traditional structures; islands with scattered populations; and a citizenry of around 100,000 people. The RMI and the FSM are both in the top third for the number of people who have access to immunizations, according to the U.S. State Department. order to illustrate some of these commonalities as well as areas where the FSM and the RMI characteristically differ. For example: The RMI has a relatively small population, but both the R MI and the F SM have a relatively large population density at 331 and 181 people per square kilometer, respectively. The FSM has a smaller population density, but a larger population density than the RMP. The RMP has a much smaller population than the FPM, but it has a higher population density. water, although the RMI 2003 statistical yearbook reports that recent tests in urban and rural areas indicate that a significant number of potable water sources are contaminated. 30 percent or more in some cases—are contaminated and deemed unsafe for human consumption. (For further information on water issues, visit the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services' website. For more information on drinking water in the United States, go to www.cdh.gov/water. For additional information on how to protect your water supply, visit http://www.dhs.gov/. health and education expenditures, both countries face development challenges in these sectors. The Millennium Challenge Corporation ranks the FSM and the RMI in the top 20 percent for health expenditures relative to other lower-middle-income countries. The FSM ranks the top 35 percent (in the 81st and 67th percentile) for expenditures on health and primary education. The RMI ranks thetop 1 percent for both indicators, Relative to other countries that qualify for the Millennium Challenge Corp's aid program, MCC says. MCC ranks both countries in the bottom third for immunizations. According to the World Bank’s World Development Indicators (WDI), the FSM also performs relatively poorly in provision of safe water or safe food. The FSM is in the 33rd percentile and the RMI in the 13th percentile. For more information, visit the MCC website or go to http://www.mcc.org/news/features/health-and-well-being-in-the-fSM. 5th and 6th highest, respectively, with per capita aid greater than $900 in 2003. Much of this aid is directed toward health and education. MCC provides economic assistance to developing countries, with eligibility determined partially by evaluating a country’s performance—relative to other countries within its income group—on select indicators associated with the country's income group. In 2003, the U.S. provided more than $1.2 billion in aid to countries in the Middle East and Africa. The FSM and the RMI have the highest levels of aid per capita. The RMI also has a very high teenage fertility rate. Except for Palau, both nations have a Compact of Free Association with the United States. The FSM’s child mortality rates are significantly lower than the R MI’S. and its GDP and aid per per capita is higher. The U.S. Census International Database, and the World Bank”s World Development Indicators, were used to compile the data. Although FSM and RMI health and education expenditures are relatively high, certain conditions in both countries’ health and Education sectors are poor. Future health outlays will also be affected by health challenges facing F SMs and R MI youths. FSM, R MI health officials indicated concern about growing youth problems such as suicides, sexually transmitted diseases, and teen pregnancy. The World Bank ranked socioeconomic conditions in the F SM and the RMI, particularly in relation to regional averages, refer to app. II. cause of adult morbidity in 2000 and 2001. The care and treatment of such diseases often involves expensive referrals abroad, lowered funding. Although the RMI has made progress in reducing overseas referrals since 2001, the rising prevalence of lifestyle diseases poses challenges for delivery of health services in both nations. The RMI is committed to reducing the number of overseas referrals to the UK by 20 per cent by 2015. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. With regard to teacher qualifications, the FSM Department of Education reports that 90 percent of teachers need to upgrade skills to meet new certification standards. In the RMI, a 2004 Ministry of Education assessment reported that more than 50percent of teachers needed to upgrade their skills to be certified as a child development teacher. A bachelor’s degree with courses in child development is required to become a teacher in FSM. A teacher must have at least a Bachelor of Arts degree to be a teacher. Reports prepared in conjunction with the Asian Development Bank (ADB), the World Bank, or the United Nations Development Program. We obtained FSM and RMI socioeconomic statistics on noncommunicable diseases, access to safe water and sanitation, teacher certifications and literacy skills, and Pacific Island Literacy Level student test scores from the FSM, RMI, and the Pacific Islands. We also obtained statistics on teacher certification, literacy skills and teacher test scores for FSM/RMI and Pacific Islands students. FSM Department of Health says 80 percent of 35 to 64 year-olds are overweight. Number of cases involving diabetes, hypertension, heart disease, and cancer increased in the late nineties. RMI Ministry of Health reports that diabetes figured as the leading cause of death for 35- to 64-year-olds in the RMI.and poor teaching skills. In the FSM, the number of people with diabetes and heart disease increased by 20 percent in the 1990s. The number of deaths from heart disease and diabetes increased by 15 percent in that period. standards over the long term will likely require private sector expansion or increased remittances. The FSM and the RMI private sectors face significant constraints to growth, however. FSM will also likely need to identify and capitalize on niche market opportunities as well as to create conditions to maximize remittance income, particularly through improving the education and health of its citizens. Establishing policy reforms will not, in of itself, produce economic development, as some experts suggest, by equipping emigrants with marketable skills. officials including those from the Chuuk State legislature, the RMI Ministry of Resources and Development, and the FSM Department of Economic Affairs (see app. III for further information) FSM and RMI emigrants could provide increasing monetary support to their home nations in the future, although evidence suggests that they are less likely to do so now than in the past. FSM emigrants are more likely to live in the U.S. than those from other countries in the region. showing that almost half of the emigrants live below the poverty line (see table 3). Nonetheless, economic experts emphasize that with an upgrading of skills, the FSM’s and the RMI’'s free access and strong historical links to the U.S. market create potential for the two nations to achieve an expansion. The FSM and RMI both have a population of more than 100,000 people. The RMI has a total population of over 100,500 people. The 2002 household survey suggests that RMI citizens send more money out to RMI emigrants than they receive in remittances. Strong historical links to the U.S. market provide the RMI with relatively good opportunities to expand remittance income, particularly if migrants had upgraded skills. Improved skill provision should benefit both R MI emigrants as well as domestic economic prospects. We have clarified our reference that 2003 data on 2003 data for the R MI is not considered reliable as it does not cover the whole of the region. World Bank data show that remittances, or the personal funds that the foreign born voluntarily send to their home countries, have become an important source of financial flows to developing countries. For the.currently limited in their income-earning opportunities abroad. Remittances can exceed official development assistance and foreign direct investment, according to the World Bank. For more information, go to: http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/features/stories/remittances-have-become-an-important source-of-financial-flow-to-developing-countries. international visitor arrivals are for other Pacific island nations. Such data are not available for Kiribati and Nauru. The World Bank has estimated that, in 2002, Kiribiti had 5,000 international visitors. However, KirIBati also has a per capita GDP that is less than one-third of the RMI’s. RMI employment is 9.9 per cent of the GDP of the Pacific island nation of Kiribatis. The RMI unemployment rate is 8.7 per cent. Fishing and tourism are key potential growth industries. In the FSM, the fisheries and tourism sectors together provide about 6 percent of employment. In both nations, fishing enterprises have shown poor performance, and the number of tourists has been small relative to other Pacific islands. The FSM and the RMI fishing and tourism industries could grow within specialized niche markets such as high-end tourism or dock services. Such opportunities remain limited in scale, however, and will require factors such as a sound design and capacity for tax enforcement. ADB experts; and visitor arrivals have remained flat over the past 10 years despite growth in Pacific island tourism. In the RMI, the fisheries and tourism sectors together provide less than 5 percent of employment. Commercial fishing within the R MI’s exclusive economic zone has been declining, and although visitor arrivals are up, the number of tourists has remained flat for the last 10 years, according to the ADB. The RMI is home to more than 100,000 people, with the majority of whom live on the island of RMI. the ADB and other economic experts suggest that growth in these industries in both countries may be limited by current structural barriers. geographic isolation and small fragmented markets. high airfares and poor flight connections. lack of adequate hotel and airport infrastructure. low freight capacities and poor. infrastructure. poor freight capacity and poor infrastructure. Poor infrastructure and low freight capacity. poor infrastructure and poor freight capacities. poor. hotel infrastructure. Low freight capacities, poor. airport infrastructure, low freightcapacity and poor hotel and airports infrastructure. Interisland shipping; inadequate transshipment facilities in some areas; a growing threat of overfishing; limited pool of skilled labor; and high production costs in terms of labor, fuel, and other supplies. In addition to facing structural barriers to growth, private industry in general faces a costly business environment in both the U.S. and the rest of the world. The U.K. is one of the fastest-growing economies in the world, according to the World Economic Forum. small island economies suggest common challenges for socioeconomic development. Developing nations in the Pacific have exhibited relatively poor economic performance. Such nations have also exhibited the need for improvements in delivery in the region. The Pacific region is home to a number of small island nations. These include Fiji, Tonga, Vanuatu, Samoa, Kiribati, Samoa and Tonga. For more information on the Pacific region, visit: http://www.nations.org/pacific/small-island-economy. of health and education services, a challenge heightened when youths account for a large share of the population. Environmental challenges from climate change and increasing population density are also common threats to ensuring sustainable livelihoods in the Pacific. Table 5 provides estimated socioeconomic data on various Pacific island nations in the Asia-Pacific region, including Fiji, Kiribati, Samoa, Tonga, Vanuatu, Samoa and Tonga. The data is based on an estimated population size of 1,000 or more people. distinct cultures, languages, and histories. Each country also has a vocal civil society evidenced by religious organizations and nongovernmental organizations (NGO) that have been active on some political issues. Internationally, both countries also participate in various regional organizations, many of which address trade, energy, and environmental challenges faced by islanders. Both countries are members of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) and the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). They are also members of several regional organizations.