The current Title II data requirements may be of limited use in helping to improve the quality of TPPs. Education has not taken steps to evaluate whether any of them should be eliminated. We believe that interim monitoring will be important, particularly if the regulations are not finalized prior to the next Title II reporting cycle. We are sending this information to the states to incorporate information about these assessments into their programs. The agency also agreed with our other three recommendations, stating that the agency would examine statutorily- defined Title II requirements. to us that, while they may use some data elements, others are not useful. Education permits states to report some Title II data in different ways to account for their differing approaches to TPPs. States and colleges and universities will continue submitting data that are time-consuming to gather and may not be contributing to state oversight, TPP improvement, or the public’s knowledge about TPPs, the report says. The report says states and colleges will continue to submit data that is not useful to them or to other stakeholders. 8 of the 14 TPPs told us that very little of the Title II data was useful to them for assessing the performance of their own programs. Officials from several TPPs also expressed confusion about the overarching goal of theTitle II reporting requirements. The TPP lead to inconsistent data and make it difficult to make comparisons across TPPs or obtain a national picture regarding TPP completers. These varying ways of calculating and reporting key Title IIData have persisted despite Education’s efforts to clarify guidance and improve reporting tools. Officials from 6 of the 14 TPPs with whom we spoke reported spending at least a month completing the annual.oversight activities. Most of the TPPs and K-12 districts and several other stakeholders questioned the usefulness of some Title II data to themselves and other stakeholders. The report was released to coincide with the start of the 2014-15 school year in the U.S. and the beginning of the 2015-16 academic year in Australia and New Zealand. It is the first of its kind to be released to the public. Officials say they have not seen any indication that other stakeholders, such as state and federal regulators or prospective teaching candidates, were using the Title II data to inform decisions. Education described some benefits to the existing data, including that it provides a robust picture of the demographics of teaching candidates. None of the officials in the six K-12 school districts we spoke with said they use the title II officials. The agency can require states to submit new Title IIData elements, but they do not have authority to remove existing data elements that are required by statute. less than half the states told us that they use the goals and assurances section of the Title II reports. Further, 48 states said either that they are not using some sections of the reports. The report includes information about institutions’ progress toward their goals for addressing teacher shortage areas. It also provides information about the progress institutions have made in addressing the problem. It is intended to be a tool to help states identify and address teacher shortage issues in their schools. It can also be used to help schools make progress on other areas of need. This time to the task, 5 states said the Title II data were “very useful,” 19 said they were ‘moderately useful’ and 25 states said it was “neither useful nor not useful.” States most frequently reported using the Title 2 data to inform the approval II reports or that they already collect most of the useful Title IIdata elements through other mechanisms. These results suggest that, even among states that find theTitle II data generally useful, states are frequently required to complete some reporting requirements that they report are not contributing to their quality. for policymakers and practitioners, and, if warranted, develop a proposal for Congress to eliminate or revise any statutorily-required elements that are not providing meaningful information. 3. Identify potential limitations in the Title II data and consistently disclose these limitations in reports, websites, and data tables the agency uses to use the data for policy-making and policy-related purposes. For more information, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/30/science/science-and-society/topics/title-2-data. data-driven management, which state that measures should be selected based on their relevance and ability to inform decisions by key stakeholders. State oversight entities are important potential users of the Title II data. They reported mixed views about whether the data were useful for their oversight, even though the data was useful for them. The data was collected from the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services and the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases. It was also used by the Department of Justice. it takes a relatively large number of staff hours to prepare the data. In our survey, states most frequently reported spending between 21-100 staff hours completing the annual Title II state- level reports. After devoting time to preparing the data, the state can then use the data to make decisions about how to use it in the future. The data can then be used to make changes to the state’s data collection and analysis procedures. The results can be seen in the next section of the report. accurate responses, and data collection and processing errors. We included steps in developing the survey, and collecting, editing, and analyzing survey data, to minimize such nonsampling error. In developing the Web survey, we pretested draft versions of the instrument with state officials in four states and consulted with officials from the Department of Education to check the clarity of the questions. On the basis of the pretests, we made revisions to the survey. Further, using a web- based survey also helped remove error in our data collection effort. reporting requirements and requested that this person consult with other officials in order to provide an official state response. We reviewed state responses and followed up by e-mail or telephone with select states for additional clarification and obtained corrected information for our final survey analysis. We also published survey responses and published a final analysis of the results of the survey. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. to enter their responses directly into an electronic instrument, this method automatically created a record for each state official in a data file and eliminated the errors associated with a manual data entry process. In addition, the program used to analyze the survey data was independently verified to ensure the results were accurate. The results were published in a book called The State of the State: A Handbook for State Officials. The book was published by the University of Wisconsin-Madison and is available on Amazon.com for $19.99. to July 2015 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable base for our conclusions. We are confident that we have obtained sufficient evidence to support our audit conclusions and that our audit findings are consistent with the standards of good government. We have no plans to change our audit methodology. We will continue to provide updates on our progress. copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees, the Secretary of the Department of Education, and other interested parties. In addition, the report is available at no charge on the GAO website at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staff have any questions about this report, please contact me at  at the GAO at (844) 615-3800. The full report can be found at: http:// www.gaO.gov/education. GAO staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix III. Contact points for our Offices of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of this report. The objectives of this study were to answer the following questions:. What is the impact of the proposed changes to the tax code? What are the implications of these changes? What will the impact be on the economy and the economy's ability to respond to the changes in tax policy? What do you think? Share your thoughts in the comments. and Daren Sweeney (analysts-in-charge); Lucas Alvarez, and Hedieh Fusfield made key contributions. Also contributing to this report were: Deborah Bland, Kate Blumenreich, Joanna Chan, Sarah Cornetto, Holly Dye, Kirsten Lauber, Ashley McCall, Sheila McCoy, Jennifer McDonald, John Mingus, Mimi Nguyen, and Tom James. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. a process for identifying low-performing TPPs, as required under the Higher Education Act. States are required to conduct an assessment to identify low- performing TPPs in the state and provide Education with an annual list of such programs. Education is responsible for collecting and disseminating Higher education Act Title II data and administering grant programs that provide an opportunity to contribute to TPPs’ continuous improvement. However, unless Education ensures that all states assess whether TPPs are low-performing as required by the higher education act, low-performance TPPs may not be identified. colleges or universities that offer TPPs submit the required data using reporting templates developed by Education. In this report we use the term “college or university” to mean “institution of higher education” as defined by the act. This table presents a summary of the templates developed. by Education (see table 2). The report is based on the 2013 edition of the American Journal of Education’s “Report on the State of Education in the U.S.”. Education contracts with a private research organization (Westat) to provide states and colleges and universities with technical assistance in collecting the required information. The agency also compiles and disseminates the information to the public in annual reports, webpages and data spreadsheets.colleges and universities offering TPPs provide the required info. For more information, go to Education.gov or call the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) at 1-800-273-8255 or go to http://www.nist.org/. the Higher Education Act Title II reporting requirements and (2) awarding and administering several competitive grants. Title II requires states and institutions of higher education (referred to in this report as “colleges and universities”) that conduct TPPs to annually report specific information. States and most the Department of Education for reporting purposes. For the statutory reporting requirements, see 20 U.S.C. §§ 1022d-1022f. The report is not intended to provide an exhaustive list of the Higher Education act reporting requirements for states or institutions. including the Office of Postsecondary Education, which administers Higher Education Act Title II reporting requirements. However, the agency does not have mechanisms in place to promote regular, sustained information-sharing among these offices, officials said. Education officials said the agency and its Title II contractor occasionally occasionally occasionally share information with each other. The Education Department is the nation's largest provider of grants to colleges and universities, with a budget of more than $1.2 billion for the 2014-15 school year. be identified, potentially resulting in new teachers being ill- prepared to teach K-12 students. Further, if Higher Education Act Title II reports include data elements that are not useful, states and colleges and universities that offer TPPs will expend unnecessary effort on collecting information that is unlikely to improve TPP, the authors say. The authors argue that states should not spend time and money on collecting data that is not useful or will not be used to improve the quality of TPPs in the long-term. K-12 school district (see below for more information about these case study interviews) We analyzed data collected to fulfill Higher Education Act Title II reporting requirements and Education’s related reports and technical assistance guidance. We conducted our work from March 2014 to March 2015. For more information on these case studies, see the case studies below. For the full report, visit the U.S. Department of Education website. For a full report on the data collected for this study, visit our interactive map. and the District of Columbia, achieving a 100 percent response rate. The survey used self-administered, electronic questionnaires that were posted on the Internet. We sent the survey to the official responsible for submitting each state’s Higher Education Act Title II. We administered the survey from November 2014 to March 2015, with the goal of reaching a majority of students in each state by the end of the year. We are happy to share the results of the survey with the public at this time. because they are independent from the primary state educational agency. Gaps in the agency’s efforts to disseminate information result from information- sharing being left to individual offices’ initiative rather than an agency-wide mechanism. Education officials also noted that sharing information with states can be challenging for some competitive grant programs, because program funds are not always available for Education to use for national activities, including providing technical assistance to non-grantees. However, this also underscores the importance of sharing information. because the data are not based on meaningful indicators of program effectiveness. Education officials told us they have not conducted a study to inform Congress or the agency about whether any current reporting requirements are not useful. By not providing the explanatory material, the data may be potentially misleading and make it difficult for users to compare across states or programs, Education’s approach is not consistent, the agency said. Officials also noted that the agency may consider adding such material in the future. The agency said it has an incomplete picture of the usefulness of various data fields. To assess the extent that Education’s data reporting supports and encourages high quality TPPs, we reviewed select state Title II reports. We interviewed Education officials and contractors responsible for collecting, analyzing and reporting such data. We also compared Education's reports, spreadsheets and web pages, including their definitions and descriptions of the appropriate use of reported reported data. The report was conducted by telephone and based on interviews with Education officials, contractors and other experts. It was published in the spring of 2014. data—against federal standards for internal controls and leading practices for data-driven program management.reliability of fields in Education’s Title II data spreadsheets. regarding the number of TPPs that states reported identifying as low-performing or at risk of being low- performing by: (1) reviewing agency documents, (2) interviewing relevant agency officials, and (3) interviewing the states’ top education officials for their views on the matter. The U.S. Department of Education has released a new report on the state of its schools. Education does not verify whether states use the process they describe in their Title II reports to identify low-performing programs or ensure that all states have such a process. Without a monitoring Title II report that was reported in October, 2014, Education may miss instances of noncompliance. If states are failing to comply with the federal requirement to conduct an assessment to identifyLow-performing Programs, they may not be reporting the information to Education. If they do not report the information, Education might not be able to verify the accuracy of this information in state reports. The Department of Education published a notice of proposed rulemaking on December 2, 2014. The proposed rule was available for Title II reporting requirements through February 2, 2015. As part of states (including state Independent Standards Boards), we provided a draft of the report to the department for review and comment. Education agreed with our four recommendations and proposed to modify the proposed rule. The department’s comments are reproduced in Appendix II of this report. For more on this story, visit CNN.com/education. Internal Control in the Federal Government, an agency’s management should provide reasonable assurance of compliance with applicable laws and regulations. In addition, under the Higher Education Act, Education has responsibility for ensuring the quality of the data submitted in Title II reports. Education officials told us that state officials are responsible for ensuring that the data is accurate and that it is submitted in a timely manner. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. a variety of methods to examine all three objectives. We reviewed relevant federal laws and regulations; federal internal controls standards; and leading practices for program management. We also conducted a web-based survey of the state entities responsible for overseeing the program. We looked at documents from Education, select states, and research organizations. And we also reviewed documents from the Department of Education and select states for more information on the program's goals, objectives, and procedures. For more information about the program, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/29/education/focus-on-programs/index. communication and coordination among K-12 districts and TPPs. Apart from offering information, most states reported that they modified their oversight activities to verify that TPPs were aligning with new K- 12 standards. 34 states reported deliberately modifying their TPP approval process to assess such alignment. Fewer states reported modifying their process for identifying low- performing TPPs to assess alignment with newK-12 standards. In our survey, no states reported identifying a TPP as low-performing during the 2013-2014 academic year because of limited information. coursework or coursework requirements to ensure that teaching candidates had sufficient subject-matter knowledge to teach to the new K-12 standards. Using classroom training to provide real world experience: Officials from all 14 TPPs we spoke with highlighted the importance of providing candidates with ample opportunities to apply new standards in real classrooms. For example, officials from one TPP and a school district said candidates may not always be paired with a veteran teacher who knows the standards as well as the teaching candidate. Officials said most on collaboration and officials from another said that it was important for candidates to make connections between different subject areas. As states shifted to new K-12 standards, most reported taking steps to help TPPs prepare prospective teachers to teach lessons aligned with the new standards. 37 states reported in our survey that they provided might choose to adapt to the new Standards. Three states reported inviting TPPs to K- 12 conferences that discussed the new Standard. Officials in one of those states said that this approach allowed them to foster a positive dialogue. In another state, officials posted a recording of the session and additional resources about the standards online. may be unaware of information about good practices for TPP quality that could assist them in their oversight. TPPs serve a vital role in preparing new teachers and K-12 students for future success. The recent shift to college- and career- ready K- 12 standards further highlights the importance of such programs. In total, we interviewed 14 TPPs and officials from the state oversight agency, two to three TPPs, and at least oneK-12 school district. The study was based on state documents and interviews with officials. made a number of modifications to its program recently surveyed faculty and administrators to evaluate its efforts and identify any ongoing needs. Many states are beginning to adopt assessments to measure K-12 students’ performance on the new standards. Officials from five TPPs said it will be important for students to be able to measure their progress on a variety of subjects. For more information on the TPPs, go to: http://www.tps.org/schools/pupils-and-teachers. custom tests to align with new K-12 standards by adding more questions that measure teaching candidates’ ability to teach non-fiction texts. All 14 TPPs we interviewed made changes that ranged from large-scale reforms to more modest modifications. The tests are designed to measure students' ability to help hypothetical K- 12 students understand complex subject-matter information. The test is designed to test students’ abilities to help hypotheticals understand complex subjects. The questions are intended to help students understand non- fiction texts and how to teach hypothetical students to read them. Two national companies developed tests related to math and English language arts. The testing companies reported modifying those tests to align with new K-12 standards. States also used modified licensing tests designed to assess individual teaching candidates’ preparation for the new K/12 standards, according to officials from the companies that develop the tests. Among the 8 states that do not use such tests, 4 reported in our survey that they modified their licensure requirements in other ways in response to thenew K- 12 standards.  states are now using or developing academic standards that are explicitly tied to college and career preparation. In 2010, the Council of Chief State School Officers and the National Governors Association spearheaded the effort to help states develop common college- and career-ready standards for grades K-12 in math and English. As of the beginning of the 2014-15 academic year, 44 states and the District of Columbia have adopted the Common Core State Standards. The Common Core Standards will be rolled out to all states by the end of the year. In September 2014, Education selected 24 partnerships, including TPPs and partnering school districts, to receive a combined $35 million in Teacher Quality Partnership grant funds. The Transition to Teaching grant program also provides grants to recruit and retain teachers in high-need schools. Aside from these two grant programs, applicants for grants from the Race to the Top Fund, Investing in Innovation Fund, and Supporting Effective Educator Development program may also choose to develop proposals related to teacher preparation for science, technology, engineering, and math teachers. programs and activities, among other topics. For example, Investing in Innovation grants funded 25 projects related to TPPs out of the 143 projects the program has funded during fiscal years 2010-2014. All states reported that they review traditional TPPs before approving them to prepare new teachers and may renew approval if they need to be reviewed again in the future. For more information on the Investing In Innovation grants program, visit InvestingInInnovation.org. for more information about the program. that mentor teachers can be important role models for teaching candidates. Officials from 9 of the 14 TPPs described assessing candidates’ preparedness for the new K-12 standards when reviewing their performance or soliciting district feedback. That they can illustrate how to apply new teaching techniques and adapt to changing expectations. That mentors can help teach students how to adapt to new expectations. that they can help students learn how to cope with change. that mentors can assist students in learning how to deal with new technology. Officials from half of the TPPs we interviewed acknowledged the difficulty of training new teachers in real classroom settings. In particular, officials from 6 TPPs said that school districts are training veteran teachers in the new standards at varying rates. About teaching candidates’ performance.about teaching candidates' performance. About teacher training in the U.S. in the next few years. About training teachers to teach in the United States in the future. about teaching in the 2030s and 2050s. about training teachers for the new U.N. standards. in each state, as well as the number of individuals who complete a program. Only about one third of states reported receiving information from Education distribute the results. This could include more detailed information about data elements where definitions vary substantially from state to state. Develop and implement mechanisms to systematically share information about teacher preparation program quality with relevant Department of Education program offices and the Teacher Quality Partnership Grant Program, the authors say. The proposed rule is expected to go into effect in December 2014. The authors say it could lead to significant improvements in teacher preparation programs. in an e-publication supplemental to this report, “Teacher Preparation Programs: Survey of State Entities that Oversee Teacher Preparation programs” (GAO-15-599SP, July, 2015). The quality of survey data can be affected by nonsampling error. Nonsampled error includes variations in how respondents interpret questions, respondents’ willingness to offer, and survey respondents' willingness to answer questions. The report is available in English and Spanish. willing to provide such information. Officials in one of our case study states noted that it was especially challenging to obtain data on teachers who work in another state or in private schools. As shown in figure 2 above, states more commonly reported using information about the effectiveness of graduates. The study was based on data from the U.S. Department of Education and the National Center for Education Statistics (NCES) It was also based on information from the National Association of State Education Administrators (NASEA) and the American Council on Education. Officials from 11 of 14 TPPs described changing the English department. Officials were sometimes reluctant to modify their courses accordingly. The changes generally fell within three categories: increasing subject-matter knowledge, modifying coursework related to teaching techniques, and using classroom training to provide real world experience. Examples of such changes, and related challenges, are listed below. For example, officials from one TPP said that candidates should learn teaching techniques that focus on the English language. For another, officials said that students should learn how to deal with a variety of social situations. or all subject-matter knowledge should be obtained prior to starting the TPP. The TPPs that did make changes sometimes coordinated with other departments, such as math and English. For example, one TPP began offering courses that were co-taught by subject-area and TPP faculty. Officials from a few TPPs stated that all subjects should be studied before starting a TPP. For more information on the TPPs, go to: http://www.tpponline.org/pupils. some academic departments were more receptive to modifying their curriculum than others, due to department priorities or other factors. For example, the new K-12 standards for English require the participation of teachers from multiple academic disciplines, but TPP faculty members who were not in those disciplines are not required to teach the new standards. The new standards are expected to be implemented by the end of the year in the U.S. and in the United Kingdom by the beginning of the 2015-16 school year. For more information, go to www.tps.org. Teacher quality workgroup has been inactive since the office in which it was housed reorganized in the fall of 2014. Education officials noted that such workgroups, particularly when operating out of high-level offices in the agency, have been very helpful for systematically sharing information across offices. This represents a missed opportunity to use relevant information, officials said. The agency has not subsequently resumed these information-sharing efforts, they said. It is unclear when the agency will resume the teacher quality workgroups. Education has made few efforts to share expertise about TPP quality among its offices. Without such mechanisms to promote information-sharing, programs and offices within Education may not have access to clear and useful information. Education’s efforts to support or enhance TPP quality reach a limited number of states. About half of all states said they would like additional support from Education on this topic. This suggests that Education is also missing opportunities to support states that could use relevant research and assistance from Education to enhanceTPP quality. to bolster the effectiveness of several Education programs, such as Race to the Top and Supporting Effective Educator Development. Federal internal controls standards emphasize that effective information-sharing efforts are those that flow broadly across an agency in a form that is helpful for students. TPP improvements, among other priorities, will be funded by the Education Department's budget for 2013-14, 2014-15, 2015-16, 2016-17 and 2017-18. For more information on the TPP, go to: http://www.education.gov/. Education administers several competitive grant programs that provide funding for TPP reforms. Of these competitive grants, the largest that is focused specifically on improving TPP quality is the Teacher Quality Partnership Grant program. We recommend that the Secretary of Education take the following four actions: 1. Develop a risk-based, cost-effective strategy to verify that states are implementing a process for assessing whether any teacher preparation programs are low-performing. 2. Study the usefulness of Title II data elements that could enhance TPP quality. data when comparing TPP performance or recruiting new teachers. Education officials said they have to continue to collect the current data, due to statutory requirements. According to Education create custom Title II data runs for program offices, but there is no systematic effort to share data within the agency. Officials in one office that administers competitive grants related to TPP quality described discussing grant results internally, but did not systematically discuss TPP quality. The Education Department says it has no plans to change the way the data is collected. More than half of states reported that they also review certain information about graduate effectiveness when assessing TPPs for approval or renewal. States that incorporate this information reported doing so in several ways. Most commonly, 30 states reported using surveys that assessed principals’ and other district personnel’s satisfaction with recent TPPs. We conducted case studies of five states: Arizona, California, Maine, Tennessee and Virginia. We selected this non-generalizable sample of states because they represent a variety of sizes (i.e., numbers of TPPs operating in the state) using graduate effectiveness information or expand their current use of such information. For example, officials in Tennessee told us that they currently review some effectiveness data in their approval process and plan to use it more in the future. The study was based on interviews with officials in several states and a survey of graduates and their parents. For more information on the study, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/29/education/top-10-student-recreational-skill-boosters-recruiting/story. on a periodic basis. To assess program design, begin reviewing recent TPP graduates’ teacher evaluation results in the future. Officials in Arizona told us they plan to begin reviewing data on graduate effectiveness as part of their approval process. They told us that the impetus behind adding this new data is to better align the state’s TPP with other states’ programs. More than half also use one or more types of information to assess graduates' effectiveness as teachers, the report found. The report also found that more than half of states use a variety of data to assess graduate effectiveness. traditional TPP graduates. Fifteen states reported assessing traditional TPPs based on other outcomes data such as the test scores (i.e., K-12 student assessment results) of public school students taught by recent TPP graduates (see fig. 2). One of our case study states uses such data to help TPPs. For example, one of our cases study states used such data for TPPs to help students with reading comprehension and vocabulary. For more information, visit www.schoolsresearch.org. identify potential problem areas in the training they provide to teaching candidates. Officials in this state told us they used these data to help a TPP identify shortcomings in its social science program. As of the 2014-2015 academic year, at least 10 additional states reported that they planned to begin process or inform state agency discussions about proposed TPP requirements. Very few states reported using the data to inform state funding decisions or to provide information to school districts that are hiring teachers from TPPs. Nearly every state reported some cases where certain requirements may not be helpful. State oversight offices or TPPs would need to obtain key information about TPP graduates from local districts. Some officials noted districts may be difficult to identify or not be be available to collect this type of data. For example, performance evaluations or employer survey responses may not be available in the local area. For more information, go to: http://www.tps.to/tps-academy-recruitment-and-training/tpp-academics-recruiting-and training. report lists that state as one of the nation's top teacher-producing states, while state officials told us that in fact the state faces teacher shortages. Program Completers: Education’s Title II guidance defines a TPP completer as someone who has met all the educational or training requirements in a state-approved course. State officials say they are working to fill the teacher shortages, but it is a long way from being a full-time job. The state has a shortage of more than 1,000 teachers. of study for initial teacher certification or licensure. However, this definition allows for states or TPPs to choose whether they require their students to take and pass all state licensing tests before they can complete all of those educational or training requirements. As a result, different definitions of completer can be used by different states and TPPs. For more information, go to: http://www.teachers.org/teacher-academics/teachers-academic-expertise-and-training. 49 states and the District of Columbia reported in our survey that they assess whether TPPs seeking approval are meeting standards for program quality. Most states reported using data about the proportion of candidates who obtain a teaching license (48 states) as part of their TPPs. In addition, we conducted interviews with a wide range of stakeholders including Education officials, contractors, companies responsible for administering state licensing tests and the national accreditation organization for teacher preparation programs. For example, these standards may appropriate teaching techniques for particular learning needs or achieve a particular threshold traditionalTPPs. TPPs, struggling TPPs may not receive the technical assistance they need. This may impact the quality of training provided to new teachers and result in their being inadequately prepared to educate children. Potential teaching candidates or hiring school districts will have difficulty identifying strugglingTPPs. The majority of states may not be able to provide the technical help they need to be successful in the classroom. This could impact the education of children in the state. It could also impact the ability of schools to recruit and retain qualified teachers. suburban, and rural locations. We selected K-12 districts that worked with these TPPs, by providing student teaching experiences, hiring graduates, or both. Interviews with state, TPP, and K- 12 district officials from Arizona, California and Maine were conducted in person and interviews with officials from Tennessee and Virginia were primarily conducted on the phone. We also interviewed officials from New Jersey, New York, Pennsylvania, and Washington, D.C. for this article. We are happy to share the results of our interviews with you. that such decisions are within the states’ authority, but have repercussions for the consistency of national Title II data. One large online TPP defines most of its teaching candidates as enrolled in the state where the TPP is headquartered, even though they live throughout the country and most likely plan to teach in other states. TPPs define when a teaching candidate is formally enrolled and these definitions may range from when a Teaching Candidate first takes a course to after they have completed other requirements such as a certain sequence of courses. TPPs prepare teaching candidates to employ effective teaching techniques and gain real-world experience in the classroom. TPPs take many forms and may be operated by a variety of organizations (see table 1). For example, the structure of TPPs can vary widely, from “traditional” TPPs such as four-year undergraduate programs with four years of experience to “non-traditional’ TPPs” such as post-baccalaureate programs with less than a year of experience. We ensured that this non-generalizable sample of TPPs varied in a number of ways including whether they were located within or separate from colleges and universities. We also ensured that the TPPs represented a range of sizes and urban, rural and suburban areas. We ensured that they offered in-person or online coursework and were alternative route or traditional. We wanted to make sure that the sample was representative of the country as a whole, rather than just one particular region or city or town. state independent standards board. States have discretion in how they conduct oversight of TPP quality. States can define the types of TPPs that may operate in the state, such as undergraduate or post-baccalaureate TPPs, or alternative route TPPs. Review and approving individual TPPs to operate and periodically assessing them. State can periodically assess and review and approve individualTPPs to operation and periodically assess them. state can periodically assessing and reviewing individual TPP’s to operating and periodically approving them to operate. TPPs with written resources, information sessions, or both. All of our five case study states offered TPPs information about the standards using various approaches. For example, one state convened a half-day workshop that included info about the new standards, related changes to TPP oversight processes, and examples of how TPPs can be used in the U.S. The U.N. set up a panel of experts to look at the standards and their potential to be changed. The panel's goal is to develop a set of standards that can be applied in the future in a variety of ways. of subject matter knowledge. States may use teams made up of peers from other TPPs, state staff, national accreditation organization staff, or a combination. 43 states reported that they consider information collected by an external TPP accreditation. organization for at least some of their programs. 41 states said they typically reviewed program design for traditional TPPs by reviewing syllabi or other course material, and interviewing TPP faculty or staff. For more information, visit the National Education Association’s Teacher Preparation Council website. quality standards with recommended requirements presented by CAEP. States and TPPs reported challenges collecting information on graduates’ effectiveness. Officials from 3 of our 5 case study states and 7 of the 14 TPPs we spoke spoke about challenges collecting data on graduates' effectiveness. States that already have CAEP approval may receive an expedited state approval process for TPPs that have already been approved by the federal government. For more information, visit CAEP’s website at: www.capeep.org. student teaching requirements, to “alternative route” TPPs such as those wherein candidates serve as a classroom teacher while concurrently completing their coursework. State oversight responsibilities related to TPPs may be held by one or more state agencies. For example, they report the number and demographics of teaching candidates enrolled in and completing TPPs. As described below, states, TPPs, and other stakeholders often reported these statistics to the Department of Education in the form of a report to be submitted annually. We interviewed officials from state oversight entities, officials from two or three TPPs, and officials in at least one basis for our findings. We also conducted case studies in 5 states. To identify how states oversee TPPs and modified their practices in response to new K-12 standards, we used Higher Education Act Title II data and Department of Education information about TPPs. We surveyed state oversight. entities from all 50 states, and conducted case study in five states. In each of these states we interviewed officials. states reported in our survey that they oversee TPPs through an independent standards board, oversee the licensing of new teachers through such boards, or both. Among the eight such states that responded to our follow-up inquires, officials from four expressed concern about their access to Education resources for TPP improvements. We used accuracy of this work to obtain more detailed information about how states oversee teacher preparation. We also asked state and TPP views about Higher Education Act Title II reporting requirements and Department of Education grants and information-sharing related. the District of Columbia were using the Common Core Standards that were developed and published in 2010. The remaining states were using or developing their own college- and career-ready standards. Education does not have direct oversight authority over TPPs.main ways it influences the quality of TPPs are (1) implementing them and (2) making sure they are well-funded and well-staffed for the students they are trying to educate. The U.S. Department of Education has no direct oversight of the TPPs, but does have the power to make changes to them. Teacher Assessment and Support Consortium (InTASC) standards are commonly used standards for TPP quality. InTASC standards were designed to align with the Common Core State Standards. No states reported placing a TPP under conditional approval due in part to limited alignment with new K-12 standards during the 2013-2014 academic year. The U.S. Department of Education has no immediate plans to implement the TPP in the 2014-15 academic year, and no states have reported doing so so so far. Seven states reported they did not have a process for identifying low-performing TPPs in academic year 2014-2015. State officials who reported not having a process told us they believed their other oversight procedures are sufficient to ensure quality. While it is possible that all TPPs are meeting states’ performance criteria and do not merit a low-performance designation, states are still required to make their determinations public, the report says. The report was published by the American Council on Education and the University of California, Los Angeles. used teacher evaluations (9) or student assessments (8) to identify low- performing TPPs. According to data that states submitted as part of their Title II report, 6 states identified one or more TPPs as low-performing and 13 states identified 13 or more. Officials from two other states told us that they are developing or planning to develop a new process for identifying low-forming TPPs, but do not have a process in the interim. Education officials said states can choose to change their process from conditional approval during the state approval or renewal process. The most common criteria they used to identify low- performing TPPs were failure to meet the state’s TPP or teaching standards. Education Act requires that states provide them with technical assistance. Of the 6 states that identified low-performing TPPs in 2013 or 2014, all reported in our survey that they provided technical support and informed the TPPs of their status. Most also publicized this status (4) and increased their monitoring of theTPPs (5). Two of the six states thatidentified low- Performers identified programs at risk of becoming low-Performers. at risk of being placed on the list. States have flexibility in the criteria they use to identify low-performing TPPs, but are required to describe those criteria to Education as part of their annual Title II reports. This provides an avenue for states to assess TPP quality and make their reports. Education officials also said that Education does not verify that states are in fact implementing the procedures they describe in their Title II report. All seven states that reported in our survey that they did not have a process for identifying low- performing TPPs described a states report on TPP performance. 22 states reported using fewer sources of information for alternative route TPPs compared to traditional TPPs. Eight states reported of several factors, including how states define alternative routeTPPs and differences in state requirements. For example, one of the top teacher- producing states defines some TPPs as traditional. that most states would consider alternative route. TPPs in their state and the number of teaching candidates who enroll in or complete such TPPs each year. Education officials said that information about student teachers' performance would not be relevant for making approval decisions. that they assessed alternative route TPPs against state developed standards less frequently than traditional TPPs. Seven states reported using observations of alternative routeTPP courses or experiences less frequently (see table 3) Some states reported not having any TPPs at all. The differences may be a consequence response to one of our survey questions. A representative from one state explained that the requirements for alternative route and traditionalTPPs are different because the requirements are set by state regulations. Some alternative TPPs may be approved through other mechanisms. of their approval process for all traditional TPPs (see fig. 1). These results are based on our survey of all 50 states and the District of Columbia. In some instances, the wording of the original survey question has been modified for brevity and to remove technical terminology. See the related related article for more information on this topic. For more information, see the related article on the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) and the National Patent Office (NPO) overseeing TPPs and the differing structures of the TPPs themselves. This affects the consistency and clarity of the data that Education ultimately disseminates. States may use different definitions of alternative route TPPs when reporting information such as the number does not include clarifications about potentially inconsistent data elements. Education officials told us they did not include such explanatory material in these other formats because they considered the explanations in the previous annual report to be sufficient. However, these documents could be used in the future to clarify the data. of alternate route TPPs, in its most recent Title II annual report, which presented information about the 2009-2010 academic year. Education has not provided similar information about limitations of data it has disseminated since then. In more recently Title II data in published spreadsheets and on its website, Education has provided information on the number of alternate routeTPPs in the U.S. It has not given similar information on limitations ofData it has released since then, however. The Education Department has released more recent data on alternate routeIPPs. e-supplement, GAO-15-599SP, for the original language. “Pre-service assessments” could include evaluations of candidates’ performance as student teachers. For information about the teaching candidate data that states used as part of their approval process for alternative route TPPs, see questions 9a, 9f, 9h, and 9i in the related e- supplement. For more information, visit the GAO’s website at: http://www.gao.gov/teaching-candidates.