Congress has delegated extensive discretion to the federal financial regulators to craft the Volcker Rule guidance to address unforeseen complexities. The regulators have already issued an interim final rule that makes changes to the regulations as originally issued on December 10, 2013. In fact, as is discussed in the "Definition of 'Ownership Interest'" section of this report, the regulators have yet to issue a final rule. The thrust of theVolcker Rule's restrictions applies to banks that fail to comply with the Rule's anti-evasion provisions. On December 10, 2013, more than two years after the statutorily mandated deadline, five federal financial regulators published final regulations. The regulations implement Section 619 of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act. Together these are known as the Volcker Rule and the regulations are published by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. The final regulations are expected to take effect on January 1, 2014, according to the Treasury Department's announcement on December 10. banking organizations promptly filed a lawsuit challenging this aspect of the financial regulators' interpretation of the Volcker Rule. The financial regulators responded by issuing an interim final rule on January 14, 2014, that will serve as a companion to the December 10 VolckerRule regulations, establishing terms and conditions by banks. The final Volcker rule will go into effect on January 1, 2015, according to the Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC) The FSC is a trade group that represents the interests of banks, financial institutions and investors. transactions, where a banking entity buys or sells a financial product "to offset a contemporaneous sale or purchase" of a customer, are exempt from the Volcker Rule's ban on proprietary trading. Insurance Company Portfolio Investments. The statute permits trading by insurance companies for their general accounts. Under the regulation, a of the permissible trading by foreign banking entities. The Volcker rule allows banking entities to act as a securitizer or, in accordance with the credit risk retention requirements, to hold investments in a covered fund that is an issuer of asset-backed. Volcker Rule regulations define "covered Volcker Rule compliance measures into existing compliance programs" The standard compliance requirements, which are set forth in Appendix A to the regulations, apply to banking entities with assets of $10 billion or more and for those banking entities that otherwise are required to do so by the financial regulators. In similar cases, similar issues likely exist regarding the applicability of the Volcker rule to securities, issued and held by banking entities both large and small, that are backed by other types of debts. The Volcker Rule is designed to prohibit banks and their affiliates from engaging in risky, short-term, speculative trading and investing in private equity and hedge funds. These are practices long condemned by the Rule's namesake, former Federal Reserve Chairman Paul A. Volcker. Regulators likely will modify and clarify the requirements through regulations and or making an investment in violation of the Volcker rule to terminate the activity and divest the investment promptly, the authors say. They also authorize the agencies to "take any action permitted by law to enforce compliance" The Volcker Rule applies broadly to all depository institutions and to most companies that are owned by or have a common ownership interest with a depository. 4. Affiliates and subsidiaries of companies described in 1-3. This covers "any company that controls, is controlled by, or is under common control with [a company described in categories 1-2]." 4. Bank of the voting shares of the company or fund; and (2) Provides investment advisory, commodity trading advisory, administrative, and other services to the company. beneficial interest in the investments; acting as a trustee for an employee compensation plan organized for the benefit of the banking entity's current and former employees; and acting in the "ordinary course of collecting a debt" as long as the products are divested "as soon as practicable" The Volcker Rule applies to Wall Street banks, not Wall Street itself. The rule applies to banks that hold U.S. Treasury Department or other government bonds, as well as other financial institutions such as insurance companies and pension funds. for the purposes of the Volcker Rule. The provision involving the control to hire or remove advisors, managers, and directors has caused some consternation among banking entities. For example, as a result of the definition of ownership, certain collateralized debt obligations (CDO) may not be able to be sold as collateral for a loan. The Volcker rule is expected to go into effect on January 1, 2015, and will apply to all U.S. banks and financial institutions. For those banking entities that must report tier 1 capital levels to appropriate banking regulators in accordance with other law, the calculation will remain the same for the purposes of the Volcker Rule. However, the final regulations establish howtier 1 capital of the banking entity will be calculated. The calculation will be based on the level of the bank's "tier 1" capital, not the amount of its "core" capital. The final regulations will be published later this year or early next year. For more information, go to: http://www.bankregulations.gov/. (by holding a certain percentage of voting stock or otherwise exerting a controlling influence over a company's decision making, such as the election of directors). Such companies are typically organized as bank holding companies (BHCs) or financial holding companies. 3. Foreign-based companies (FHCs), which are organized as savings and loan or thrift holding companies, which are typically foreign-based and have a large share of the company's stock. The majority of FHCs are based in the U.S. or Canada. of America, Citigroup, JPMorgan, Wells Fargo, and Goldman Sachs. The rule generally applies to hundreds of depository and non-depository affiliates and subsidiaries of these FHCs. However, the regulations provide certain exceptions to the definition of "FHC" and "FDIC-insured depository institution" The rule applies to banks that control at least one FDIC- insured depository. institution. It also applies to many other banks that are not FDIC insured, such as U.S. Bancorp and Bank of America. the Currency (OCC), the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (FRB), the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), the SEC, and CFTC (together, the federal financial regulators or the Agencies) Agencies to issue coordinated rulemakings to fill in the details and complete the difficult task of crafting regulations to distinguish between banks and non-banks. The goal is to make it easier for financial institutions to make decisions about whether to lend money to each other. The law prohibits "banking entities" from engaging in "proprietary trading" and from making investments in or having relationships with hedge and similar "covered funds" The law applies to certain exemptions from registering with the Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC) as commodity pool operators or with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) under the purpose of that law. The law also applies to commodity pools that have an exempt status under CFTC Rule 4.7; CFTC-registered commodity pools whose participation units are substantially owned by and only offered to certain "qualified eligible persons" Mae, Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, the Federal Home Loan Banks, Farmer Mac, and Farm Credit System institutions; and obligations of any state or political subdivision of a state. Under the regulations, banking entities may purchase and sell "any municipal security" and other domestic government obligations without running afoul of the regulations. The regulations were put in place after the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks on the U.S. The attacks were blamed on the actions of al Qaeda in Iraq and the Islamic State. backed by trust preferred securities (TruPS), a type of financial instrument that many banking entities, particularly community banks, used as a way to raise capital. TruPS generally was a prohibited investment under the original Volcker Rule regulations, and thus would have to be divested. The American Bankers Association and several community banks are among the groups that have called for the ban to be lifted. The U.S. Federal Reserve is expected to make a decision on the ban in the coming days. which banking entities will be permitted to continue to hold interests in and sponsor a CDO (or similar investment vehicle) backed by TruPS. Shortly after the regulators issued the interim final rules, the plaintiffs withdrew their lawsuit. While the focus of theinterim final rule is on TruPS issued and issued, the final rule will affect all CDO investments backed by the TruPS system. The final rule comes into effect on January 1, 2015. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. primarily by investing or trading in securities. Merger and Acquisition Vehicles. Issuers established for the sole purpose of effectuating "a bona fide merger or acquisition" Foreign Retirement and Pension Funds. Retirement or pension funds that are organized in, subject to regulation in, and provide benefits to residents or citizens of, and are based in, or subject to regulations in, the country where the fund is based, or are based on the basis of the country's laws and regulations. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. and seeding vehicles intending to be registered investment companies or business development companies. FDIC Conservatorship or Receivership. Issuers organized "to facilitate the disposal of assets acquired in the FDIC's capacity as a conservator or receiver [of a depository institution or non-bank financial institution supervised by the FRB]." Other Investments. The FDIC is a not-for-profit organization based in Washington, D.C. It was established in 1933 to protect the deposits of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. Covered Bonds Vehicles. Funds holding a pool of loans or certain other permissible assets "for the benefit of holders of covered bonds," which are issued or guaranteed by a foreign banking organization. Smaller Business Investment Companies (SBICs) and Other Public Welfare Investment Funds. Small business investment companies and similar similar investment companies. Small Business Investment Company (SBC) Funds. SBCs are investment companies that invest in small and medium-sized businesses. SCCs can also invest in other types of businesses. capital should be calculated for those banking entities that are not otherwise required to maintain and report capital levels. Banking entities are permitted to make initial seed investments to establish covered funds and help make them become attractive investments for unaffiliated third parties. To do so, they must: actively invest in covered funds, and make sure they are attractive to unaffiliated parties. They must also make sure that the covered funds are well-managed and well-liked by the banking community. They should also be well-capitalized, and should be able to raise money from outside the banking industry. companies organized "to make investments [d]esigned primarily to promote the public welfare" or investments in certain qualified historic tax credit programs. Registered Investment Companies and Business Development Companies (BDCs) Issuers registered under the Investment Company Act of 1940. Business development companies regulated by the SEC as business development companies. BDCs registered with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) under the Business Development Act (BDAC) of 1995. B DCs registered under BDC Act of 1995 (BDC) with BDC name changed to Business Development Company. generally excluding debt and equity securities, subject to various terms and conditions. Certain Asset-Backed Commercial Paper Conduits. Issuers of an asset-backed commercial paper conduit "that issues only asset- backed securities comprised of a residual interest and securities with a legal maturity of 397 days or less," and that meet other conditions. The U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission has issued a ruling on the issue. The ruling is expected to be finalized by the end of the year. which "the banking entity does not reasonably expect to give rise to appreciable profits or losses as a result of short-term price movements"; various derivative clearing activities; acquisitions or sales of financial products for the satisfaction of delivery obligations, such as in connection with a judicial or administrative proceeding; acquisitions and sales of products for delivery obligations. The bank does not "reasonably expect" to give "appreciable profits" or "losses" from short- term price movements. The banking entity doesn't expect "short-term" price movements to give it profits or loss. or sales of financial products "by a banking entity acting solely as agent, broker, or custodian"; acquisitions or sales of. financial products while acting as a trustee for an employee compensation plan; and acquisitions or. sales in the "ordinary course of collecting a debt," as long as they are made by a bank acting as an agent or broker. The law applies to financial products sold by banks acting as agents, brokers, custodians or trustees for employee compensation plans, as well as other financial products. "Proprietary trading" covers buying and selling of "financial instruments" by banking entities as "principal" for their "trading accounts" "Financial instruments" include securities, derivatives, and contracts for future sale or for options on any commodity other than foreign exchange or currency, but not loans. However, as described in the definition of "proprietary Trading," including the following: acquisitions or sales of financial products pursuant to a repurchase and reverse repurchase agreement; acquisitions or Sales of "highly liquid" securities as part of a valid liquidity management plan. "Trading account" as any account used to buy or sell one or more financial instruments "principally" for "short-term resale" "Tradingaccount" also covers trades by banking entities that are securities dealers and swap dealers. "Traded account" also includes accounts used to hedge financial instruments or to benefit from price movements or arbitrage profits. For more information, go to TradingAccounts.com or call 1-800-273-8255 or visit www.tradingaccounts.org. or swap-based securities dealers. Market risk capital transactions and hedges of such transactions by banking entities that calculate such ratios under the banking agencies' Market Risk Capital Rules. The Rule, embodied in the regulations, expressly provides that certain activities are not included in the definition of "market risk capital" and are not subject to the Market Risk capital Rule. The rule also does not include certain activities that are used to calculate market risk capital ratios, such as swaps and swaps-based derivative transactions. that are treated like bank holding companies pursuant to the International Banking Act of 1978. This includes foreign-based banks that are permitted to operate branches in the U.S. or that own certain other domestic lending companies. An affiliate is "any company that controls, is controlled by, or is under common common control" of a bank or a bank holding company. A bank affiliate is a company that "controls, iscontrolled by, is undercommon common control of a Bank or Bank Holding Company" affiliates, directors, and employees. Wholly Owned Subsidiaries. Entities that are directly or indirectly owned entirely by the banking entity or one of its affiliates. Joint Ventures. Joint ventures between a banking entity and up to ten unaffiliated entities. As long as the venture is not raising money, it is not a joint venture. It is a venture between the bank and a group of up to 10 unaffiliated entity. It does not have to be based in the U.S. a foreign jurisdiction. "A separate account, provided that no banking entity other than the insurance company participates in the account's profits and losses" Separate Life Insurance Accounts. A separate account established for a banking entity (or multiple banking entities) to acquire life insurance policies for its benefit. "a separate account," provided that "no banking entity" other than "the insurance company" participates in "the account's profit and losses." "a different bank account" for different types of insurance policies. in the covered fund are not held by or offered to U.S. residents. All associated activities with and investments in the covered. fund are conducted outside of the United States. The majority of the banking entity's overall business takes place in a foreign country. Insurance companies and their affiliates are not allowed to offer their services to thecovered fund. The covered fund is not permitted to offer its services to its customers in the United Kingdom or other European countries, except in certain limited circumstances, such as when it is underwritten by a foreign bank. generally may sponsor or acquire ownership interests in covered funds if those interests are retained solely for the insurance company's or its affiliate's own account. Insurance company is subject to, and such investments comply with, a state insurance regulatory regime, unless the federal banking regulators jointly determined that the federal insurance regulators jointly decided that the company's investments complied with the state insurance regime. The company is not required to comply with state insurance regulations, but it must comply with federal insurance regulations if the company is a U.S. insured. Investments permitted under Sections 4(c)(9) and 4( c)(13) of the Bank Holding Company Act. Proprietary Trading by Foreign Companies Conducted Outside the United States. Other Investments. The and whose ownership interests are offered and sold exclusively outside the U.S., that either are sponsored by a banking entity or have ownership interests held by a Banking entity. Such funds could qualify for an exemption, other than exemptions under Section 3(c) or Section 3 (c)(7), from the Investment Company. to retail investors in [their] home jurisdiction" and such interests are sold "predominantly through one or more public offerings outside of the United States" This exemption only applies if "the ownership interests in the issuer are sold predominately to persons other than such sponsoring banking entity, such issuer," and their interest is sold through a public offering outside the U.S. The exemption applies only if "such ownership interests" are sold to "persons other than ... such sponsoring bank entity" Banking entities that are organized in a foreign country and are not controlled, either directly or indirectly, by a U.S.-based banking entity may be exempt from the Volcker Rule. However, even if a banking entity acquires an investment in or sponsorship of a covered fund that meets one of the permissible exceptions described below, it could still be barred by theVolcker Rule if it results in: "a material conflict of interest"; "a Material exposure by the banking of the investment" The Rule expressly exempts certain activities that otherwise would fall under the general prohibition against sponsoring or investing in a covered fund. The exemption for underwriting and market making-activities ... by its terms, is a statutorily permitted activity and exemption from the prohibitions in [12 U.S.C. §1851(a)], whether on proprietary trading or on covered fund activities. For underwriting activities, the requirements for the exemption are the same as those for market making activities. fund" to largely encompass entities that are exempt from various registration requirements with either the SEC or CFTC. The rule explicitly excludes a number of activities and products from the "covered fund" definition. These exclusions include the following: Foreign Public Funds. Issuers that are not organized or established in the United States that "issue ownership interests" in foreign public funds. The term includes issuers that rely on Investment Company Act of 1940 Sections 3(c)(1) or 3( c)(7) to avoid being considered investment companies. De minimis investments in covered funds are subject to both per fund and aggregate caps. A de minimis investment made by a banking entity and its affiliates must "not exceed 3 percent of the total number or value of the fund de Minimis investment caps" The cap is based on the type of fund in question (i.e., asset-backed securities issuer, feeder funds, fund-of-funds, and all other types of covered funds) The total ownership interests incovered funds by a Banking entity and their affiliates "may not exceed three percent" Banking entities are permitted to take ownership stakes in covered funds for hedging purposes subject to important limitations. Such acquisitions are only permissible to the extent that they are "designed to demonstrably reduce" the de minimis investment cap calculations discussed above. Similar to the exemption from the ban on proprietary trading, banking entities are allowed to take stakes incovered funds forhedging purposes. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. Banking entities with assets of $50 billion or more are subject to Enhanced Minimum Standards. The standard compliance program includes requirements for (1) written policies and procedures documenting compliance and verifying exemptions, and (2) written documents documenting compliance with the requirements and procedures for each exemption. The requirements are set forth in Appendix B to the regulations. The standards apply to banking entities with $50billion or more in assets, as well as those with $10 billion or less in assets. The regulations also apply to banks with $1 billion in assets or less, and to non-banks with $100 billion or fewer. covered fund activities or investments. Management involvement in reviewing and testing the identification and documentation of all covered funds sponsored or organized by components of the organization. identification of the lines of authority with respect to such funds. explanations of monitoring for and prohibition of covered fund activities, investments, and activities. The Enhanced Minimum Standards requirements include management involvement in testing and reviewing the identification, documentation, and monitoring of covered funds. The requirements also include management participation in testing the documentation, monitoring, monitoring and prohibitions of such covered funds, investments or activities. Banking entities and their affiliates must be entered into in accordance with the "arms-length" requirements of FRA Section 23B. The banking entity must have an internal compliance program. Any ownership interest acquired by a banking entity conducting underwriting or market making activities with a covered fund must be included in both the per fund and aggregate covered funds. The final regulations require banking entities to develop and maintain a compliance program for each covered fund. The statute requires the federal financial regulators to issue regulations to "insure compliance with [Section 619]." work to replace their investments with that of unaffiliated third parties; comply with the aggregate de minimis investment requirements; and generally within one year of the establishment of the covered fund. Upon an application by a banking entity, the fund must be in compliance with the per fund de minimi investment cap. The application must be made by the fund’s investment manager within a year of its establishment. The fund must also be in Compliance with the Per Fund De minimis Investment Cap of $1,000,000. outstanding ownership interests of the fund," unless the banking entity, in the context of investing in an asset-backed securities issuer, is required to acquire a greater percentage to comply with the credit risk retention requirements of Section 15G(a)(3) of the Exchange Act. The Rule establishes various methods for calculating per cent ownership of a fund, including a percentage based on the fund's market value and a percentage-based method of calculating the percentage of ownership. The rule also establishes various ways to calculate per cent. "after all other interests have been redeemed and/or paid in full"; 4. a "right to receive all or a portion of excess spread" of a covered fund; 5. a duty to pay acovered fund for the ownership interest that could be reduced based on lower interest rates owed on such ownership interest or as a result of a loss in value of the fund's assets. 6. any earnings of pass-through income from the covered fund or of income that varies in accordance with the value. of the covered Fund's assets; or 7. "any synthetic right to have, receive, or. fund's managers, directors, or investment advisors, except when exercising creditor rights upon a default or acceleration trigger. A right to share in a covered fund's "income, gains, or profits"; 3. a right, other than rights as a creditor upon an acceleration trigger, to acovered fund's assets. A. right to a share of a covered Fund's assets, except if the fund has defaulted or was in liquidation; and 4. rights to a coveredFund's assets if it was in a liquidation. entity; (7) no director or employee of the banking entity, other than those directly engaged in providing investment advisory or other services to the covered fund, acquires an interest in the fund; and (8) the banking entities takes certain steps to assure the investors in thecovered fund that the fund does not lose its name or share a name with the banking entity. No director or employee of the banking entity other than those directly engaged in providing investment advisory or other services to the covered fund  acquires an interest in the fund. to "banking entities" "Banking entity" is defined as: 1. FDIC-insured depository institutions. 2. Companies that own or control FDIC -insured depositories. This includes national and state banks, federal and state savings associations, thrifts, and similarly chartered banking institutions that offer FD IC-insured deposits. It also includes companies that own, control or own or own FDIC – insured depositories, such as banks, savings associations and thrifts. banking entity provides "bona fide trust, fiduciary, or investment advisory services"; (2) "the fund is organized and offered only in connection with bona fide trust" or "investment advisory services to persons that are customers of such services of the banking entity"; (3) the banking entities retains only a de facto de facto stake in the fund. The fund is offered to customers of the bank in exchange for investment advice and other services. The bank is not required to provide such services to its customers. excluded from the definition of "covered fund" as described above, will not be considered an affiliate of a banking entity for the purposes of the de minimis seed investment limits if the banking entity does not own, control, or hold with the power to vote 25 percent or more. The covered fund does not have the word "bank" in its name or share a name with the banking conducted only on terms specified in FRA Section 23B. The banking entitydoes not guaranty the obligations of the covered fund. minimis interest in the funds; (4) the banking entity and its affiliates engage in no transaction with the fund that would be designated as a "covered transaction" under Federal Reserve Act (FRA) Section 23A; and (5) transactions are conducted only on terms specified in FRA Section 23B, securities so long as the banking entities retains only a de minimis interest. Banks and their affiliates that provide advisory or investment management services to or hold a permissible interest in a covered fund are prohibited from entering into a transaction. activities, the prohibition does not apply to holding an ownership interest in a covered fund. The interest is acquired by a banking entity while "acting solely as agent, broker, or custodian," fiduciary, or trustee for a customer. The regulations broadly define "ownership interest" to mean "any equity, partnership, or other similar interest" Under certain circumstances, "restricted profit interests" held by banking entity or one of its current or former employees that served as a trading or investment advisor, manager, or similar service provider are not considered ownership interest. banking entity that is an insurance company or an affiliate of an insuranceCompany is permitted to buy or sell financial instruments for its own account. However, the relevant federal law prohibits such transactions. The transaction "is conducted in compliance with, and subject to, the insurance company investments laws" of the applicable state, according to the law. The federal law also prohibits the sale of financial instruments to a bank that is not a member of the U.S. Treasury Department or the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. so long as the banking entity does not control the account's investment decisions. Issuers of certain asset-backed securitizations, including certain loans, foreign exchange derivatives, and interest rate derivatives, but not interest rate derivative. Bank does not have an interest in account's profits and losses except as permitted by regulatory guidance. Certain Asset-Backed Securitization. Bank doesn't control investment decisions, but does have interest in investment decisions and does not own shares of the account. Banking doesn't own shares in the account, but has a stake in its profits or losses. this part and dispose of any investment." The statute generally requires divestiture of nonconforming activities within two years of the Rule becoming effective. The FRB has authority to extend this two-year period one year at a time, not to exceed an aggregate of three years. The entity may apply to the FRB for an extension which may be granted for no more than five years. At the end of the five years, divestiture would be required or on the contractual date—whichever is earlier. FRB may provide up to two additional years to conform with the per fund de minimis cap if such an extension "would be consistent with safety and soundness and not detrimental to the public interest" SEC-registered business development companies, investment companies, and foreign public funds, which generally are foreign, generally are subject to the cap. The cap is $1.5 billion for each fund, or $2 billion for a total of $10 billion. The limit is in effect until the end of the year. The Volcker Rule could be extended an additional two years. Banking entities are expected to engage in good faith efforts to be in compliance with the rules by July 21, 2015. The July 15, 2015, conformance date may be extended by the FRB for one-year periods, not to exceed two additional years. In addition to a two-year extension, if a banking entity is required by contract to take or retain its ownership interest in, or provide additional capital to, an entity, the extension could also be extended. recent extension, the conformance date is July 21, 2015. This means that a company that was a banking. entity or a subsidiary or affiliate of a banking entity on July. 21, 2010, must bring its activities into conformance before July 21. 2015. For a company not a. banking entity, conformance is required before the later of July 21,. 2015, or two years after the date on which the company. becomes a banking entities or a. subsidiary or an affiliate. more time to conform, developing an appropriately specific conformance plan, and immediately terminating any stand-alone proprietary trading operations. During the conformance period, banking entities with significant trading operations will remain subject to the data reporting and recordkeeping requirements of the Rule that are discussed in the previous section of this article. The rule will take effect on January 1, 2015. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. odds with conventional banking principles and potential risks to overall financial stability that could trigger the need for future bailouts. The same day that the regulations were issued, the Federal Reserve Board (FRB) set the date when conformance with the Rule is required as July 21, 2015, although that date has not yet been set by the FRB. The FRB has set a target date for conformance to the Rule to occur by the end of July 2015, but that date could be pushed back to July 2016. The Volcker Rule establishes an outright prohibition on proprietary trading by a "banking entity" Subsequent prohibition against proprietary trading. Under certain circumstances, foreign banks and foreign affiliates of U.S. banks will be permitted to trade foreign government obligations. But these activities generally are prohibited under the Rule's ban on proprietary Trading for U.U.S.-based banking entities and U.N.-based affiliates of foreign banks. The final regulations are expected to be released in the coming weeks and could be released as early as next month. banned by the Volcker Rule. Recordkeeping and reporting requirements and other compliance standards that apply to community banks and their subsidiaries and affiliates generally will not be as onerous as those imposed on the country's largest FHCs. As another example, foreign banks and foreign affiliates of U.S. banking entities will be able to do business in the United States without being subject to the same regulations as the largest U.N. banks. The rule will go into effect on January 1, 2015. The regulation focuses on restricting short-term trades. It establishes a rebuttable presumption that any financial instrument held for fewer than 60 days is a banned proprietary trade unless all relevant facts and circumstances rebut the presumption. It defines the products are divested "as soon as practicable" The Rule identifies exceptions to the blanket prohibition of proprietary trades by listing permitted activities and setting conditions under which those activities may be conducted. However, it excludes from permitted activities. More fully below, certain types of financial instruments and operations are excluded. provisions of the legislation provide activities that are excluded from the definition of "proprietary trading," as long as various conditions are met. Subject to those conditions, the exceptions or permitted activities are: Underwriting Activities. Market Making Activities. Riskless Principal Transactions. Fiduciary Activities. The ban on proprietary trading does not apply to a banking entity's fiduciary activities on behalf of a customer and where the banking entity does not acquire a beneficial interest in the associated financial instruments. and procedures applicable to its trading desks and to its covered fund activities or investments. For the trading desks of banking entities that are subject to the heightened compliance program, there are specific requirements regarding how the trading desk "identif[ies], authoriz[es], and document[s] financial instruments to be purchased or sold"; and how it "identifies, authorizes, and documents" financial instruments that are to be bought or sold. The trading desk must be able to "identify, authorize, and document" the purchase or sale of financial instruments. "types and amounts of risks allocated" to each trading desk; how those risks will be measured; why those risks are appropriate; "the process for setting new or revised limits"; and types of permissible customers and counterparties. "process for identifying, documenting and approving new products, trading strategies, and hedging strategies"; and. "type and amount of risks" that will be allocated to each desk; and "how those risks would be measured" to determine appropriate risk levels for each desk.  Appendix A sets forth non-exclusive recordkeeping and reporting requirements, including quantitative recordkeeping. The report also includes risk factor sensitivities, value-at-risk, position limits and usage, comprehensive profit and loss attribution, inventory turnover and aging, and customer facing trade ratio. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255 or visit www.suicideprevention.org. compensation arrangements. There are also provisions on describing the firm's risks and risk management process; how it authorizes risks, specific instruments, and products; what its hedging policies and procedures are; and how it will remediate violations. For more information, go to: http://www.finance.com/finance/firm-risk-management-and-compensation-asset-planning and remediation-and procedures-for-firms-that-have-violations. compliance programs, internal controls, and recordkeeping systems to control and monitor the risk of trading and investment activities. Banking entities conducting no proprietary trading activity (2) internal control systems, (3) management frameworks, (4) independent testing and review, (5) personnel training, and (6) recordkeeping. Compliance requirements vary in accordance with the size of the banking entity, as well as the scope, complexity, and types of Trading and Investment activities. For banking entities subject to the standard compliance program, the final regulations also require and establish methods of calculating quantitative measurements. of the market ... "; and, that, in addition to other criteria, the banking entity has an internal compliance program. Whether the goal of the agencies for flexibility sufficient to maintain robust capital markets has been achieved, particularly with respect to some specialty markets with limited participants, awaits time and the market's reaction to the proposed changes to the rules. The U.S. Federal Reserve is expected to announce changes to its capital markets rules in the coming weeks. The changes are expected to be more flexible than previously thought, the agency says. metrics, for banking entities with "significant trading assets and liabilities" The preamble to the final regulations make clear, however, that these are not safe harbors for banks. "Banking entities [must ensure] that they have robust measures in place to identify and identify and liabilities," the regulations say. The regulations are expected to go into effect in the fall of this year. They will apply to all banks, including U.S.-based banks and certain non-U.S. banks. not to exceed, on an ongoing basis, the reasonably expected near term demands of clients, customers, or counterparties"; the banking entity "routinely stands ready to purchase and sell ... financial instruments ... in commercially reasonable amounts and throughout market cycles on a basis appropriate for the liquidity, maturity, and depth of the market ... "; its market making positions must be "designed not to exceed" the "reasonably expected near-term demands" of clients and customers; and the bank must be ready to sell financial instruments on a "commercial reasonable" basis. The regulations stipulate that, to be permissible, such underwriting activities must be related to the banking entity's role as a securities underwriter. The banking entity must have an internal compliance program, and certain other requirements must be include that the positions must relate to the bank's securities underwriting role. For market making activities, the regulations state that such activities must not "exceed the reasonably expected near term demands of clients, customers, or counterparties" The regulations also state that underwriting positions must be "designed not to exceed" the "reasonably expected nearterm demands" of clients. permissible market making, the agencies sought to provide covered institutions sufficient flexibility to engage in the full scope of current "market making-related activities" provided there are "clearly defined, verifiable, and monitored risk parameters" The regulation's requirements include that "[t]he amount, types, and risks of the financial instruments ... are designed as they meet the same terms and conditions necessary to comply" with the exceptions for underwriting and market making from the ban on proprietary trading. According to the preamble to the final regulations, "the Agencies believe that providing a separate provision relating to permitted underwriting ... would be appropriate" Banking entities will be required to document any investment undertaken as a hedge by linking it to the specific risks or exposures being offset. This provision is aimed at preventing incidents like the $6 billion loss that JPMorgan & Co. suffered in 2012 as a result of derivatives trades, according to a report by The Wall Street Journal. The report by the Journal was based on interviews with more than 100 people. It was also published in the New York Times, the Washington Post, the Financial Times, and the Wall Street Transcript. assure the investors in the hedge fund or private equity fund that losses of the fund will be borne solely by its investors. Although not explicitly excepted by the statute, pursuant to the regulations, banking entities generally may engage in underwriting and market making activities for covered funds so long as it is not prohibited by the law. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. and permit "risk-mitigating hedging activities" that are "positions, contracts, or other holdings of the banking entity" The final rule seeks to make it clear that portfolio hedging will not be permitted. Banking entities must have written internal programs in place to ensure that hedges comply with the Volcker Rule both at the time of acquisition, as well as through the life of the bank. The rule appears to prohibit portfolio hedges akin to the JPMorgan London Whale trades discussed in the Proprietary Trading section above. The statute authorizes "[r]isk-mitigating hedging activities" that are "related to individual or aggregated positions ... that are designed to reduce the specific risks" The regulations track the language of the statute.experience. The regulation track thelanguage of the Statute. The regulations Track the Language of The statute. The Regulations Track theLanguage of The Statute,. The Regulations track the Language Of The Statutes. The Regulation tracks the language. of the Regulation. The Regulator tracks the Language. of The Regulation. to hedge against risks of the entire financial conglomerate, which were conducted by a trader known as the London Whale. The statute authorizes the purchase and sale of U.S. obligations; obligations of federal agencies; and obligations of Ginnie Mae and GSE Obligations. A Senate investigation documented in a Senate investigation found that the trader was responsible for the collapse of the financial conglomerate. The trader's actions were documented in the Senate investigation and were documented by the trader's own book, "The London Whale," which was published in 2010. Investment Advisors Act. In concert with these broad prohibitions, the Rule carves out numerous exclusions and designates myriad activities as permissible so long as various terms and conditions are met. The statutory language provides only general outlines of prohibited activities and exceptions, while empowering the Office of the Comptroller of the Treasury to make its own rules. The Rule is intended to be a guidebook for investors in the investment industry, not a complete guide book for the financial industry. It is not intended to replace the Securities and Exchange Commission’s rules. activities, while also carving out specific exclusions from the scope of the two categories and exceptions for certain activities that otherwise would generally fall within the broad prohibitions. These excepted activities are designated as permissible under the Rule unless they would involve or result in a material conflict of interest;. They are not allowed to be performed unless they are in a position of trust or favor that would prevent them from doing so; and. They can't be performed in a way that would result in the appearance of a conflict of interests. a material exposure to high-risk assets or high- Risk trading strategies; pose a threat to the safety and soundness of the banking entity. The report concludes by addressing other aspects of the Rule that apply generally to banking entities. The Rule also provides standards by which the regulators may set further limits or conditions, the report says. It applies to any transaction or class of activities, otherwise permitted, that would involve or result in a material conflict of interest, it says. The rule also applies to "high-risk" assets, as defined by the regulators, according to the report. such critical terms as "banking entity," "covered fund," "illiquid fund" "trading account," "hedge fund," and "reasonably expected near term demands of clients" It includes a broad explicit delegation of discretion to exclude from the basic prohibitions of the statute "[s]uch other activity as the appropriate [federal of material conflicts of interest, threats to safety and soundness] " It includes documentation of plans for seeking unaffiliated investors to meet investment limits; board of director and senior management involvement; and CEO attestation. "banking entity," as discussed below. The applicability of certain exemptions, recordkeeping and reporting requirements, and other aspects of the Rule vary to some degree according to the organization or typical activities of a particular banking entity. For example, because they may engage in little or no activities that are that are subject to the Rule, they may be exempt from some of the requirements of the rule. For more information, visit the IRS website at www.irs.gov/irs/irs-rules. or otherwise significantly mitigate the specific, identifiable risk to the banking entity in connection with a compensation arrangement with an employee of the banking entities or an affiliate thereof. The limitation to "specific, identifiablerisk[s]" is limited to " Specific, Identifiable Risk" or "Specific, identifiable Risk[s] for the covered fund" The limit to "Special, Special Risk" is also limited to 'Special, Specific Risk' or 'Specific, Specific risk' for thecovered fund. The limit on 'Special Risk' is 'Special Special Risk' of insurance firm, securities firms, and foreign banking institutions operating in the United States, among others. The federal financial regulators have been tasked with diverse objectives, among which are the following: promoting safety and soundness of the entities covered by the Rule. The statutory language requires the regulators to explicate the objectives of the rule. The regulation also requires the regulator to "appropriately" timing divestiture of illiquid assets affected by the rule, among other things. The rule is expected to take effect on January 1, 2015. banking regulators, in consultation with the Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC) and relevant state or foreign insurance regulators, may jointly proscribe otherwise permissible insurance company investment activities. If the state regulation of those activities "is insufficient to protect the safety and soundness of the banking entity or the financial stability," the state may ban those activities. In the U.S., the state can ban an insurance company's investment activities if it does not have the authority to do so. In Europe, the state has the power to ban insurance company investments if it doesn't have the ability to do it. or to the financial stability of the United States. It provides standards by which the regulators may set further limits or conditions on these activities and includes authority for the regulators to add to the list of permitted activities. The regulators may impose additional capital and quantitative limits as "appropriate" to protect the safety and soundness of banking entities engaged in such activities. Banking entities, subject to certain limitations, are permitted to do business in the U.S., subject to a number of restrictions. The U.N. Security Council has approved a resolution that would allow banks to conduct business in Europe. entity organized under the laws of the United States or of one or more States. The regulation also includes various other restrictions. The agencies used this broad authority to define the scope of the regulation. The regulations are expected to take effect in early 2015. They will apply to all foreign banking entities that engage in trading activity under U.S. law. They also apply to any activity that they "determine, by rule, ... would permit promote and protect the safety soundness of the banking entity and the financial stability of the US" applicability of the Rule. It then separately analyzes the two distinct components of the rule: (1) restrictions on proprietary trading; and (2) Restrictions on investing in and sponsoring covered funds. The basic framework of the Rules is to broadly prohibit banking entities from engaging in these two broad categories of activity. It also analyzes how the Rule would apply to different types of banking entities, such as asset managers and hedge funds. It concludes that the Rule is not likely to have a significant impact on the banking industry. to meet a list of widely divergent objectives. The statute states the prohibitions and conditions in very broad terms. It applies to an array of financial institutions subject to a variety of regulatory regimes and separate regulators, foreign and domestic. The law applies to community and global banks, every variety of banks. It also applies to financial institutions in the U.S., Canada, Australia, New Zealand, South Africa and other countries. It is intended to apply to all financial institutions, not just banks.