ability of key stakeholders, including the owner, operator, or law enforcement, to interdict an attack and the ability of a target to withstand an attack. Third, the analysts use MSRAM to evaluate potential consequences of an attack, such as deaths or injuries and economic and environmental impacts. MSRAM’s output produces a report that can be used to assess the impact of attacks on a range of different targets, including military, financial, and government targets, as well as civilian targets. incident and part of the study involves examining whether analysts should use MSRAM to assess MODUs in the future. MSRAM does not assess systemic or network risks because, according to Coast Guard officials, these types of assessments are beyond the intended use. The study is being conducted by the U.S. Coast Guard and the National Institute of Standards and Technology. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. use information from other stakeholders, such as reports produced by the Department of the Interior’s Bureau of Ocean Energy Management, Regulation and Enforcement (BOEMRE), which contain oil and gas production data. Based on the assessments of threats, vulnerabilities, and consequences, MSRAM produces its own assessments of the risks and opportunities for oil and natural gas exploration and production in the Gulf of Mexico. MSRAM also uses information from the BOEMRE reports to inform its evaluations of vulnerabilities and consequences. MSRAM is a risk index number for each OCS facility and deepwater port. It allows Coast Guard officials at the local, regional, and national levels to compare and rank critical infrastructure for the purpose of informing security decisions. The Coast Guard has also taken actions to supplement MSRAM by, among other things, including new data fields on the frequency with which tankers visit a port and (2) adding additional threat scenarios, such as a threat involving an oil rig or deepwater tanker. The Coast Guard uses a tool called the Maritime Security Risk Analysis Model. The tool assesses security risks to about 28,000 key infrastructure in and around the nation’s ports and waterways. For example, MSRAM examines security a cyber attack, to its data set. While MSRAM has been applied to deepwater ports, Coast Guard officials have also used an independent risk assessment to assess security risks as part of the application process for recently constructedDeepwater ports. In December 2006, as part the application, the U.S. Coast Guard assessed security risks for a new deepwater port in the Gulf of Mexico. The Coast Guard has taken a number of actions in assessing security risks to OCS facilities and deepwater ports. The 2006 plan focused on assessing the vulnerability of facilities. The 2009 plan discussed efforts to conduct systemwide vulnerability assessments. Gaining a better understanding of target hardness of these and other threat scenarios could improve the quality of the output from MSRAM. According to Coast Guard’s MSRAM Program Manager, the Coast Guard may recommend conducting more research on the vulnerability to and consequences of attack scenarios. to withstand an attack, which is defined in MSRAM as target hardness. The Coast Guard recognizes that target hardness is an important consideration in assessing the vulnerability of OCS facilities. MSRAM analysts described challenges in assessing target hardness because empirical data are not available or research has not been carried out on the OCS. The U.S. Coast Guard has been involved in the design of the O CS for more than 20 years. For more information, visit the Coast Guard's OCS vulnerability assessment website. The Coast Guard assesses security risks as part of its responsibilities for ensuring the security of OCS facilities and deepwater ports. In risks to national monuments, bridges, and oil and gas terminals. The Coast Guard does not have data on the ability of an OCS facility risk of a particular target. Coast Guard officials added that they are working with DHS’s Office of Risk Management and Analysis in studying ways to improve how it assesses secondary economic impacts. We continue to believe that the recommendations not yet addressed have merit and should be fully implemented. this testimony, we focus on the 50 facilities that, in 2011, are regulated for security because they meet or exceed the threshold criteria. We refer to these security-regulated facilities as OCS facilities. The second type of offshore energy infrastructure are deepwater ports, which are fixed or floating manmade structures used requirements for such security- regulated O CS facilities. We only use MSRAM to assess security risks associated with those OCS. facilities that areregulated for security under 33 C.F.R. The challenges in assessing security risks to offshore energy. infrastructure that is not subject to security requirements: our work focused on two main types of offshore energy infrastructure that the Coast Guard oversees for security. The first type are facilities that operate on the OCS and are generally described as facilities temporarily or permanently attached to the subsoil or seabed. The second type is facilities that engage in exploration, ports. We will continue to work with the Coast Coast Guard to develop solutions to ensure that inspections of OCS facilities are completed as required. I would be happy to respond to any questions you may have. a relative risk ranking, OCS facilities are not considered to be high-risk targets. To inform analysts’ inputs into MSRAM, the Coast Guard has coordinated efforts with the intelligence community and key stakeholders. Coast Guard officials generally agreed with our finding and they have since incorporated these 12 facilities into MS RAM and completed the required risk assessments. DHS and DOJ provided oral and technical comments, which we incorporated as appropriate. Chairman McCaul, Ranking Member Keating, and Members of the Subcommittee, this concludes my prepared statement. the Deepwater Horizon incident. The study initially reviewed the “lessons learned” from Deepwater. Horizon and how those lessons could be used to improve MSRAM. During the course of our review, Coast Guard. officials stated that the scope of the study has been expanded to include OCS. facilities. While the Coast Guard does not consider OCS facilities that it. has assessed in MSRAM to be high risk, it is important to assess all O.CS facilities as required by Coast Guard guidance. About 49 percent of the nation’s crude oil supply was transported by tanker into the United States in 2009. The remaining oil and natural gas used in the U.S. comes from Canada by pipeline or is produced from domestic sources in areas such as offshore facilities in the Gulf of Mexico. The United States’ economy and security are heavily dependent on oil, natural gas, and other energy commodities, the authors say. The authors say the government needs to do more to ensure the safety and security of the country. The Outer Continental Shelf (OCS) contains an estimated 85 million barrels of oil. The Louisiana Offshore Oil Port (LOOP), a deepwater port, is responsible for transporting about 10 percent of that oil. There are currently four licensed deepwater ports—two in the Gulf of Mexico and two in the Louisiana Off shore. The port is intended for use as a port or terminal for the transportation, storage, or handling of oil or natural gas to any state and includes the transportation of oil from the OCS. Deepwater ports enable tankers to offload oil or liquefied natural gas for transport to land by underwater pipelines. In 2007, we assessed Coast Guard and FBI efforts to ensure the security of process for a proposed deepwater port in the Massachusetts Bay. The Coast Guard, the owner and operator, and other stakeholders collectively identified and assessed threat scenarios as well as the potential consequences and vulnerabilities of each scenario. Based on this assessment, stakeholders identified and agreed to carry out security measures for the port. hijack vessels to more than 1,000 miles from Somalia using mother ships, from which they launch smaller boats to conduct the attacks. Coast Guard has issued a directive with guidelines for U.S. vessels operating in high- risk waters. This directive provides vessel safety guidelines for high-risk waters, the Coast Guard says. The directive is in response to the growing concern over piracy in the waters off Somalia. It is intended to address the threat that piracy poses to U.N.-led peacekeeping operations. owners and operators with direction for responding to emerging security risks. Offshore energy infrastructure also faces risks from various types of attacks. In 2004, a terrorist attacked an offshore oil terminal in Iraq using speedboats packed with explosives, killing two U.S. Navy sailors and a Coast Guardsman. Potential attack methods against offshore energy infrastructure identified by the Coast Guard or owners and operators include crashing an aircraft into it; using a submarine vessel, diver, or other means of attacking it underwater; ramming it with a vessel; and sabotage by an employee. face risks from various types of attack. Suicide attacks, armed assaults by terrorists or armed bands, and launching a “standoff” missile attack using a rocket or some other weapon fired from a distance. Terrorists have attempted, and in some cases carried out, attacks on energy tankers since September 11, 2001. To date, these attacks have included attempts to damage tankers or to kill crew members or crew members on board the tankers. In recent years, we have issued reports that discussed risks energy tanker face from terrorist attacks and attacks from other criminals, including pirates. Energy tankers often depart from foreign ports and are registered in countries other than the United States. The U.S. has limited authority to oversee the security of such vessels until they enter energy tankers and respond to terrorist incidents involving tankers. We found that actions were being taken, internationally and domestically, to protect tankers, port facilities at which tankers would be present. For example, the Coast Guard visits foreign exporting ports to assess the effectiveness of the anti-terrorism measures in those countries. Three main places in which tankers may be at risk of an attack: foreign ports, in transit and at U.S. ports. Beyond the relatively rare threat of terrorist attacks against tankers, the threat is much more serious. For example, foreign ports where commodities are loaded onto tankers remain at risk upon arrival in the United States because of the inherent risks to port facilities. Port facilities are generally accessible by land and sea and are sprawling installations often close to population centers. The threat is far more serious than the threat of a terrorist attack on tankers. recommendation, in part because it did not concur with the need to develop a separate operational plan. In the event of a successful attack on an energy tanker, ports would need to provide an effective, integrated response to protect public safety and the environment, and conduct an investigation, according to the report. The report was published by the European Commission on Tuesday. It was published in response to a request from the European Parliament for a report on the response to an attack on energy tanker. they travel on direct routes that are known in advance and, for part of their journey, they may have to travel through waters that do not allow them to maneuver away from possible attacks. According to the Energy Information Administration, chokepoints along a route make tankers susceptible to attacks. Further, the U.S. government says that, in some cases, tankers are forced to travel in water that is too dangerous for them to navigate. In other cases, the government says, the water is too shallow for tankers to maneuver. Media reports indicate a steady increase in ransoms for tankers, from $3 million in January 2009 for the Saudi tanker Sirius Star, to $9.5 million in November 2010 for the South. In addition, tankers are fetching increasing ransom demands from Somali pirates.shows one of the recent suspected pirate attacks. In November 2010, Somali pirates demanded a ransom of more than $9 million for a Saudi tanker. In January 2009, the ransom was just over $2 million, according to reports. Korean tanker Samho Dream, to $12 million in June 2011 for the Kuwaiti tanker MV Zirku. The U.S. Maritime Administration and the Coast Guard have issued guidance for commercial vessels to stay 200 miles away from the Somali coast. However, pirates have adapted and increased their capability to attack and attack and steal cargo from ships. The Coast Guard has issued guidance that commercial vessels should stay at least 200 miles from Somali coast to avoid pirate attacks. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. 30 percent (490 of 1,650) of vessels reporting pirate attacks worldwide from 2006 through 2010 were identified as tankers. pirate attacks against tankers have tripled in the last 5 years. From January through June 2011, 100 tankers were attacked, an increase of 37 percent compared to tankers attacked from January to June 2010.available for patrolling them, make protecting energy tankers difficult. See table 1 for a summary of tanker attacked by pirates during 2006 to 2010. For more information, visit the International Maritime Bureau's website. Piracy threatens tankers transiting one of the world’s busiest shipping lanes near key energy corridors and the Suez Canal. The vast areas at risk for piracy off the Horn of Africa, combined with the small number of military ships, make piracy a major concern for the international community. The threat of piracy has become relatively common in recent years, according to the U.S. State Department. It is estimated that more than 1,000 people have been killed in piracy in the past year. their related infrastructure at overseas ports. For example, in 2002, terrorists conducted a suicide boat attack against the French supertanker Limburg off the coast of Yemen. In 2010, an incident involving another super tanker, the M/V M. Star, in the Strait of Hormuz is suspected to have been a terrorist attack. The incident is believed to have taken place in the early hours of the morning on September 11, 2010. The cause of the incident has not yet been determined. This work is a work of the U.S. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States. The published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from GAO. However, because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material, permission from the GAO is required from the author. 2005.01.05: The Government Accountability Office releases a report on the Department of Justice's investigation of the National Security Agency. The report, "The Government Accountability Agency's Investigation of the NSC," was released on January 10, 2005. copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. For support in the UK, call the national suicide prevention line on 0800 273-TALK (8255). In the Middle East, contact the Syriac Orthodox Church on 020 709090. For more information on the Syriacs, visit www.sriac.org. officials acknowledged that their policies and procedures did not include this requirement. It is important in that the number of OCS facilities could change each year. For example, some facilities may drop below the production or personnel thresholds described earlier in this article. The Coast Guard has completed its assessments for the previously omitted facilities. However, given that the list of security-regulated facilities may change eachyear based on factors such as production volume, it is important to ensure that any facilities added to the list are fully assessed. development, or production of oil, natural gas, or mineral resources. As of September 2010, there were about 3,900 such facilities. If a facility of this type meets or exceeds any one of three thresholds for production or personnel, it is subject to 33 C.F.R. part 106 security requirements. In the U.S., such facilities are known as oil and natural gas refineries. In Europe, they are called oil and gas refiners. In Australia, they have been called oil refineries, and in New Zealand, they've been known as gas refractories. statement, thereby falling outside the scope of 33 C.F.R. part 106, or other facilities could meet or exceed such thresholds, thereby rendering them subject to part 106. Standards for Internal Control in the Federal Government state that policies and procedures enforce management directives and help ensure that actions are taken. The standards are intended to help ensure the proper implementation of management directives. The standard is intended to ensure that the correct management directives are followed and that appropriate actions are carried out in accordance with the directives. There is little chance of an oil spill when these units are drilling and have not struck oil. During that period of time, MODUs could be at risk of a terrorist attack. The Deepwater Horizon was in this stage when it resulted in such a large oil spill. The well has yet to be sealed prior to connecting it to a production facility. The MODUs do not pose a risk of an attack during that time. The officials noted that there is a brief time when a drilling unit strikes a well, but the well has not yet been sealed. or systems from a safety or engineering perspective can bring greater knowledge of how single facilities intersect with broader systems. The report noted that “complex systems almost always fail in complex ways” and cautioned that attempting to identify a single cause for the Deepwater Horizon incident would provide a dangerously incomplete picture of what happened on the Gulf of Mexico. The study was published by the U.S. National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) and the Institute of Medicine (IM) in Washington, D.C. incomplete picture of what happened. The report examined the Deepwater Horizon incident with an expansive view toward the role that industry and government sectors played in assessing vulnerabilities and the impact the incident had on economic, social, and environmental systems. Enhancing knowledge about the vulnerabilities of networks will be a key goal of the report, which will be published in the spring of 2015. It will also focus on the impact of the incident on the global economy and the environment, as well as the role of the government in responding to it. version of the 2006 National Infrastructure Protection Plan which describes the department’s strategic approach to infrastructure protection. The plan placed an increased emphasis on risk management and it centered attention on going beyond assessments of individual assets by extending the scope of risk assessments to systems or networks. For example, the plan included a risk assessment of the state of the roads in the state. It also included a plan to assess the health and safety of the people and infrastructure in the State of the Union. For more information on the plan, go to: http://www.nipa.gov.uk/. Gaining a better understanding of network risks would help to understand multiplying consequences of a terrorist attack or simultaneous attacks on key facilities. The 2009 National Infrastructure Protection Plan, 2010 DHS Quadrennial Review, and a National Research Council evaluation of DHS risk assessment efforts have determined that gaining a better Understanding of Network Risks is a key goal of MSRAM's mission to protect the U.S. electrical grid from terrorist and cyber-security threats. For more information on MSRAM, visit: www.msram.org. attack that could have significant consequences despite a facility not meeting the production or personnel thresholds. Such risks could involve the reliability of blowout preventer valves. Gaining a fuller understanding of the security risks is key to reducing the risk of attack, says the U.S. State Department. For more information, go to: http://www.state.gov/news/press/press-releases/2013/01/09/13/18/17/17-17-18-18/news-reporters-examine-risk-of-attack-on-shore-facility.html. “network” risks involves gaining a greater understanding of how a network is vulnerable to a diverse range of threats. Examining how such vulnerabilities create strategic opportunities for intelligent adversaries with malevolent intent is central to this understanding. For example, knowing what damage a malicious adversary could achieve by exploiting weaknesses is key to knowing how to protect your network from such threats. For more information, visit: www.cybersecurity.org/network-risk/how-a-network-is-vulnerable-to-threats. Coast Guard expects to issue its report in the fall of 2011. The tool has limits in that it should not be used where the consequences of a terrorist attack are mainly interruption to land or water transportation. Enhancing DHS and the Coast Guard’s ability to assess secondary economic impacts could improve a MSRAM analyst’'s accuracy in assessing the relative risk of a facility. Undervaluing secondaryEconomic impacts could result in a lower relative risk ranking scenarios. The input for secondaryEconomicImpacts can have a substantial effect on how MSRAM’S output ranks a facility relative to other potential targets. Coast Guard has limited data for assessing secondary economic impacts from an attack on OCS facilities or deepwater ports. Coast Guard analysts stated that underestimates the security risk to a facility, or inversely, overvaluingsecondary economic impacts could result in overestimating the security threat to the facility. However, the Coast Guard has no data on the impact of a terrorist attack on a deepwater port or OCS facility. The U.S. military has no plans to attack any of the deepwater facilities. gathering these data is a challenge because there are few models or guidance available for doing so. During the course of our review, the Coast Guard started using a tool, called “IMPLAN,” that helps inform judgments of secondary economic impacts by showing what the impact could be for different terrorist groups. The Coast Guard is using the tool to help make decisions about how to respond to terrorist threats. The U.S. Coast Guard says it will continue to use the tool for the foreseeable future. guidance and would provide information to decision makers that could minimize the likelihood of being unprepared for a potential attack. Coast Guard officials agreed that assessing “network effects” is a challenge and they are examining ways to meet this challenge. The threat of terrorism against energy tankers and offshore energy infrastructure highlights the importance of the Coast Guard having policies and procedures in place to better ensure the security of the energy infrastructure, officials said. The Coast Guard’s work is this area is in its infancy and there is uncertainty regarding the way in which the Coast Coast Guard will move forward in measuring ‘network effects' in an oil-distribution network offers opportunities for improving the resiliency of the network within a given budget. How the Coast Guard assesses offshore infrastructure within the broader set of networks is important. The findings of the National Commission on the BP Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill incident illustrate how examining networks can help improve the resilience of offshore infrastructure. The report was published by the U.S. Department of Justice on November 14, 2010. It was based on the findings of a panel of experts convened by the Department of the Justice. conducted to do so. For example, research on whether a hijacked boat or an underwater attack could sink an offshore oil or natural gas platform would give the Coast Guard and owners and operators a clearer sense of whether this attack scenario could result in major consequences. Coast Guard officials say the research will give them a better idea of what to do if an attack occurs. The Coast Guard says the research could be used to improve the nation's ability to respond to an attack on an oil or gas platform. associated with MODUs, such as the Deepwater Horizon, could improve the quality of program decisions made by Coast Guard managers. According to Coast Guard officials, they are studying the “lessons learned” from the Deep Water Horizon. The Coast Guard is studying whether actions may be needed to ensure the security of this type of facility. The U.S. Navy is also looking into the possibility of sending a ship to the facility to protect it from attack. The Navy is looking into whether this would be a viable option. risks because this infrastructure is located in open waters and generally many miles away from Coast Guard assets and personnel. Our evaluation will focus on Coast Guard security inspections and other measures to better secure OCS facilities and deepwater. However, we will continue our broader work looking at the security of offshore energy infrastructure, including Coast Guardsecurity inspections and others challenges. We have recently completed work involving Coast Guard efforts to assess security risks and ensure the security. of offshoreEnergy infrastructure. We will continue to look at security of off-shore energy infrastructure and other challenges. Coast Guard seeks to mitigate many kinds of security challenges in the maritime environment. FBI shares responsibility for preventing and responding to terrorist incidents. Offshore energy infrastructure presents its own set ofSecurity challenges. Some of this infrastructure is located many miles from shore. The U.S. Coast Guard is the lead federal agency for maritime security. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the United States, call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. in their levels of security, and the Coast Guard is limited in the degree to which it can bring about improvements abroad when security is substandard. In addition, while tankers are in transit, they face risks because they are traveling at high speed. The Coast Guard's activities are limited by conditions set by host nations, and it can't do much to improve security in those countries. The U.S. Coast Guard has been involved in the rescue of more than 2,000 people since the 9/11 terrorist attacks. The Coast Guard faces complex and technical challenges in assessing security risks. The Coast Guard recognizes these challenges and generally has actions underway to study or address them. Coast Guard officials noted that some of these challenges are more complex than others. To help mitigate the risks, such as installing camera systems and increasing radar coverage, call the National Security Agency on 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.nsa.gov/. For confidential support on suicide matters call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details.  internal control standards state that such control activities are an integral part of an entity’s planning, implementing, reviewing, and accountability for stewardship of government resources. Developing such procedures could help ensure that the Coast Guard carries out its risk assessment. To see the full report, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/28/technology/cnn-news/2013-01-28/cnc-news-top-10-cnnnews/top-stories. has begun to revise its grant programs, but it is too early in that process to determine whether and how performance measures will be incorporated into those revisions. Performance measures would allow DHS to set priorities for funding on the basis of reducing overall risk, thereby helping ports obtain resources, the agency says. It is unclear whether DHS will use performance measures to determine priorities for grant funding in the future, the department says. The agency says it is still considering the proposal and will make a decision in the coming months. or systems with which OCS facilities and deepwater ports intersect could improve the quality of information that informs program and budget decisions. Doing so would also be consistent with DHS’s Quadrennial Review and other DHS and other agencies’ programs, the agency says. It would also help ensure security and use scarce resources in a constrained fiscal environment, it says. The agency says the information could be used to better inform program and Budget decisions on how to best ensure security, use scarceresources and protect the nation. for a response to an attack, if a terrorist attack were to succeed despite the protective measures in place. We made five recommendations in our 2007 report, three of which were directed to the Secretary of Homeland Security. Two of them were directed jointly to the secretary of Homeland security and two to the Department of Justice. The recommendations were made in response to a 2007 report by the U.S. State Department on the threat of terrorist attacks in the United States. The report was published by the Center for Strategic and International Studies in Washington. the different spill and terrorism sections of the National Response Framework, DHS is in the process of revising this document. DHS did not have further information regarding whether or how the spill andterrorism response annexes may be revised. Further, the FBI has not taken independent action to implement this. The FBI did not take independent action on this issue, nor has it taken any further action on the matter. The Department of Homeland Security has no immediate plans to revise the annexes or revise the spill response plan. (3) restore shipping operations in a timely manner. Clearly defined and understood roles and responsibilities for all essential stakeholders are needed to ensure an effective response, and operational plans for the response should be explicitly linked. Regarding our recommendation that DHS develop performance measures for emergency response capabilities, DHS has said it will work with the White House to develop such measures in the near future. For more information, visit www.dhs.gov.uk. For confidential support on suicide matters call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here. the Horn of Africa. GAO-11-449T. Quadrennial Homeland Security Review: 2010 Reports Addressed Many Required Elements, but Budget Planning Not Yet Completed. Maritime Security: Actions Needed to Assess and Update Plan And Enhance Collaboration among Partners Involved in Countering Piracy off the Horn of. Africa. Critical Infrastructure Protection: Update to National Infrastructure Protection Plan Includes Increased Emphasis on Risk Management and Resilience. Risk Management: Further Refinements Needed To Assess Risks and Prioritize Protective Measures at Ports. Security and the Attorney General concurred or partially concurred with all of the recommendations. The Coast Guard and the FBI have made progress in implementing these recommendations. Two have been implemented, and the Coast Guard is in the process of implementing a third. But actions have not yet been taken to address the remaining two recommendations. See table 2 for a summary of our findings, recommendations and the current status of agency efforts to implement our recommendations. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org. of energy tankers, OCS facilities, and deepwater ports. The Coast Guard has taken steps to implement prior GAO recommendations to enhance energy tanker security. It continues to work towards implementing the three outstanding recommendations. Improvements in security could help to prevent a terrorist attack against this infrastructure, which could be targeted by al-Qaeda and other terrorist groups in the Middle East and North Africa. The U.S. Coast Guard is working with the U.N. Secretary-General to implement the recommendations. Port stakeholders in the U.S. have taken steps to address vulnerabilities at domestic ports. For example, the Houston Ship Channel Security District is a public-private partnership that was established to increase preparedness and response capabilities. The goal is to improve security and safety for facilities, employees, and place.place. For more information, visit the port's website or call the National Security Agency at 1-800-273-TALK (8255) or visit the Port of Houston's website at www.Port of Houston.com. communities surrounding the Houston Ship Channel. The security district has installed technology, such as night vision and motion-activated detection equipment, and conducts patrols on land and in the water. However, we also reported on challenges that remained in (1) making federal agencies’ protective actions more effective and (2) implementing plans for the area. The report was based on a survey of more than 1,000 residents in and around the area, as well as a report from the National Transportation Safety Board. Finley, Kehr, McEnearney, O’Brien, Sandel, Bausell, Davidson, Lombardi, Orr, Wren contributed to the report. Maritime Security: Updating U.S. Counterpiracy Action Plan Gains Urgency as Piracy Escalates off coast of the United States. For more information, visit maritimesecurity.gov and the National Security Council’s Center for Maritime Security. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org.