Congress has imposed restrictions on J-1 visa holders, including physicians in graduate medical education. They must meet this light of this finding, the Congress tightened immigration laws for foreign doctors. The latter were made subject to the 2-year foreign residence requirement whether or not their programs were Graduate Medical Education (GME) programs. The U.S. is the only country in the world that allows foreign doctors to practice medicine in the United States. The GME program is intended to pass learning and experience to other countries. Each year a few thousand new physicians receive J-1 visas and enter research. Only these exchange visitor physicians are subject to the J-visa 2-year foreign residence requirement. Policy changes regarding waivers for exchange visitors will affect more than one-third of the international medical graduates in graduate medical education or training. Does not include graduates of Canadian medical schools. Medical school type was not indicated for 454 residents (0.5 percent of all residents) under the Mutual Educational and Cultural Exchange Act of 1961. J-1 visas allow foreign nationals to participate as exchange visitors in cultural and educational programs in the United States. USIA is responsible for managing the J-1 visa program and designates organizations as program sponsors. In 1995, over 9,000 foreign physicians with J- 1 visas were in the U.S. for graduate work. The programs are intended to promote mutual understanding between the people of the United states and other countries by means of educational and cultural exchanges. Under these exchange visitor programs, designated organizations sponsor nonimmigrant aliens’ temporary visits to the US for the purposes of teaching. physicians because they were unable to recruit U.S. physicians. In some cases it appears that other qualified physicians are available, but the facility prefers to hire the physicians with J-1 visas. For example, officials from one multispecialty clinic told us that they interviewed several applicants for a specialist physician position, including candidates who were not under J- 1 visas, but had excellent references and credentials. For more information on how to apply to be a doctor, visit the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists website. J-1 visa waivers did your state receive from employers between October 1, 1995 and March 31, 1996? (enter 0 if no applications were received during that time) 112 (total) applications please continue on next page--> ) 5. Based on your current if any, does your state consider in deciding whether to request state J-1 visas? (check all that apply) 15% We rely on other federal or state 38% We act in response to reports from other federal and state agencies 32% other (please specify) 97% Whether the practice location is apply. There is an annual limit of 20 state J-1 visa waivers to meet your state’s needs for physicians under this program. Which of the following activities, if any, does your state conduct or intend to conduct this year for state J/1 visa waiver physicians? We require periodic reports by the 6% less than adequate 0% much less thanadequate. We are also interested in any activities your state conducts to monitor compliance with the conditions of the J- 1 visa waiver. Listed below are some of the factors you might consider when reviewing state J-1 visa waiver applications. Which of the following factors should you consider? We require periodic reports by the 18% too early to tell 21% We conduct periodic site visits 82% We rely on the employers to enforce 6.adequate 50% We require regular site visits by the 82% too late to tell 18%. We conduct monthly site visits and require periodic site reports. We conduct quarterly site visits to ensure that the site is in good condition. in a health professional shortage area (HPSA) 65% Whether the practice location is in a medically underserved area/population (MUA/MUP) 29% Whether other state J-1 visa waiver physicians are practicing in the area. 27% Whether physicians under National Health Service Corps (NHSC) obligations are practicing there. 7% Other (please explain) 10. Whether the facility has tried recruiting in the past without success 0% None of the above factors (please include a copy of your state’s) weak controls mean there is little to deter physicians or their employers from failing to comply if they choose to break these terms. We found instances in which on Immigration Reform. who obtain waivers of their J-1 visa foreign residence requirement are apparently complying with the terms of their service agreements. We analyzed waivers to practice in underserved areas in the United States instead of in their home states. We sent the questionnaire to the facilities for 211 physicians who had their waivers requested through ARC, DOT, HUD, and USDA from 1994 to 1995. The number of physicians receiving waivers of the 2-year foreign residence requirement for J-1 exchange visitors has grown more than tenfold in the past 5 years. Several factors have contributed to the increase: more hospitals and other facilities have found the ability to pay to be more difficult to come by. The number of doctors who have been granted a waiver of the requirement has grown by more than 10 times in the last 5 years, according to a study by the American College of Physicians. The study also found that the number of patients who had received a waiver had increased by over 50 per cent. 1996 amendments should improve coordination of the waiver requests for physicians with J-1 visas. They do not address the following issues: Fully coordinating with other underservice programs or with waiver requests by other agencies. The amendments apply only to exchange visitors who were admitted to the U.S. under a J-visa or acquired such status before June 1, 1996. Other amendments to the Immigration and Nationality Act regarding waivers for physicians were passed in the 104th Congress and included in the Omnibus Consolidated Appropriations Act, 1997. By 1995, four U.S. government agencies and 23 states were requesting waivers of J-1 visa requirements for physicians. Before 1993, the only agency requesting waivers for a number of physicians to practice in underserved areas each other and of other programs to address medical underservice. By 1995, there were nearly 30 federal agencies and states processing requests for waivers. Most of them were operating independent of one another. The four federal agencies have no formal process for coordinating their waiver the states’ participation in requesting waivers. Health care facility officials, as well as state and federal health officials, said that they have been inundated with inquiries from physicians who would like to obtain a waiver by working in a shortage area. “In summary, this Department has viewed the J-1 visa to be a means of sharing advanced medical knowledge and allowing the benefits of training to accrue to the home country. The Department does not view waivers as for congressional consideration. DOT has had limited involvement in waivers for physicians with J- 1 visas and did not have comments on the draft report. Requests for waivers for physicians with J-1 visas are not coordinated effectively among the they chose. The use of waivers is now a ready means for acquiring physicians. Congress should consider requiring that waivers be used to address medical underservice in the U.S. for physicians who have subspecialties. The current statute the lack of potential actions against employers who did not use physicians with waivers in accordance with the intended purposes noted in the program. The exception policy now resembles a full-fledged program for addressing medical resolution, and better coordination is needed. requirement, we subtracted the number of exchange visitor physicians who were continuing applicants in the 1995-96 academic year from the number. of physicians sponsored by ECFMG in the prior academic year. While this number is not exact because it may include a small number of physicians, it may also include some who were involved in exchange visits in the 1990s and early 2000s. The number of physician exchange visitors may also be higher in the early 1990s than in the late 1990s. instructing or lecturing, studying, observing, conducting research, consulting, demonstrating special skills, or receiving training. ECFMG is the designated sponsor for exchange visitors participating in graduate medical education. After completing this program, it is expected that participants will return to their home countries and impart what they have learned and experienced. It is also expected that they will share their experiences and knowledge with their local communities. The program is funded by the European Council on Foreign Relations (ECFMG) and the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (ERR). About 1 in 10 physicians in programs accredited by ACGME was an exchange visitor in August 1995. Exchange visitors are only a portion of physicians in graduate medical education programs. Of those who were international medical graduates,physicians who did did not visit the U.S. State licensing boards; and other sources. For more information, visit the American College of Gastroenterology and Midwifery (ACGME) website. For additional information, see the American Council on Gastro-Gastro-Meteorology (ACEM) website and the American Board of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists (ABGME). including INS service centers; (4) officials from the Department of Labor and the State Department. Officials from the Educational Commission for Foreign Medical Graduates (ECFMG), the National Association of Community Health Centers, the American Medical Association (AMA), the Council on Graduate Medical Education (COGME), and the U.S. Commission for foreign medical Graduates were also on hand for the event. The event took place in Washington, D.C., at the White House and on the East Coast. Council on Graduate Medical Education. First Report of the Council, Vols. I and II. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 1988. Sixth Report: Managed Health Care: Implications for the Physician Workforce and Medical. Education. Washington: U.N. Institute of Medicine, 1989. Third Report: The Role of Medical Education in the Developing World, 1990. Council on Graduate medical education. First report of the council, Vol. I, I, II, and III. to participants in graduate medical education or training. “that there is no longer an insufficient number of physicians and surgeons in the United States.” In Services, 1995. Institute of Medicine. The Nation’s Physician Workforce: Options for Balancing Supply and. Requirements. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press, 1996. The New England Journal of Medicine, Vol. 334, No. 25 (1996), pp. 1679-83. The National Academy of Medicine: Options For Balancing supply and Requirements. Pew Health Professions Commission. Critical Challenges: Revitalizing the HealthProfessions for the Twenty-First Century. San Francisco: University of California San Francisco Center for the Healthprofessions, 1995. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Department of Education, Division of Public Health, Department. of Health Policy and Management, Division. of Public and Behavioral Health, Division, HealthCare.gov, Health Care Research Institute, Health Resources and Services Administration, and the National Institutes of Health. On December 31, 1995, 848 NHSC physicians were practicing in underserved areas. This is a conservative number because it does not include the number of physicians who were NHSC state loan repayment recipients practicing in shortage areas, which was not available by state. To estimate the number. physicians who completed graduate medical education and training in. 1995 who would be subject to the 2-year foreign. residence between 1994 and 1995, we obtained the. number of NHSC scholarship or federal loan repayment recipient who were practicing. in each state as of 1995. the facility listed in agency data on December 31, 1995, or had their waivers in process to begin practicing shortly thereafter. We used the shortage area dedesignation level because it is the primary measurement used by HHS and the requesting agencies to establish the need for physicians. We compared this number with the number of full-time-equivalent physicians needed to remove primary care Health Professional Shortage Area designations in that state as of December 1, 1995. We also compared this with the total number of physicians who received NHSC scholarships or federal loan repayment. from NHSC at the time of our review. As shown in table VII.1, the degree to which the identified physician shortage can be offset by the waiver physicians practicing in a state varied between the states. When combined with the NHSC physicians practicing there, the number exceeded the number of physicians needed to remove some states’ primary care Health Professional Shortage Area designations. OtherStates’ identified physician needs were not met by these two physician sources. In addition to those named above, the following individuals made important contributions. practicing in nonprofit community or migrant health centers and about one-fourth are in a private or group practice. The rest are practicing in hospitals, for-profit health centers, or other settings (see fig. 3). See appendix VI for more detailed information on the results of our survey of facilities. Using our survey to help you with your own health care planning is a great way to help your family and community. Use our Survey to Help You Plan Your Health Care Planning to Help Your Family and Community. health center serving residents in public housing, city and county health departments, a capitated-rate program for the Medicare- and Medicaid-eligible elderly. We conducted our work between November 1995 and September 1996 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. practice. The most prevalent subspecialty was nephrology (medicine concerned with kidney disease), which was reported for about 7 percent of the primary care physicians. Requesting facilities and state officials had mixed views on the usefulness of subspecialties for meeting their needs. Officials from some states said that physicians with sub Specialties are not as desirable because they may not remain in the area to practice primary care. In fact, several states have policies to not request waivers for specialties. survey results, we estimate that almost all physicians practicing on January 1, 1996, whose waivers were processed through federal agencies were practicing in primary care specialties. Overall, more than half of them werepracticing in internal medicine (see fig. 4). The other major primary carespecialties were pediatrics and family the practice specialties and practice settings for the 150 physicians who were practicing on New Year's Day 1996. Includes rural health clinics, mental health clinics and other facilities listed on agency data. or not the physician obtained permanent residency during his or her employment; and (5) the physician’s medical specialty, subspecialty, and practice setting. We received responses for 39 of the 40 physicians in our 1990 to 1992 ARC sample and for 200 of 211 physician in our 1994 to 1995 samples. We also received responses from 200 physicians who were interviewed in 1994 and 1995. We are happy to share these responses with the public for use in this article. We thank the physicians for their responses. These physicians are required to return to their home country (or to their country of last legal residence) for at least 2 years after completion of training. However, they may obtain a waiver of this requirement and remain in the United States. The amendments strengthen penalty provisions for federally sponsored waiver physicians by prohibiting them from obtaining permanent residence or U.S. citizenship without completing the required 3-year agreement. The alien physician must (1) demonstrate a bona fide offer of full-time employment at a health facility, (2) agree to begin employment at that facility within 90 days of receiving the waiver, and (3) agrees to work there for at at least 3 years while while being trained. USIA and INS must recommend and approve all waivers of the 2-year foreign residence requirement for physicians requested by interested government agencies and states. No single agency has management responsibility for use of the waivers to address physician shortages. The waivers can be requested by a federal agency or by a state agency or department that is responsible for public health issues. These federal agencies andStates generally request waivers so that the physicians can practice for several years in underserved areas (see table 1). The waivers are granted on a case-by-case basis. prevent physicians from shopping between agencies. The foreign medical graduate would have to certify that he or she is only requesting a waiver through one agency. The Omnibus Consolidated Appropriations Act, 1997, included amendments to the Immigration and Nationality Act that create greater consistency among waiver efforts by subjecting state waiver efforts to the same standards as national waiver efforts. The bill passed with bipartisan support and was signed into law by President George W. Bush on July 25, 1997. It was the first of its kind in the U.S. a shortage of health care professionals. If the alien physician is otherwise contractually obligated to return to a foreign country, that country’s government must furnish a statement to the Director of USIA that it has no objection to a waiver. if the physician fails to fulfill the contract, he or she or his or her family will be deported. If they are in the U.S., they will be allowed to stay for up to two years. if they are not, they can stay for three years. In 1981, USIA asked the Congress to extend the limit up to 7 years for medical doctors to encourage them to study in the United States rather than in a Communist country. The House Committee on the Judiciary questioned USIA officials regarding the likelihood that physicians would be willing to return home after 7 years, during which time they may have raised families in the U.S. The Congress agreed to the extension of the limit, and doctors were allowed to return to their home countries for a maximum of 7 years. maintaining a nonimmigrant work status (H-1B visa). (The physician’s status as a non immigrant may not be changed until the employment contract is fulfilled.) The alien physician must agree to practice medicine for at least 3 years in a geographic area or areas designated by the Secretary of HHS as having a shortage of health care professionals. The U.S. General must begin work within 90 days of receipt of the waiver, and (4) maintain aNonimmigrant status until their 3-year commitment is completed. request by a U.S. government agency, the regulation would condition approval on the physician’s commitment to practice primary care for at least 3 years in a designated Health Professional Shortage Area or a Medically Underserved Area. To practice psychiatric care in a mental health Health Professional shortage Area, a physician would have to be a member of a Mental Health Health Shortage Association. To be part of the Mental Health Shortages Association, a doctor would need to have been a member for three years. U.S. government agencies to some of the same requirements as those sponsored by state agencies. For example, the amendments require such physicians to (1) agree to work for at least 3 years for the health facility named in the application, and (2) work in an area designated by the Secretary of Health and Human Services. The amendments were passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate this week. They are expected to be signed by President Barack Obama by the end of the month. to all concerned...and, above all, the foreign nationals themselves—that the exchange program is not an immigration program and should not be used to circumvent the operation of the immigration laws” The 1956 amendment also provided for a waiver of the foreign residence requirement on the basis of a request from the request of an interested U.S. Government agency. An amendment to the foreign residency provision in 1970 removed the blanket application of theforeign residence requirement for exchange visitors and imposed it only on participants whose participation was financed in some way by the United States or their home. Educational Exchange Act of 1948. The act required participants to depart the United States after completing their programs. The 2-year foreign residence requirement and its related waiver provision evolved through a number of legislative changes after the exchange visitor program was authorized in 1948. “the amendment would make perfectly clear that the program was not intended to be a permanent residence,’’ the amendment said. The amendment would also make it clear that participants would not be required to stay in the U.S. for more than two years. an interested U.S. government agency showing the waiver to be in the public interest. “To make available the services of exchangees who possess talents desired by our universities, foundations and other institutions, the language of the House bill was modified to permit the waiver of the foreign residence requirement,” the bill says. The bill was passed by the House of Representatives on a vote of 419-3. The Senate passed the bill on a voice vote on Thursday, and the vote is expected to go to a second vote on Friday. Inappropriate Uses of Educational and Cultural Exchange Visas. GAO/NSIAD-90-61, Feb. 16, 1990. U.S. Information Agency: Waiver of Exchange Visitor Foreign Residence Requirement. “Correcting the Oversupply of Specialists by Limiting Residencies for Graduates of Foreign Medical Schools.” The New England Journal of Medicine, July 5, 1990, at 3 p.m. www.newenglandjournal.com. requirement before they are eligible to apply for nonimmigrant visas (H and L) as temporary workers, for permanent residencies in the United States, or as immigrants. There was no 2-year foreign residence requirement or waiver provision in the exchange visitor program authorized with the passage of the U.S. immigration reform bill. Information and information about the exchange visitors program can be found at: http://www.samaritans.org/exchange-visitors/index.html. she must reside and be physically present in the country of his or her nationality or last residence for at least 2 years after departing the U.S. before becoming eligible to apply for an immigrant visa, for permanent residence, or for any other change of nonimmigrant status. The 1994 law was changed in 1994 to make it easier for people to apply to become citizens or permanent residents of the United States. The law was also changed in 1995 to make sure that people could apply for a green card if they were already citizens. financed by a government, made ineligible to apply for waivers on the basis of no-objection statements from their home countries, limited to 3-year stays in the United States. required to make a commitment to return to their home country after completing their training, and required to provide written assurance by their government that they will return to the country after their training is complete. The U.S. military is the largest employer of women in the world, with more than 100,000 women working in the military. increased the usual permissible duration of stay to 7 years, but it imposed additional requirements. Graduate medical education or training participants were required, as a continuing reminder, to furnish annual affidavits to INS attesting that they would return to their home countries upon completion of the education orTraining for medical training. The requirement to return to home countries was imposed on graduates of medical training programs in the U.S. and Canada. The requirements were imposed on graduate medical education and training participants in the United States and Canada, as well as those in other countries. countries or (2) whose home countries clearly needed their services. Participants could no longer meet the 2-year foreign residence requirement by residing in other foreign countries. They had to reside in the countries of their nationalities or their last foreign residences before coming to the United States. This requirement has been lifted for the duration of the program. The U.S. government says the program has been a success and that it will continue to work to improve the lives of those who serve in the military.  ARC’s Inspector General attributed most of the problems identified to the employers. However, for waivers requested through both federal agencies and states, the applicable federal laws and regulations do not specify penalties against employers that fail to comply with agency policies. The new regulations and the 1996 amendments do not establish any penalties for employers who fail tocompliance.a program. The ARC Inspector General noted that the most significant programmatic issue that surfaced during that office's review was the limited accountability of employers and facility owners. ARC tries to address this shortcoming by requiring employers to sign a statement certifying that they will comply with the waiver policy. Applications from employers found to be in violation of the policy receive additional scrutiny to ensure that the problems have been corrected. The growth in the number of employers signing up for the waiver program has been slowing down in recent years. The number of applicants is expected to grow again in the next few years as the economy continues to improve. The waiver program is funded by a combination of federal and state grants. and regulations do not require waivers to be used only as a last resort. It is unclear whether agencies would devote sufficient resources to effectively monitor compliance. USDA, for example, relies on employers to enforce the employment contracts, citing a lack of staff resources to conduct its own. It's also unclear whether employers would devote enough resources to monitor compliance with employment contracts. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. Recent amendments to the Immigration and Nationality Act impose additional requirements for waivers obtained through federal agencies. These changes (1) make the waiver conditions much more consistent, which may help to alleviate the confusion cited by agency officials. The new regulations, if finalized, and the 1996 amendments could address many of the coordination and compliance problems, but not all of them. Recognizing the need for residence requirement.waiver requests more consistent. While the efforts of the interagency group and enactment of the1996 amendments could help to address some of the problems. still applies. The 1970 act also established two additional bases for waivers: persecution because of race, religion, or political opinion and statements by the participant’s home countries that they had no objections to the waivers. These bases still apply except that the statement of no-objection waiver is no longer available. The act also establishes two more bases for waiver: persecution due to race or religion, and persecution because the participant is a citizen of another country. The acts also establish two additional grounds for waivers.  INS may only grant the waiver if USIA submits a virtually all waiver requests. USIA reviews the program, policy, and foreign relations aspects of the case and forwards its recommendations to the INS Commissioner. INS officials said that refusal of the waiver is extremely rare if USia has given a favorable recommendation. “when the application demonstrates that the exchange visitor is needed merely to provide services for a limited geographical geographical area,” the INS said in a statement. The waiver is granted when the application shows that the visitor is only needed to provide a limited number of services. To determine the number of waivers for physicians granted at the request of ARC, USDA, and HUD, we requested copies of the agencies’ databases. Each database contained information about when the agency requested that USIA recommend the waiver. We used the date that the agencies sent the request to computer-based systems, and selectively compared the data with that held by USIA. We obtained information on the waiver requests made by DOT from its Office of the General Counsel. We got information on state requests for waivers from the Department of Health and Human Services. published a proposed regulation in the Federal Register on September 5, 1996. In the preamble to the proposed regulation, USIA noted that with the entry of USDA and HUD into the waiver process, inconsistency in the administration of waiver requests among the different agencies has created some confusion. For a list of the agencies involved, visit the USIA website. For more information, go to: www.usia.gov/warrant-warrants-and-grant-authorities. You can use the enclosed pre-addressed envelope or send it via FAX on (206) 287-4872. The questionnaire should take about 15 minutes to complete. Please provide the name, title, and telephone number of the individual who completed this questionnaire so that we may consult him or her, if we may. If you have any questions, please send them to jennifer.smith@mailonline.co.uk or e-mail jennifersmith@mailOnline.com. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here. 30 days, please call (202) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone. A recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists. For more information, please visit www.cnn.com/cnn30daylist or call 1-800-273-8255 or visit the website at http://www.cntv.com/. For more details on the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline, call (800) 273-TALK (8255) or visit http:// www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. For confidential support on suicide matters call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch or click here. Journal of Medicine, Vol. 333, No. 7 (1995), pp. 454-56. The first copy of each GAO report and testimony is free. Additional copies are $2 each. Orders should be sent to the following address, accompanied by a check or money order made out to the Superintendent of Documents, when necessary. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. GAO issues a list of newly available reports and testimony each day. To receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past, call (202) 512-6000. Orders may also be placed by using fax number (301) 258-4066, or TDD ( 301) 413-0006. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. General Accounting Office. Health Care Shortage Areas: Designations Not a Useful Tool for Directing Resources to the Underserved. GAO/HEHS-95-200, Sept. 8, 1995. U.S. National Health Service Corps: Opportunities to Stretch Scarce Dollars and Improve Provider Placement. GAE/HEHM-96-28, Nov. 24, 1995, and GAO-95/96/200, September 8-9, 1995,. U.s. General Accounting Office: Health Careshortage areas are not a useful tool for directing resources to the underserved. VISA and MasterCard credit cards are accepted, also. Orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent. U.S. General Accounting Office P.O. Box 6015 Gaithersburg, MD 20884-6015 Room 1100 700 4th St. NW (corner of 4th and G Sts. NW) For confidential support call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. "We are sending copies of this report to the Secretaries of Agriculture, Health and Human Services, Housing and Urban Development, and Transportation," the report says. "We also received comments on technical matters from several of the agencies, which we considered in preparing our final report," it adds. The report is available online at: http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-263876/Obama-administration-report-reveals-technical-problems.html#storylink=cpy United States Information Agency, the Federal Co-Chairman of the Appalachian Regional Commission, and the Attorney General. Major contributors to this report are listed in appendix XI. We also will make copies available to others on request. Please contact me on (202) 512-7119 if you or your staff have any questions. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from. Click here to go to the report's page about the U.S. Civil Rights Act of 1964. to this report: Sarah F. Jaggar, Issue Area Director; Susan Lawes, Senior Evaluator; Susie Anschell, Evaluators. Julie Rachiele, Technical Information Specialist; Evan Stoll, Computer Specialist; Jerry Aiken, computer Specialist. Julian Klazkin, Senior Attorney; Stan Stenersen, EvalUator; Lisa DeCora, Intern. Kathleen Belfi, Support Services Technician; and William J. Carter-Woodbridge, Communications Analyst. IX, and X). These comments indicate general agreement with our conclusions and matters for congressional consideration. HUD and Justice (the parent department for INS) chose not to provide formal comments. However, we discussed our findings with HUD and INS officials, and they raised no objections to our findings or matters. We are happy to discuss these matters with you in the coming days. We hope you will join us in discussing our findings and matters that need to be considered by Congress. We look forward to hearing from you. chairs the department’s Exchange Visitor Waiver Review Board. HHS favored the option of delegating responsibility for the waivers to the states, he said. He said that his office had fully reviewed the draft report and was in general agreement with the findings. The report will be submitted to Congress for consideration. The bill is expected to be voted on by the end of the year, the White House has said. The House and Senate are expected to vote on the bill in the coming weeks. which they came to the United States. U.S. officials were required to issue an annual report to the Congress on participants who had submitted affidavits, including their names and addresses. In reporting on this legislation, the House reported on the participants' status in the programs, the report said. The report said the participants had submitted an affidavit to provide information on their status in those programs and the programs in which they were participating, and that they had been accepted into the U.N. programs. Committee on the Judiciary “notes the flagrant abuse of the exchange program during the past decade’ It seeks to alleviate possible ‘brain drain’ from various countries. It said that the affidavits were to ensure that the physicians comply with the terms of their agreement. amendment of the Immigration and Nationality Amendment of the immigration and nationality. Amendment. of theimmigration andnationality. amendment. to make it easier for people to apply for asylum in the U.S. to get a green card. other NHSC professionals who received scholarships or federal loan repayment were practicing in underserved areas of the country. In addition to NHSC, HHS has other programs to address medical underservice. For example, HHS provides federal grant funding to community health centers that are required to accept all patients regardless of their medical history. For more information, go to www.nhsc.org or call the National Institutes of Health at 1-800-273-TALK (8255) or go to http://www.hts.gov/. three agencies that provided formal written comments also expressed their support for the need for better coordination between the participating agencies, states, and other programs to address medical underservice. One agency, USDA, also expressed concern about the lack of available funding to operate its program effectively. USDA suggested that an additional $1 million be put into the program to help fund it more effectively. The program is funded by a combination of federal, state, and local sources, as well as private donations. It is currently funded by the federal government, state and local governments. coordinated with other federal programs. Establishing penalties against facilities that fail. Designating leadership responsibility for managing the program. This responsibility could be given to a single federal agency, such as HHS, or to several federal agencies, for example, through a memorandum of understanding. or it could be delegated to the states. It could be used to improve the quality of the health care provided to children in the state and local communities. It can also be used as a tool to improve health care for the entire nation. facilities to verify and the waiver physicians to certify that they are complying with ARC policies. In addition, the ARC Inspector General conducts site visits to the physicians’ practice locations. In contrast, while HUD and USDA officials said that they had started or planned to start requiring periodic reports, officials through (1) discussions with theARC Inspector General and a review of reports from that office, conducted a survey of facilities where requesting agencies believed that the physicians were practicing, and visited facilities where they were supposed to be practicing. Many of the examples of physicians who failed to comply with agency policies resulted from actions taken by the employers. As a result, a reliance on employers to do the policing does not appear adequate to prevent the kinds of situations, the report says. The report was compiled by ARC’s Inspector General and the Center for Health Research and Policy, and was published by ARC on November 14. For more information, visit www.monitoring.org. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here. practice in other areas, including designated Medically Underserved Areas. ARC officials said that they excluded the MedicallyUnderserved Area designations because (1) this designation is not an accurate measure of physician shortage; (2) the designations have not been updated; and (3) including them would allow physicians to practice in virtually area’s underserved. For example, if the underserved part of the population is low-income, the designation may not apply to that group. existing authority and agency resources. Despite some improvements, monitoring efforts to ensure that physicians fulfill the terms of their agreements remain spotty. Accountability for reducing the actual conditions of underservice is limited. Physicians can practice in underserved areas but not actually target their efforts to that part of the population. There are some improvements in monitoring efforts, but there are still some areas that need to be addressed, the report says. The report is published by the American College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists (ACOG). In 1995, about half of the foreign physicians that were supposed to return home were granted waivers of this requirement to practice in an underserved area in the United States. In five states, the number of physicians for whom waivers were processed equaled more than 75 percent of the physicians needed to remove more physicians practicing in an area than are needed. There is a continued need for physicians in other areas; and a lack of coordination with state efforts to address physicians shortages. In addition, although HHS has started to collect information on theNumber of physicians practicing under waivers. home countries. As a result, HHS does not support waivers for physicians to remain in the United States to practice in underserved areas. Instead, HHS administers other federal programs, such as NHSC, to address physician shortages in the U.S. To measure the need for physicians in the Medically Underserved Area, there is no dedesignation level to measure theneed for physicians. Although physicians with waivers may also practice in designated MedicallyUnderserved Areas, HHS doesn't remove this designation. HHS is the federal agency responsible for addressing physician shortages. It does not use waivers to do so. HHS endorses the philosophy that exchange visitors return home after completing their training to make their new knowledge and skills available to their patients.favorable recommendation. Figure 1 illustrates the waiver process. The waiver process can take up to two years to work through, depending on the length of the exchange. For more information on the waivers, visit the HHS waiver website. for more information about the waiver, click here. agencies and states may not know of problems identified by HHS when considering requests from community health centers. For example, waivers were requested through HUD for several physicians to practice at a health center that had its HHS funding discontinued due to financial management problems. When requesting the waivers for these physicians, HUD officials did not know that HHS had identified problems with the health center. As a result, they could not take those problems into consideration when deciding whether the waivers were in the public’s interest. agencies and states or with other medical underservice programs, such as NHSC. No single entity is responsible for coordinating practice locations of waiver physicians. Waivers for physicians also are not well-coordinated with other programs addressingunderservice, like those operated by HHS. When combined with NHSC physicians, federal agencies and states have requested waivers for more physicians than are needed to remove the shortage designations in managing the waivers, the authors say. They say the problems of overlapping jurisdictions and the lack of information on the practice locations could result in physician shortages. Warrant policies vary considerably between agencies, leading in some cases to “shopping” by the physicians seeking a waiver to obtain the most advantageous terms. Agency controls to help ensure that physicians comply with waiver agreements vary among the federal agencies and states. These controls range from periodic reports and site visits, to reliance on employers to enforce the employment contracts. For example, ARC requires theARC requires the federal government to provide a mechanism to help resolve the problems of shortage areas.” Without any overall management of the use of waivers, waiver policies vary. to comply with requirements of the waiver. Directing the entity(ies) managing the program to implement procedures and criteria for the selection and placement of physicians and for monitoring compliance with waiver requirements. This could include requiring the state to clearly support the use of the physician for the program. It could also be required that the state clearly state that the physician is being used for the purposes of the program, such as for medical research or treatment. It would be required to clearly state the physician's role in the program and the reasons for his or her selection. federal agencies. One state health official commented that participation of multiple federal agencies has resulted in confusing and sometimes contradictory program guidelines. This means that federal agencies and states will not know if the needs of an area are already being met when considering whether or not to request a waiver for a physician. Another HHS program with which physician waivers are not well-coordinated is the Community Health Center program. Thus far, the various efforts to use waiver physicians to address medical underservice have operated largely independent of need. not being managed as a program, and this is having detrimental results. Federal efforts to address physician shortages are not coordinated among the federal agencies or with the states. Several agencies, including those not traditionally involved in physician supply issues, have set up de facto physician supply programs using their resources. The federal government is trying to find a solution to the physician shortage crisis, but it is having trouble finding a way to do so. The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services is working with states to address the shortage of doctors. Survey: More than one-third of physicians who received waivers are in an area. Congress should consider how waivers fit into overall strategy to address medical underservice. Ensuring that the use of waivers for physicians is a last resort, authors say. In other states, such as California, such physicians equal less than 10 percent of the identified need, they say. The survey also asked respondents for their state’s written policies, if any, regarding these waivers, they write. Every state except Alaska relies on waivers to relieve physician shortages. The degree to which they are relied on varies greatly from state to state. State health officials do not always know where physicians receiving waivers through federal agencies are practicing. Because of the lack of coordination, the number of waivers processed for physicians to practice in some states has been more than the amount needed to alleviate the identified physician shortage in that state, the authors say. The authors say the waivers are needed to help alleviate physician shortages in the United States. The growing use of waivers is that is underserved. Not all agencies processing the waiver requests have expertise in addressing health care issues. The rapid growth in waivers for physicians makes this an opportune time for the Congress to reassess what it wants the waiver provision to accomplish. The running disagreement between HHS and other federal agencies about the role of waivers in addressing physician shortages in underserved areas needs to be resolved, says David Perry, a health care policy expert at the Center for American Progress.  ARC restricts physicians to practice locations in federally designated Health Professional Shortage Areas. While ARC requires that facilities’ requests for waivers come through the states, other agencies do not. This leads to situations where the states are unaware of the level of placements that are occurring. ARC, USDA, and USIA provided formal written comments (see apps. VIII, VIII) to seven agencies that are involved with waivers for Physicians to practice in underserved areas.as eligible practice locations and state involvement and the consequences of the physician’s failure to complete the agreed-upon length of service. any location in Appalachia. State health officials commented that they would like consistency in waiver policies across some locations. There is no mechanism for each federal agency to know how received the waiver. Here are examples in which the facility changed its mind: In letters asking USDA to request waivers for three physicians, a clinic in Illinois said that the physicians were needed to help meet an urgent primary care delivery crises in the rural community where the practice site was located. In one case, HUD requested waivers for additional physicians to practice in the same city. requests and they have overlapping jurisdictions. As a result, we found USDA’s policy has been to request waivers for rural areas. HUD's policy has. been to ask waivers for urban areas. The two agencies have not agreed on which areas are rural and which are urban. We found that the two agencies don’t even agree on what areas are “urban” and “rural” The U.S. Department of Agriculture and the Department of Housing and Urban Development have not yet agreed on the definition of rural. no longer limited to practice locations in Appalachia and areas serving DOT personnel; instead, they could practice in rural and urban areas across the country. HUD officials have recently decided to reassess the department’s waiver policy and stopped accepting requests after August 30, 1996, to conduct a review. Table of Contents: HUD's waiver policy, 1996-2013. HUD's waivers policy, 1997-2013: 1996-2014: 1997-2015: 2007-2014, 2008-2009, 2009-2010, 2010-2011, 2011-2012. the department’s Agricultural Research Service by an office that has experience processing waiver requests for a small number of research scientists who were in the United States as exchange visitors. At HUD, the waivers were processed in the Office of the Deputy Assistant Secretary for Intergovernmental Relations. Although most physicians are in the U.S. on exchange visits, some scientists are also in the country for research. The waivers can be granted for up to three years. The waiver process can be completed in a matter of days. to practice in one rural area where the U.S. Coast Guard operates. The rapid growth in waivers began in late 1993 and 1994, when the Departments of Agriculture (USDA) and Housing and Urban Development (HUD) began requesting them for physicians to serve their rural and urban constituents. Senior officials say the waivers are needed to ensure the safety of the nation's health care system. The waivers are also needed to protect the health of the American public, which has been hit hard by the recession. USIA, INS, HHS, and the requesting federal agencies have been meeting since late 1995 to discuss the use of waivers to address physician shortages. The officials formed an informal interagency group that has discussed revising regulations addressing waiver requests. USIA, in working with the other agencies, USIA has proposed regulations to make the better coordination, officials from USIA and other agencies said in a joint statement. The group has met informally to discuss waiver requests and USIA is proposing regulations to address some of the problems. obtained and analyzed data on requests for waivers for physicians from USIA and the requesting federal agencies. We also visited three states—Washington, Texas, and Georgia. We selected these three states for a cross-section of states where waiver physicians were practicing. Washington was USIA in our calculations because neither USIA nor INS has a cost-effective means of identifying waiver requests by occupation. USIA officials said that they recommended or approved virtually all the physician waiver requests made by the interested U.S. government agencies. sent a questionnaire to the contact person provided by USIA or the official responsible for public health issues in all 54 eligible jurisdictions. The 50 states, the District of Columbia, Guam, Puerto Rico, and the U.S. Virgin Islands were included. Each state reported on the number of waivers requested by the state and the amount of money spent on each waiver. The total amount of funds spent on the waiver was $1.2 billion. The number of waiver requests was $2.1 billion. under the state authority, did not know how many physicians received waivers through federal agencies to practice in the state. As a result, when we scheduled our visits to practice sites in Texas, state officials were surprised to find out that over 20 waiver physicians practicing in Texas. Texas had a large number of physicians with waivers throughFederal agencies but the state was not requesting waivers. Georgia had a state program as well as physicians whose waivers were requested through ARC, HUD, and USDA. During our site visits, we met The authority for states to request waivers was passed in 1994. 23 states requested waivers in calendar year 1995. Agency officials said they would like to limit the number of waivers processed by their agencies, but have not found a way of effectively restricting them. Another factor in the increase in waivers may be the interest among physicians. 2 shows the number. of waiver requests submitted to USIA by each agency in 1995 and the. reason for the requests. For information on the. number of. waivers requested by each agencies since 1990, see appendix V. our survey of states regarding waivers for physicians and follow-up telephone calls to state officials. Our scope did not include waiver requests from VA or requests from other agencies for physicians to conduct research. Because the agencies requesting waivers do not consistently track the practice dates of the physicians, we do not have a complete picture of the waiver requests. We are happy to share this information with the public if it is of interest to the public or to those who wish to learn more about the waiver process and its application process. waiver to be a means to fill their empty positions. More agencies and states are making requests; and physicians are actively seeking waivers. Waiver physicians are practicing in virtually every state; most are primary care physicians processing the waiver. In some cases allegedly paying recruiters and immigration attorneys to find them a position. They cite several reasons why they wanted waivers, including that they would not be able to apply the medical skills they had learned in the United States in their home countries, (2) they were concerned about violence in their home countries, they wanted to serve in an underserved area, their families and relatives were in the United States, and (5) they had a general desire to stay in the U.S. In 1996, waiver physicians were practicing in 49 states. In 2012, waiver doctors were practicing on an average of three times the number of patients they had been practicing on in the previous year, according to the American College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists. who were willing to practice there. Other reasons cited for hiring these physicians are their superior foreign language skills and cultural familiarity with a facility’s patient population. For example, several with state and other health officials, visited 14 sites where waiver physicians were practicing, and interviewed health care facility officials and 20 physicians who received waivers. We selected the sites in order to visit physicians in a variety of practice settings, including federally funded community and migrant health centers, a hospital, and a nursing home. States. want to employ foreign physicians through the use of the waivers. Many officials said that their facilities had turned to these physicians received waivers to practice at a migrant health center in Eastern Washington. These physicians were recruited, in part, because they are native Spanish speakers, which enables them to effectively treat the center’s Spanish-speaking patients. The sudden increase in the number of waivers being processed in 1994 and 1995 was probably probably due to the recession of the 1990s, the authors say. workers, a waiver physician was in a group practice a block away from a federally funded migrant health center. A senior official at the migrant Health Center said that the waiver physician did not impact the center’s patient load because they both served different patient populations. Establishing penalties against a waiver doctor could lead to fines of up to $10,000 a day for each patient who is denied access to a doctor for more than a year. A waiver physician could also be charged with failing to provide medical care to migrant workers. alternative to funding the program from appropriated research funds would be to initiate a fee-for-service type application fee to offset operational costs. We concur that any entity involved in managing waiver requests for physicians should commit adequate resources for oversight and operational support. Although we did not examine financing options for managing the waivers in our review, we did note that a few states, such as Michigan, have been requiring user fees of up to $500 per physician. We did note, however, that we have not examined financing options to manage the waivers. by professional recruiters or immigration attorneys regarding the availability of a physician to meet their facility’s needs. Some facility officials and physicians reported paying up to $25,000 in immigration attorney or recruiter fees for assistance in matching a physician with a facility and facility. Some facilities paid as much as $100,000 to find a physician who could meet their needs if the physician could obtain a waiver. Some physicians paid as little as $5,000 for their services to meet the needs of the facility. the requesting agencies’ and states’ policies do not all require that a waiver physician in such an area accept Medicaid, have a sliding fee scale, or accept anyone for services regardless of his or her ability to pay. In one area where the identified need was care for migrant farm, a waiver doctor was needed to care for the children of migrant farm workers. The waiver physician was also needed to look after the children’s medical needs after they were released from the care of the migrant farm. a 95-percent confidence level, the rate of compliance among the 1990 to 1992 requests is at least 80 percent. The percent still at the requesting facility on January 1, 1996, is at at least 19 percent. For this analysis, we used the survey results of the 1994 to 1995 samples to estimate the of compliance. We also used the surveys to estimate practice specialties and practice settings of physicians who were practicing on New Year's Day 1996. We used the Survey results to estimate that compliance among those practicing on Jan. 1, 1995, was at least 93 percent. We used the survey results of the 1990 to 1992 ARC sample to estimate the rate of completion of ARC’s required 2-year contract. This appendix contains information for each state showing (1) the identified physician need in the state and (2) the number of physicians with waivers granted or in process. The appendix also includes the total number of waiver physicians in each state and the number who have been granted or are in process of being granted waivers. We estimate that only 38 of 40 ARC physicians, 2 of 2 DOT physicians, 49 of 49 HUD physicians, and 111 of 120 USDA physicians completed the contract.  ARC began requesting waivers in the 1980s for physicians to practice in Appalachia. ARC requested around 200 or fewer waivers per year, peaking at 266 waivers in 1993. In addition to ARC, since 1993 the Department of Transportation has requested waivers for a handful of physicians. We sent a questionnaire to the contact person at the facility that had requested the waivers, using the information provided by the federal agencies. For each physician, we asked for each physician to explain his or her reason for requesting a waiver. The number of waivers being processed for physicians to practice in underserved areas each year has grown from 70 in 1990, to 1,374 in 1995 (see fig. 2) For eight states, the number of physicians who received waivers in 1994 and 1995 (or had waivers in process), combined with the number. of NHSC physicians in service at the end of 1995, exceeded number of. physicians needed to remove the shortage area designations in the state. (See app. VII for more information on the identified need, number of waived, and number ofNHSC physicians practicing in each state) The rate of compliance, to date, of physicians whose waiver requests were received by ARC, DOT, HUD, and USDA from 1994 to 1995. At a 95-percent confidence level, the rate we included those 150 physicians who were practicing on January 1, 1996, for the facilities listed by the agency. We also obtained comments on the use of waivers for physicians from the survey respondents. The remaining 4 percent had left or did not plan to plan to return to their previous jobs in the future. could not identify the number of physicians in practice at any given point in time. Instead, we used the dates that the agencies and states submitted their requests for waivers to USIA. We assumed that those physicians whose waivers were requested in 1994 or 1995 were either already practicing at the time of the request. For the number. of NHSC physicians in a state, we Used the Data from the requesting agencies and. states on the numberof waiver applications sent to. USIA from 1994 to 1995. number of waiver requests for physicians to practice in underserved areas that the agencies sent to USIA in 1995 (1,374) is about 64 percent of this figure. Therefore, we estimate that half of the physicians who were supposed to return home after completing their graduate medical education or training received a waiver from the federal government. We estimate that about half of those physicians were able to return to the U.S. to practice medicine. We are not sure how many of them returned to the United States. required by ARC, which was 2-years, for the facility that requested the waiver. On January 1, 1996, over one-fourth (28 percent) were still practicing at the same facility. Nearly half of these (13 percent) had been there for more than 4 years. We also examined the number of people who had been in the military for at least a year and how long they had been with the military. We found that the majority of those who had served in the armed forces had served at least two years. of the physicians were not practicing there. We also found instances in which the reason for not meeting the requirements of an agreement resulted from the physician’s actions. For example, in two separate cases, physicians were fired when they refused to complete the requirement for working 40 hours a week. In one case, a physician was fired when he refused to work 40 hours in a week, even though he had agreed to do so. In another, a doctor was fired for refusing to work more than 30 hours in one week. agreements were not met. Six of eight reviews conducted by the Inspector General from 1994 to 1995 found that contrary to ARC policy, some physicians were not practicing primary care at least 40 hours per week in a Health Professional Shortage Area. Instead, employers were using the physicians in subspecialty instead of the primary care physicians in the HPSA. The review found that employers were not using the doctors in their primary care areas, but instead using them in their subspecialties. The report was published in the Journal of the American Academy of Family Physicians. in many cases for less than 1 year. To provide a more accurate picture of whether physicians stay for the full term of their agreement, we analyzed those physicians whose waivers had been requested through ARC from 1990 to 1992. We counted those physicians who worked for at least 1.75 years as meeting the ARC minimum contract period at that time, which was 2 years. We estimate that 90 percent completed the minimum employment period were requested between 1990 and 1992. At the time, we used 1. 75 years of practice as our measure to allow for vacation and other leave. to work at that facility. Although this percentage is similar to the percentage of ARC physicians who did not complete their 2-year agreements, the percentage may grow because many of the physicians had completed only a fraction of their employment contract by the start of 1996. For example, none of none of the doctors at the facility had completed their 2 year contracts by the beginning of 1996, but they were still employed there at the time of their departure. The percentage of physicians who didn't complete their two-year contracts may grow over time. the physicians with waivers through HUD had been practicing for more than 1 year by that date. For the physicians in our sample and in the states we visited, several reasons they were not practicing at the location for which the waiver was requested had to do with changes made physician remained to work for the new employer after the practice was sold. HUD officials also said that their monitoring efforts were limited by the availability of staff resources. Under existing procedures, locating a waiver physician in a medical shortage area is no guarantee that the needs of the underserved will be addressed. the location on the waiver request to another location that is not in a federally designated shortage area. The third physician was practicing only part-time at the practice site for which the waiver was requested. He said that because there were not enough patients in that location, he spends about three days a week at that location. The waiver was granted on a temporary basis until a new location could be found. The new location is in the state of New Jersey, which has a population of 1.2 million. half his time working at the main clinic in Champaign, Illinois. A medical group asked HUD to request waivers for three physicians to work at a practice purchased from a retiring physician outside of Atlanta. When we called the practice site, we were told that only one of the three worked at the clinic at the time of the HUD request for the waivers to be granted. We are happy to make clear that this is not the case, and that the waiver was requested by the medical group, not HUD. by the facility that initiated the request. If a facility indicated that the physician never worked there, we contacted the facility, INS, or both to obtain information on the reason. In at least one case, it appears that the employer made this determination before the waiver was even granted, but the physician still agency officials. We also reviewed case files at the requesting agencies and USIA to see if a waiver had been granted. We found cases in which a facility made the request and then determined the physician was no longer needed. a physician never practiced at the intended facility, unbeknownst to the agency processing the request. Including all current waiver physicians when assessing compliance with requesting agency policies can present somewhat of a misleading picture. So many of these physicians have been at their jobs for a relatively short time, so it can be difficult to assess compliance with the agency's policies. For more information, go to: http://www.nhs.gov/nhs-topics/topics-health-researchers/top-10-physician- waivers. at both agencies said that they do not have the staff resources to monitor physician compliance. These officials said that because the use of waivers to address physician shortages is not authorized or funded as a program, their agencies don't have the resources available to effectively manage it as part of a program. The waivers are not intended to be used to fill physician shortages, but to address the shortage of doctors in certain areas of the U.S. They are not meant to be a permanent solution to physician shortages. the contact person to tell us (1) if the physician worked or planned to work at the facility; (2) if he or she was working as of January 1, 1996; (3) if they left and the date they left; and (4) whether the physician was still working at that time. If the physician is still working, we will include that information in this article. We will also include the date the physician left the facility, if it was in 1996 or after. to check for documentation, if any, of the physician’s departure from the facility or noncompliance. For physicians that did not work at or left the facilities, we tried to locate the physician through AMA data. We also used the unique provider identification number database, which is maintained by the Medicare program; telephone listings; and other sources. For more information, go to www.cnn.com/healthcare and www.nhs.uk/health-care-facility-listing. at the requesting facility. In one instance, the fired physician notified USDA that he was going to practice at another hospital and when USDA officials told him he could not because the hospital was not in a shortage area, the physician broke off contact with them. The facility official said the physician was fired because he was not qualified to work at the hospital at the request of the USDA. The physician has since been fired, according to the facility official, and the physician has not been heard from since. that he had heard that the physician was pursuing additional graduate medical education in the United States. In the second instance, the facility reported the physician’s firing directly to INS, which revoked his nonimmigrant work status. Reviews conducted by ARC’S Inspector General have disclosed similar instances in which conditions of conditions of work were not met, according to the Inspector General's report. The inspector general's report also found that conditions of working conditions at the facility were not meeting the standards required by federal law. was located. Six months after one of the physicians began working there, she was terminated because the clinic had determined that it was overstaffed. She is now practicing in another city in Illinois that has an identified shortage of physicians who serve Medicaid patients. The second physician was transferred from the clinic to another one in the state. The clinic was located in the city of Carbondale, Illinois. It is now located in a city of the same name, in the town of Edwardsville. One physician never worked at the site, one physician worked a brief period and then went to practice at a prison in Michigan. An official from the medical group said that the practice no longer had enough patients to support these physicians. One physician.was practicing there. As a result, one doctor never worked there, and one physician. was practicing there, the official said. The medical group no longer has enough patients for these physicians to support them, he said. One doctor worked there for a few months, and then left for a prison.