Arabia, several Saudi princes, a Saudi banker, and a Saudi charity. Plaintiffs argued that these Saudi defendants played a "critical role" in the September 11 attacks by giving money to Muslim groups, which in turn funded Al Qaeda. In August 2008, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit affirmed dismissals of claims against the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, aSaudi charity, Saudi princes,. and aSaudi banker in In r e Terrorist Attacks on September 11, 2001. The Supreme Court later abrogated the first of these holdings. The Second Circuit reversed its own position with respect to the tort exception to foreign sovereign immunity. In December 2013, the Second Circuit ordered these claims against Saudi Arabia and its agencies or instrumentalities to be reinstated in the interest of the United States. The Supreme Court has yet to rule on the case, which is expected to be heard by the Supreme Court in April. The case is expected in the spring or summer of this year. of justice to determine whether the tort exception applies. The district court again dismissed the claims based on foreign sovereign immunity. The case is on appeal at the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit. In r e Terrorist Attacks of September 11, 2001 ( In re Terrorist tortious acts retain immunity as discretionary functions. In a separate decision in In re terrorist attacks on September 9, 2001 , the Court of appeals for the. Second Circuit affirmed the dismissal of claims against five defendants. Attacks ) is a case consolidated for pre-trial purposes in the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of New York. The Second Circuit Court of Appeals' opinion reviewed dismissals of only a subset of the claims at issue in the case. Plaintiffs in In r e Terrorist Attacks are plaintiffs who were injured or killed in the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, in New York City, Washington, D.C. and elsewhere. The case is currently being heard by the United States Court of Appeal for the Second Circuit. protected as an agent or instrumentality. Only the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit (Seventh Circuit) had reached the opposite conclusion. In Terrorist Attacks III , the Second Circuit characterized the Seventh circuit as an "outlier" on this issue. However, after the Fourth Circuit also adopted the minority, the Fifth and Sixth Circuits agreed with the Fifth Circuit on the issue of terrorism as a protected agent or Instrumentality. The Seventh Circuit was the only one to reach the contrary conclusion. a terrorist act. The exception for designated state sponsors of terrorism provides jurisdiction over cases involving designated "state sponsor[s] of terrorism" in suits involving "personal injury or death that was caused by an act of torture, extrajudicial killing, aircraft sabotage, hostage taking" This list currently includes Iran, Sudan, and Syria. At the time suit was brought in the In re Terrorist Attacks litigation, the previous terrorism exception remained in force. Before asserting jurisdiction to accept a case, a federal court must claim implicates property rights connected with the United States. Claim arises from tortious conduct that occurred in the U.S. or pursuant to an arbitration agreement. Claim seeks money damages against a designated state sponsor of terrorism for injuries arising from the act. Claims can be made if: (1) the claim is made pursuant to arbitration agreement; or (2) it is made in response to a specific act of terrorism; and (3) it involves property rights that are connected to the United states. individuals and businesses injured by the September 11 terrorist attacks. They brought claims based on state and federal tort law and various federal laws, including the Torture Victim Protection Act, for injuries suffered as a result of the attacks. The dismissed claims fall into four categories: (1) claims against the U.S. government, (2), (3), (4), and (5) claims for unspecified damages from the government, among other things. The judge dismissed all but one of the four claims. applied to the charities also commanded immunity for the Kingdom and the SHC. The plaintiffs, recognizing that their allegations about indirect funding for the attacks would not satisfy the tort exception, sought to allege that the activities of certain "operational level agents and alter-egos" of Saudi Arabia within the United States were grounded in considerations of public policy or susceptible to policy analysis. He noted the 2005 district court decision in Terrorist Attacks I granting the defendants immunity for decisions involving which charities to fund. the Saudi defendants, the In r e Terrorist Attacks plaintiffs characterized defendants' charitable contributions to Muslim groups as a form of money laundering. The court rejected this characterization as incompatible with the Supreme Court's interpretation of the commercial activities exception. The FSIA defines "commercial activity" as "a regular course of action" in which the defendant makes a contribution to a charity. The Supreme Court ruled in favor of the defendants in the case of the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks in the United States. efforts by September 11 victims and other plaintiffs seeking recovery in U.S. courts against foreign officials and government-controlled entities like the Saudi charity. Plaintiffs' efforts to hold non-government financial institutions liable for providing material to terrorist organizations have also seemingly been stymied by the courts' interpretations of the ATA as a terrorist organization. The Supreme Court is expected to rule on the case in the next few months, if not before the end of the year or early next year. state a claim on which relief could be granted. Plaintiffs brought claims against these defendants under a common-law tort theory as well as a tort theory. These defendants were Al Rajhi Bank, Saudi American Bank, Saleh Abdullah Kamel, Dallah al Baraka Group LLC, and Dar Al–Maal Al–Islami ("DMI") Trust. The jury found in favor of the Plaintiffs and awarded them all damages. The case was decided in the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of Texas. that all of the defendants' conduct had occurred abroad, and noted in a footnote that Although the September 11, 2001 attacks constitute a "tort," the SJRC and the SRC are not alleged to have participated in that 'tort' Instead, the 'torts' allegedly committed by the 'SJRC and SRC only involve giving money and aid to purported charities that supported al Qaeda' The September 11 '11 attacks thus are distinct and separate from the 'Tort' 'Torts' 'Al Qaeda' are 'alleged support for the terrorist group' In r e Terrorist Attacks on September 11, 2001 , is a consolidated case that includes, among other claims, claims against the Kingdom of Saudi. Plaintiffs in the case were victims of the September 11 terrorist attacks. They alleged that the Saudi defendants had supported Al Qaeda's financial backers prior to the attacks and were therefore civilly liable for plaintiffs' injuries. The appeals court in 2008 affirmed dismissals of the first three sets of claims for lack of subject matter. But the court of appeals did not reach the merits of these allegations. N umerous legal and practical obstacles, such as the infeasibility of locating Al Qaeda operatives, stand in the way of victims seeking to establish liability in U.S. courts. Victims, however, have sued numerous times in the past for damages from the terrorists who planned and carried out the September 11, 2001, attacks. The U.N. Security Council has passed a resolution that would allow victims to sue Al Qaeda for damages if they are found to have been responsible for the attacks. The plaintiffs in this case alleged that the defendants were liable for knowingly providing financial support and services to charities that supported Al Qaeda. The plaintiffs did not identify any actions on the part of the defendants that proximately caused their injuries. Citing its own rules, the court did not describe who can be held liable for the plaintiffs' injuries. The court did, however, say that the plaintiffs could sue the defendants if they were found to be liable for any of the injuries they sustained in the attack. The plaintiffs sued four Saudi princes for actions taken within their official capacities. All four princes held positions of power in the SHC. Three of the princes were members of the country's "Supreme Council of Islamic Affairs," the body responsible for monitoring and approving "Islamic charitable activities" The plaintiffs also sued a banker and Saudi princes in their instrumentality of the Kingdom. The trial is expected to last until the end of the month, when the jury will decide if the case should go to trial. The court applied a multi-factor test, derived from a previous Second Circuit decision and from decisions from other circuits. Whether the SHC was an agency or instrumentality turned on whether it was an "organ" of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. Emphasizing that the Saudi government had formed SHC and paid its employees, the court held that the SHc was an organ, and thus was a agency or agency. The court also considered whether the entity holds exclusive rights to some right in the [foreign] country; and how the entity is treated under foreign state law. giving both within and outside the Kingdom"; and the fourth prince was the SHC's president, in addition to his roles as a provincial governor and crown prince. Although several other federal courts of appeals had ruled on the extension of foreign sovereign immunity to foreign officials, treatment of officials under the Kingdom's rule was not considered a matter of law by the Supreme Court of Saudi Arabia. The court ruled in favor of the king's right to grant immunity to his officials, but not his right to immunity for foreign officials. Instead, the court held that U.S. courts lack jurisdiction over the claims against the Saudi defendants. The legal bases for this holding were lack of subject matter jurisdiction under the FSIA and lack of personal jurisdiction. The most significant aspects of the court of appeals' opinion were interpretations of the jurisdiction was not precluded by theFSIA. However, the appeals court upheld the district court's determination that it lacked personal jurisdiction over Saudi defendants sued in their personal capacities. The court concurred with the districtCourt's finding that the princes sued in his personal capacities lacked sufficient contacts. affirmed dismissals of the claims against the Saudi defendants. However, part of the reasoning for the dismissals was later overturned, and the plaintiffs were permitted a second chance to bring their suit. This effort also failed on sovereign immunity grounds at the district position, the Supreme Court granted review and established the minority position as the correct one. Consequently, jurisdiction over remaining Saudi officials is subject to the same inquiry that applies to other individuals and possibly to a determination as to whether common law immunity applies. to allege that an injury or damage occurred within the U.S., it must also be demonstrated that the defendant's tortious conduct occurred in the United States. In affirming the dismissal with respect to the Saudi Joint Relief Committee (SJRC) and the Saudi Red Crescent Society (SRC), the appellate court did not appear to foreclose a finding of jurisdiction unless all conduct associated with the injury occurs wholly within the United states. In the case of the Saudi charities, the appellate Court stated that some tortious act must be committed by the defendant. the "entire tort" rule would apply, in which case the fact that the relevant Saudi government activity took place outside the United States would make the tort exception inapplicable. For claims made against a Saudi banker and against several Saudi princes for actions taken in their personal capacities, subject matter States in connection with the attacks are attributable to Saudi Arabia. The court found that there was an insufficient factual basis to conclude that any of these individuals were employees of Saudi Arabia acting within the scope of their employment. U.S. State Department has not designated the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia as a state sponsor of terrorism. The court found two other exceptions—the commercial activity and tort exceptions—"potentially relevant" Neither exception applied to the Saudi defendants, the court said. To support their argument that the commercial activities exception should apply to the Kingdom, the defendants cited the U.S.-based International Criminal Court for its ruling in the case of Iran's alleged involvement in 9/11 terror attacks in the United States. applied not only to the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia but also to Saudi officials and the SHC as an agency or instrumentality of the Kingdom. The court of appeals next examined whether any FSIA exception applied. First, the court held that the terrorist state exception did not apply because the York dismissed the claims. Second, it held the FSIA tort exception does not applied because of the "entire tort" rule, and suggested that the discretionary act exception to the tort exception might otherwise apply to preclude jurisdiction. exception by reason of their non-commercial nature, regardless of the contributions' alleged money laundering purpose. This portion of the decision remains undisturbed. The court of appeals rejected the tort exception as inapplicable to claims against the Saudi defendants. The 111 th Congress held a hearing to consider S. 2930 , the Justice Against Sponsors of Terrorism Act, which, among other measures, would have amended the Tort exception to the FSIA specifically to cover terrorist. Claims against Saudi defendants could be boosted by the legislation, the court said. court, however, and is once again on appeal at the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit. The fourth set of claims (those brought against princes in their personal capacities) fell outside of the scope of the FSIA. Nonetheless, as discussed below, the court dismissed those claims for lack of personal jurisdiction. Because a foreign state's "agency or agency or agency" is not subject to FSIA jurisdiction, the case is still on appeal. It is also on appeal to address some issues involving the interpretation of theFSIA, among other issues. were not part of the motion to vacate, plaintiffs did not have an opportunity to pursue their lawsuit against them on remand. Claims against them in their official capacity would likely be deemed to be claims against the state or its instrumentality in any event. After holding that the FSIA.were notPart of the Motion to Vacate, the court ruled that the motion had been denied. The case was heard in the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of New York. The court would be authorized to issue a stay for 180 days, which could be renewed for additional 180-day periods if the Secretary of State certifies that such negotiations remain ongoing. All current versions of JASTA include a finding by Congress that expresses the defendant state to resolve the claims. The court would have the power to extend the stay for an additional 180 days if the secretary of state certifies such negotiations are ongoing. The stay would be valid for a period of up to two years, depending on the length of the stay. The FSIA contains both a general, presumptive rule against litigation in U.S. courts and a number of exceptions permitting suits. As a general rule, foreign states, together with their agencies and instrumentalities, are "immune from the jurisdiction of the courts of the United States and from the states" However, the FSIA authorizes jurisdiction over foreign nations in several exceptions. The FSIA is a jurisdictional gatekeeper for claims against foreign states and their instrumentalities. As discussed below, the Second Amendment to the Constitution protects the right to sue foreign states in international practice. S. 2040 would permit lawsuits by U.S. nationals against the foreign state itself. It would clarify the relationship between the FSIA exception and the ATA's civil liability exception precluding suits against foreign officials. Aliens as well as U.s. nationals would likely be able to bring lawsuits under causes of action other than ATA if jurisdiction is available under the newFSIA exception.rise to jurisdiction where it constitutes "mere negligence," the bill says. The bill is expected to be signed into law by the end of 2015. provide for exclusive federal court jurisdiction over foreign states under the new FSIA provision. Would authorize the Attorney General to intervene in such cases to seek a stay of the civil action if the Secretary of State certifies that the U.S. is engaged in good faith discussions with foreign states. If successful, the measure would allow for the federal government to sue foreign states in federal court. The measure is expected to be signed into law by the end of the year. For more, go to CNN.com/Immigration. FSIA, namely (1) its interpretation of "agency or instrumentality" under the FSIA as extending both to the Saudi charity and to individuals sued in their official capacities, and (2) its. interpretation of the commercial activities and tort exceptions under theFSIA as having a narrower scope than plaintiffs had advocated. The key threshold question was whether the SHC and the princes sued in. their official capacity qualified as agencies or instrumentalities under the. FSIA. The FSIA defines " Agency or Instrumentality" as any entity that is entitled to the same immunity to which the state itself is entitled. Congress passed the FSIA to codify long-standing principles and to clarify limitations on the scope of immunity that had emerged. The Second Circuit held that individuals acting within their official capacities were indeed "agencies" of their states. The court also emphasized the potential erosion of immunity for foreign states if foreign states were to sue the U.S. for violations of the law. The case was a question of first impression for the Second Circuit, the court said. The decision is expected to be published in the coming days. This report addresses relevant legislative developments in its final section. Congress is considering the Justice Against Sponsors of Terrorism Act ( S. 2040 , H.R. 3815 ). The Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act (the FSIA) applies to all foreign states and their "agencies and instrumentalities." Immunity for sovereign nations against suits is a key part of the FSIA, which is why it's being considered by Congress. The FSIA also applies to foreign states that have immunity from lawsuits. an exception. Individual foreign officials are not covered by the FSIA if they are sued in their capacity as individuals. One such defendant, the former president of two of the Saudi-run charities sued for alleged involvement. may be immune from suit under the common law of foreign sovereign immunity. The lawsuit was brought by the American Civil Liberties Union and the Center for Constitutional Rights, both of which are based in Washington, D.C. The case is expected to go before a federal appeals court later this year. immunity extended only to government actions distinct from the actions of officials as individuals. The Second Circuit's holding was consistent with the conclusions of five of the six other federal courts of appeals that had considered whether an individual may be immune from prosecution. "The state cannot act except through individuals," the court said in its ruling. The ruling was published in the online edition of the Second Circuit Court of Appeals on Wednesday, October 17. For the full edition, go to: http://www.secondcircuit.org/. applicable two-part rule for determining whether immunity is retained for otherwise tortious conduct: (1) the acts alleged to be negligent must be discretionary, in that they involve an element of judgment or choice and are not compelled by statute or regulation, and (2) the judgment or decision in question must be made by a person of a certain age or with a certain degree of deliberation. The rule applies to both criminal and civil cases, as well as to civil and family cases. "entire tort" rule to determine whether the conduct of a foreign government or its instrumentality is subject to the FSIA tort exception. The Supreme Court has described the tort exception as "cover[ing] only torts occurring within the territorial jurisdiction of the United States." Consequently, it is insufficient to overcome immunity United States. Neither the appellate court nor the district judge had occasion to determine if the discretionary function exclusion would apply to the Saudi government and the SHC since immunity was already protected. country, that foreign state could not be accorded sovereign immunity … for any tort claims resulting from its conduct. Similarly, the Ninth Circuit has held that the discretionary act exclusion does not apply in the case of a foreign official who, while acting in his home country, orders a killing. The Supreme Court will hear arguments on the case on September 26. The case is expected to last at least a few days before the Supreme Court takes up the case. The decision will be heard on September 27. district court in the D.C. Circuit found in Letelier v. Republic of Chile that an assassination occurring on U.S. soil under the direction of a foreign government was not a discretionary act within the meaning of the FSIA tort exception. While it seems apparent that a decision will be made soon, it is not clear if the decision will ever be made. The case was decided in favor of Chile, and the decision was appealed to the Supreme Court of the United States. calculated to result in injury or death to a particular individual or individuals, made for whatever reason, would be one most assuredly involving policy judgment and decision and thus exempt as a discretionary act. Under section 1605(a)(5)(A), that exception is not applicable to bar this suit. As it has been, the suit has been successful. The suit is being heard by the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of New York, which is hearing the case. of injury to "physical injury" rather than "personal injury," and specifically excluding "any claim for emotional distress or derivative injury suffered as a result of an event or injury to another person that occurs outside of the United States" It would include "any statutory or common law tort claim arising arising from an event" that occurs in the U.S. It would also include any claim for "emotional distress" or "derivative injury" suffered by a person outside the United states. precluding secondary liability for terrorist acts and requiring that plaintiffs demonstrate that the support alleged was a proximate cause of their injuries or losses. Several bills have been introduced in Congress that would broaden the FSIA tort exception explicitly to cover terrorist acts that occur within the United States. Although the aspect of the Terrorist Attacks has been the focus of some of the legislation, the legislation would also cover other aspects of terrorism, such as aircraft sabotage and hostage taking. The bill would amend the tort exception expressly to include "any statutory or common law tort claim arising out of an act of extrajudicial killing, aircraft sabotage, hostage taking, terrorism, or the provision of material support or resources for such an act" with respect to the FSIA non-commercial tort exception in other cases. Under the bill, a plaintiff could seek money damages from a foreign state for physical injury to person or property or death caused by both (1) an act of international terrorism in the United States, and (2) a tortious act in the U.S. The bill was passed by the House of Representatives on Wednesday. The Senate is expected to take up the bill next week. It would go into effect on January 1, 2015. the defendants breached any duty of care owed to the plaintiffs or that their actions proximately caused the plaintiffs' injuries. In Terrorist Attacks III , the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit adopted narrow interpretations of the commercial activities and tort exceptions under the FSIA. The decision appears to preclude the plaintiffs from suing the government for damages under the federal False Claims Act. The ruling was handed down on September 11, 2013. The case is known as Terrorist attacks III, and it was decided on September 14, 2013, in Washington, DC. exception was to create liability for incidents such as traffic accidents that occur in the U.S. The court was concerned about the effect that an expanded tort exception would have on the other FSIA exceptions. It emphasized that if the exception were expanded to include all conduct conceivably, it could be used to cover the entire federal government. The case was decided in favor of the plaintiffs. The decision was published in the June 2013 issue of the magazine, which is also published by the New York Times, the Washington Post, and the Los Angeles Times. an amendment in the nature of a substitute offered by Senator Cornyn. H.R. 3815 would amend the FSIA tort exception in 28 U.S.C. §1605(a)(5) by limiting the type of tort. The amendment was introduced late in 2015 and referred to the House Judiciary Subcommittee on Constitution and Civil Justice. The House Judiciary Committee has yet to vote on the amendment. The Senate is expected to take up the amendment later this year. The full Senate could vote on it as early as next week. The bills would have expanded liability for foreign government officials sovereign immunity may be abrogated. It would also eliminate the "entire tort" rule by providing that the non-commercial tort exception covers physical injuries, deaths, and property damage or loss occurring in the United States "regardless of where the underlying tortious act or omission occurs" The discretionary function exclusion would remain. The bills would also have been amended to clarify that there is no rule holding that the "Entire Tort" must occur within the U.S. characterized as tortious, the tort exception would "vitiate" the terrorist state exception's limitation to designated terrorist states. In a separate case, a later panel of the appellate court disagreed with this aspect of the decision, however, effectively overturning it for the Second Circuit. It is possible that other courts could read the terrorism exception as foreclosing suits against states not designated as sponsors of terrorism. The tort exception is a federal law that applies only to acts that occur in the United States. attacks has some bearing on the application of the "entire tort" rule. A more direct role in orchestrating from abroad a terrorist attack that takes place in the United States would nevertheless qualify for jurisdiction under the tort exception. The district court found that the same considerations that in the U.S. that would be a violation of the domestic law of that country. Both of these cases applied the tort exceptions to injuries in the US orchestrated from abroad, suggesting that the rule either is not in use in these appellate circuits or that it is not used. the plaintiffs relief from judgment in the interests of justice, sending the case back to the district court. The lower court was also asked to determine whether the defendants were entitled to immunity based on the discretionary nature of their actions. If the appellate court reverses theDistrict court's dismissal of the suit on "entire tort" grounds, the case will likely return to the District Court. The case will also likely return for a determination of whether the suit is precluded on grounds that the alleged actions were a separate tort. The Supreme Court in 2004 held that the statute does not provide a cause of action for such lawsuits. The court rejected the plaintiffs' complaints based on common law tort theories, holding that they did not demonstrate that the claims were valid. The case was brought by non-U.S. citizens seeking damages for conduct that violates the "law of nations or a treaty of the United States" in the U.S., the court said. It was the first case of its kind to be decided by a federal court in the state of California. recent holding in Rothstein v. UBS AG , the appellate court held that the ATA does not encompass liability on an aiding-and-abetting theory. The Alien Tort Statute provides federal jurisdiction, according to the Supreme Court's interpretation of the phrase "by reason of," requires a showing of proximate cause. The Supreme Court has not ruled on the question of liability for the actions of a party to an ATA suit, but it has said that liability must be shown for a cause that is proximate. that international terrorism did not meet this standard as of September 11, 2001. Quoting its 2003 opinion in United States v. Yousef , the court stated the following: We regrettably are no closer now ... to an international consensus on the definition of terrorism or even its proscription; the mere mere existence of terrorism is not enough to ban it. The U.S. Supreme Court ruled in 2003 that international terrorism didn't meet the standard of terrorism as of 9/11. existence of the phrase "state-sponsored terrorism" proves the absence of agreement on basic terms among a large number of States that terrorism violates [customary] international law. Moreover, there continues to be strenuous disagreement among States about what actions do or do not constitute terrorism, nor have we shaken ourselves free, he says. "We are not yet free," he adds, "and we will not be free until we are free from the threat of state- sponsored terrorism" "We will be free from state-sponsored terror," he says, "when we have shaken ourselves of the fear of it" The court also rejected the plaintiffs' reliance on the Torture Victim Protection Act for their case. "We thus conclude ... that terrorism ... does not provide a basis for universal jurisdiction [under customary international law," the court said. The court also said the plaintiffs were wrong to claim that "one man's terrorist is another man's freedom fighter" in the case of the U.S. soldier who was killed by al Qaeda in Iraq in 2004. The U.N. secretary-general said in a statement that al Qaeda was responsible for the attack. recognized, there is no discretion to commit, or to have one's officers or agents commit, an illegal act. Whatever policy options may exist for a foreign country, it has no "discretion" to perpetrate conduct designed to result in the assassination of an individual or individuals, action that is clearly contrary to U.S. policy. U.N. Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon: "No country has no discretion" to commit "an illegal act" in the name of national security. to the precepts of humanity as recognized in both national and international law. Accordingly there would be no "discretion" within the meaning of section 1605(a)(5)(A) to order or to aid in an assassination and were it to be demonstrated that a foreign state has undertaken any such act in this way. There would also be no "discretion within the meaning of section 1605 (a) to order or to aid in an assassination and were it to be demonstrated that a foreign state has undertaken such an act. "International terrorism" is defined with reference to the ATA, including the exclusion for "acts of war" The amendment would dispense with the "entire tort" rule and the statutory discretionary act exclusion for such cases only. Current law intact jurisdiction, to the maximum extent permissible under the 5 th Amendment to the Constitution of the United States, over any person who commits or aids and abets an act of international terrorism or otherwise sponsors such act or the person who committed such act, the amendment says. in civil actions for terrorist acts no matter where they occur. H.R. 3143 would have included the provision of material support for terrorism in the jurisdiction. The amended version of Section 2337 would have exempted only U.S. officials. It currently exempts all government officials, which would have been a change in the law for the first time since 9/11. The bill was defeated by a vote of 38-31. It was introduced by Sen. Marco Rubio, R-Florida, in the Senate. Identical versions of the Justice Against Sponsors of Terrorism Act were introduced in the 113 th Congress. S. 1535 was reported favorably out of the Senate Judiciary Committee with some amendments to the findings and provisions addressing aiding and abetting liability under the Anti-Terrorism Act. A companion bill, H.R. 5904 , did not receive further action. The House did not vote on either version of the bill. The bills would have been passed into law if they had been approved. S. 1894 was the Justice Against Sponsors of Terrorism Act. It was ordered to reduce some of the burdens faced by victims of state-sponsored terrorism in the United States who seek to bring lawsuits against foreign officials. Attacks within the U.S. were ordered by the act. The act was passed by the 112 th Congress. It is the only act of its kind in the history of the country. It has been signed into law by President George W. Bush, who signed it into law on January 1, 2009. The Justice Against Sponsors of Terrorism Act (JASTA) has returned to the 114 th Congress as S. 2040. The Senate passed the bill by voice vote on May 17, 2016, after accepting the ATA's revision of the cause of action. The ATA did not expressly include liability for material support, but the JASTA revision does. The bill is expected to be voted on by the House of Representatives as early as next week and the Senate as soon as the end of June. unchanged; however, the bill would include among congressional findings that "no country has the discretion to engage knowingly in the financing or sponsorship of terrorism, whether directly or indirectly" S. 2040 (as passed by the Senate) would create a new exception to the FSIA for acts of international terrorism that that are funded by the U.S. The bill would create an exception for acts that are financed by the United States or its allies. The Senate passed the bill by a vote of 52-36. ATA to remove the immunity of foreign officials from lawsuits as currently provided in 18 U.S.C. §2337(2). It would also add a provision to the ATA to address issues plaintiffs have confronted in establishing personal jurisdiction over foreign nationals. H.R. 3815 would declare that The district courts shall have personal which any national of the United States suffers injury in his or her person, property, or business by reason of such an act in violation of section 2333. S. 2040 (as passed by the Senate) would leave the foreign official exclusion under the ATa intact. as the Anti-Terrorism Act (ATA), the Alien Tort Statute (ATS), and the Torture Victims' Protection Act (TVPA) The ATA provides that U.S. nationals injured in their person, property, or business "by reason of an act of international terrorism" can recover treble damages, plus costs. The TVPA provides that victims of torture can recover up to $100,000 in damages, but does not require the victim to pay the full amount. Secondary liability would attach under the Senate bill to any person who "aids and abets, by knowingly providing substantial assistance" The House bill would authorize secondary liability against anyone who aided, abetted, or conspired with the perpetrator. Neither bill would explicitly elucidate whether criminal liability under the material support provisions of the law would be covered by secondary liability. The bill would also clarify what type of intent or knowledge would be necessary to establish liability.that gives rise to the lawsuit. act was done pursuant to and in furtherance of the common scheme. S. 2040 (as passed by the Senate) and H.R. 3815 would amend the ATA to provide for secondary liability in the case of an act of international terrorism. The bills would implementsecondary liability in somewhat different ways. The Senate passed the bills, the House passed them, and the Senate is expected to vote on them this week. The bill would provide secondary liability for acts of terrorism in the United States. ATA would also establish civil liability, as some courts have found. Language in the findings section suggest the intent that the knowing or reckless provision of material support or resources to a foreign terrorist organization, whether directly or indirectly, should give rise to liability. H.R. 3815 would amend the Patriot Act to make it easier to sue the U.S. government for aiding and abetting a terrorist organization. The bill is expected to be voted on by the House of Representatives this week and the Senate next week. planned, committed, or authorized by an entity designated as a foreign terrorist organization at the time of the planning, commission, or authorization of the attack. The House bill would also apply liability in the case of an entity designate as aforeign terrorist organization as a result of the attacks. The bill was introduced by Rep. Peter Roskam, R-Illinois, and passed by the House Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs. It would not apply to individuals or groups that have been designated as foreign terrorist organizations. with the forum to permit personal jurisdiction under the constitutional "minimum contacts" standard. Plaintiffs argued that the minimum contacts test was satisfied because the defendants had purposefully directed activity at the judicial forum by supporting the attacks. The court rejected this argument, acknowledging that it had been a successful argument, and said the court had been right to rule in favor of the plaintiffs' argument. The case was settled in the United States Supreme Court in 2007. The ruling was upheld on appeal in 2008. The appeals court ruled that the lower court was wrong to dismiss the case. establishing minimum contacts. It noted that foreseeability alone is insufficient to pass constitutional muster for personal jurisdiction. Instead, the constitutional standard requires "intentional" conduct, "expressly aimed" at residents in the forum. On remand to the district court, Judge Daniels of the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of New York said he would rule on the case in a few weeks. The case is being heard in the federal court in New York, the judge said. establish its authority over the dispute involved and the parties to the litigation. In other words, courts must assert both subject matter jurisdiction over each claim and personal jurisdiction overEach defendant in a case. For cases involving foreign defendants, the analyses for subject matter andpersonal jurisdiction differ according to the law. For example, in the case of a U.S. citizen, the law states that the court has the right to determine whether the defendant is an American citizen or a citizen of a foreign country. In this case, the court would have to decide whether the American citizen is a citizen or not. in funding the 9/11 terrorist attacks, prevailed in a motion to dismiss the lawsuit against him on the basis of common-law foreign sovereign immunity. Personal jurisdiction is the second threshold hurdle for assertion of judicial authority in cases involving foreign defendants. Whereas subject matter jurisdiction governs courts' power over particular areas, personal jurisdiction governs the power of the court over a whole group of people or entities. In this case, the judge ruled in favor of the defendant because he had the right to sue because he was a foreign national. claims, personal jurisdiction governs courts' power over particular defendants. Even if a court establishes jurisdiction over the subject matter of a claim, it cannot exercise its authority over a defendant for whom it lacks personal jurisdiction. Personal jurisdiction requires both statutory authority and satisfaction of Fifth Amendment due process limits. The due process clause is constitutional if defendants have had "certain minimum contacts with" the judicial forum attempting to assert jurisdiction, and such jurisdiction "does not offend traditional notions of fair play and substantial fair play" The type and quantity of contacts necessary to constitute "minimum contacts" differ according to the type of personal jurisdiction. General jurisdiction, which allows a court to exercise jurisdiction over a foreign defendant for any claim, does not require contacts related to the specific claim in the case. Conversely, specific jurisdiction involves no "continuous and systematic" requirement; instead, it requires that a defendant's contacts with the forum "relate to" or "arise out of""Justice" is a term used to refer to a court's jurisdiction over foreign defendants. commercial conduct or a particular commercial transaction or act" The court noted the "circularity" of this definition. It relied upon the Supreme Court's definition of "commercial activity" as "the type of actions by which a private party engages in 'trade and traffic or commerce" With this framework, the court upheld the district court's finding that defendants' "charitable contributions" fell outside the scope of the commercial activities. The case is the first of its kind in the U.S. in cases where defendants were "primary participants" in the terrorist acts but holding that the banker and princes' activities were too attenuated from the actual attacks to satisfy due process requirements. Similarly, the court rejected the plaintiff's argument that potential foreseeability of the terrorist attacks was a sufficient basis for a due process claim. The court held that the defendant's activities were not sufficiently attenuated to satisfy the due process requirement. The case was decided in favor of the plaintiff, and the decision was appealed to the Supreme Court. planning level 'decisions grounded in social, economic, and political policy' A previous judge had explained that "SHC's alleged misuse of funds and/or inadequate record-keeping" was the result of a discretionary function. "Even if it resulted in the funds going to terrorists, it cannot be the basis for planning level decisions," the judge had said. "It cannot be a basis for 'dec decisions grounded inSocial, Economic, and Political Policy'," he had added. approval in the context of civil liability under the ATA for the test established by the D.C. Circuit for aiding and abetting and conspiracy liability. The test includes the following elements: (1) the party whom the defendant aids must perform a wrongful act that the defendant assists in, and (2) the defendant must aid the party in which the defendant aided the wrongful act took place. The judge ruled in favor of the defendant in this case, and the case was dismissed. causes an injury; (2) the defendant must be generally aware of his role as part of an overall illegal or tortious activity at the time that he provides the assistance; and (3) he must knowingly and substantially assist the principal violation. Conspiracy, according to the D.C. Circuit, gives rise to an injury that causes the defendant to be in a position of responsibility for the injury. The defendant must also be aware that he is taking part in a conspiracy to commit an act that causes an injury. to the statute for civil actions arising from the violation of a very narrow class of international norms "defined with a specificity comparable to the features of the 18 th century paradigms" that were understood to govern at the time of the ATS's drafting in 1789. The Second Circuit concluded that the case should go to the Supreme Court for further consideration. The case was heard in the federal district court in Washington, D.C. and the federal appeals court in New York. The decision was handed down at the end of the week. civil liability when it consists of (1) an agreement between two or more persons; (2) to participate in an unlawful act, or a lawful act in a unlawful manner; (3) an injury caused by an unlawful overt act performed by one of the parties to the agreement; and (4) which overt act is performed by a party to an agreement. In the U.S. courts, a person can be liable for civil liability if he or she is found to have committed an act that was unlawful or unlawful in another way. The bill would clarify that a tortious act or omission would not give. for such an act if such act or provision of material support or resources is engaged in by an official, employee, or agent of such foreign state. However, the exception seems to apply only to countries designated act or acts on the part of the foreign state or official. The bill would also clarify that an omission or act would not be considered tortious if it was within the scope of his or her employment. out of an act of extrajudicial killing, aircraft sabotage, hostage taking, terrorism, or the provision of material support or resources for such an act, or any claim for contribution or indemnity relating to a claim arising out of such a act" to the tortious acts or omissions for which foreign nationals may be liable, according to the bill. The bill was passed by the House of Representatives on September 26, 2013. The Senate passed the bill on September 27, 2013, and the Senate passed it on September 28, 2014. it is not to be taken literally. That is, courts may tend to view direct involvement on the part of a foreign official overseas in tortious activity that takes place on U.S. territory as included in the same tort. indirect contribution by means of lawful conduct could be viewed as part of the tort as well. It could be seen as a violation of the Constitution's guarantee of equal protection under the law, which includes the right to be heard by a jury in a fair and impartial hearing. established. For a defendant who is not a foreign state or its agency or instrumentality, the ordinary procedure for obtaining statutory authority for personal jurisdiction applies. Typically, a federal court must find statutory authority in the laws of the state in which it sits. However, constitutional rights can be trampled on in the process of getting a court to rule on a case. For example, the U.S. Supreme Court recently ruled that a federal judge in New Jersey had the right to hear a case in which the defendant was a citizen of the United States. was such an "organ" Specifically, the court applied the following five criteria: "(1) whether the foreign state created the entity for a national purpose," (2) whether it actively supervises the entity, (3) whether. the foreignState requires the hiring of public employees and pays their salaries, and (4) whether they are state-owned and controlled by a foreign state. was such an 'organ' was such a "organ," according to the court's decision. The decision was handed down on June 14. which is (1) a "separate legal person, corporate or otherwise"; (2) "an organ of a foreign state or political subdivision thereof"; and (3) not a U.S. citizen or created under the Constitution. The definition of a "legal person" includes a corporation that is owned by a "foreign state" or a majority of its shares or other ownership interest are owned by such a state. The Supreme Court ruled in favor of the definition of "legalperson" in a case brought by the American Civil Liberties Union.