years and is planning to consolidate these two radar centers into a single center by 2006. DFS has also integrated operations and consolidated facilities, moving 17 approach units from airports and integrating them into four air traffic control centers. The Dusseldorf control center has been relocated to the Langen control center, and is expected to be fully operational by the end of the year. It is the first time the German Air Traffic Control Center has been fully operational since it was established in the 1970s. It has also been the first German Air traffic control center to be completely operational. DFS transferred and consolidated its headquarters from Offenbach to Langen.center in 2002 (see fig. 1) DFS reports that because its supervisory board, rather than a parliamentary committee, now makes major investment decisions, it has been able to make key strategic decisions that would have been made by the parliamentary committee. DFS says it is now able to focus on its core business, which is the construction of new buildings and other facilities. It is also able to invest in new technology, which it says is key to its future success. an operating profit of more than $87.4 million and reduced its 2005 fees for en route services by 19.5 percent and for approach control services by 28 percent. DFS has begun to consider the benefits of a reserve fund, but German legislation governing air navigation service charges must be changed, the agency says. The German government says it is considering the possibility of setting up a special reserve fund for air navigation services in the event of a downturn in the economy. The fund could be set up in the future if the German government agrees to such a plan. consulting with its customers before investing in any modernization efforts has been beneficial. According to DFS, before commercialization, the German government did not consult with users and other stakeholders when it acquired and deployed new air navigation technologies. Once an initial investment decision has been made, ANSPs have further reported, that it can be beneficial to consult with customers before making a decision to invest in air navigation technology. The German government has not commented on the ANSP's claims to the effect that it consulted with users before making an investment decision. fees than they formerly paid in ticket taxes when the government provided air navigation services. In Germany, Lufthansa stated that except in business years 2001 through 2003, the airline paid less in user fees than it paid during the initial commercialization of Germany’s air navigation service in 1993. According to the airline, except for the years 2001-2003, the company paid less than it did in ticket tax during that period. The airline also said that it did not pay any user fees in the period between 2001 and 2003. By 2006, Germany plans to change the ownership of DFS, selling 74.9 percent of its equity to private investors and reorganizing it. The remaining shares are divided among a consortium of seven UK airlines (42 percent), NATS staff (5 percent), and a private airport company (4 percent) DFS is a joint venture between DFS and the German Federal Ministry of Transport (DFS) which is based in Berlin. DFS has a fleet of more than 1,000 aircraft.  NAV CANADA has a borrowing capacity of about $2.4 billion, of which $1.8 billion is currently drawn. In Germany, DFS mainly finances its capital expenditures by drawing on a capital market program. DFS issues short-, medium-, or long-term notes (i.e., debt issuance and commercial) in the public debt markets. The German government has a long history of issuing short- and medium-term debt. It has also issued commercial debt in the past.  NAV CANADA banked up to $66.3 million in its rate stabilization fund to protect against future losses. This fund was quickly exhausted and, after the SARS outbreak in 2003, the fund reached a cumulative deficit. Before DFS can develop such a reserve, DFS must first find a way to fund it. DFS has been unable to do so since September 11, 2001, when 9/11 took place. The fund has now been depleted to the point that it can no longer fund itself. paper), each amounting to approximately $546.4 million for a total of almost $1.1 billion, to private investors in the market. DFS can also draw on an annual credit line of around $175.9 million from its bank. The ANSPs may also charge fees, as applicable, for other services, such as aeronautical services, to the private investors, the ANSP said in a statement. The company said it would not comment further on the matter. In Germany, DFS also lost revenue during the industry downturn, but to a lesser degree. DFS reported a loss of more than $36.4 million in 2001, when air traffic declined by 0.9 percent over the previous year. In 2002, it sustained a loss. of more. than $23.2 million. To address these deficits, D.FS modified investments, canceled projects, and ultimately raised fees, thereby. increasing financial pressures on the airlines. When air traffic increased again in 2003, D FS recorded a profit. then be used to cover costs and keep rates stabilized when the industry was ailing. The fund was capitalized by operating profits earned before September 11, 2001, but depleted during the economic downturn caused by the events of September 11 and the Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) outbreak of 2003. It was established to help the airline industry during the financial crisis of the early 2000s. It is now being used to help fund the industry's operations during the current economic downturn. be sufficient to offset the decline in air traffic and the concomitant decline in revenue. The industry downturn that began in about 2000 and intensified after the events of September 11, 2001, and the SARS outbreak of 2003 brought this lesson home to at least four of the five commercialized airlines. The U.S. Airline industry has been in decline since the early 1990s, when it was in decline for more than a decade. In the last decade, the industry has seen a sharp decline in the number of flights. through a new regulatory structure, and obtain additional funds from the government and private shareholders. NATS now has a system in place to mitigate the effects of an industry downturn through automatic price increases that are triggered by reductions in air traffic. These price increases can be triggered by a number of different factors, including the level of air traffic in the country at the time and the number of passengers on the ground at that time. The system can also be triggered through a series of other factors, such as an increase in the cost of fuel, or a reduction in the amount of fuel available to air passengers. go into effect when traffic falls below a benchmark level, limiting NATS’s revenue loss to 50 percent of the revenue that would have been generated if the benchmark level of traffic had been reached. If traffic fall below this 50 percent benchmark, as it might in a severe crisis, NATS's revenue loss will be limited to 50 per cent of what it would have generated if it had reached that benchmark level. NATS says it has no plans to change the way traffic is calculated in the future. revenue loss is limited to 20 percent of the projected revenue. In effect, this automatic trigger mechanism spreads the risk of traffic downturns between NATS and its airline customers. Without this trigger, the prices set by CAA, the economic regulatory body, would remain fixed until the next regularly scheduled review, the airline said. The airline added that NATS would not be able to predict the impact of a downturn on its customers' revenue. The company added that it would be possible for NATS to make changes to the way it calculates revenue loss, if necessary.  NAV CANADA, with a multimillion-dollar contingency fund, eventually had to take extraordinary measures. Besides being burdened with debt, NATS was vulnerable to the industry downturns. Nearly all of its costs (95 percent) were fixed, limiting its ability to cut costs, and its revenues. It was the most vulnerable, but even NAV CANADIA had to make some tough decisions. The company was bailed out by the federal government in 2008. It is now one of Canada's largest banks. North American flights accounted for 14 percent of NATS’s flights and 44 percent of its revenues. To avoid insolvency, NATS first obtained an estimated $104.2 million in short-term loan credit. After September 11, transatlantic traffic declined after September 11. NATS's revenues declined 15 percent after the September 11 terrorist attacks. The airline is now in the process of filing for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection in New York and Washington, D.C. It is seeking a $100 million loan from the Federal Aviation Administration. navigation services center, called the Swanwick Center. According to NATS, after placing this new center in service, it reduced its staff costs by nearly $20.1 million and its costs for services and materials by about $18.5 million between 2002 and 2003. Between 2003 and 2004, NATS reported, it reduction its staff cost by nearly  $20 million and reduced its services costs by about  $18 million. The center is still in service today, but it has been closed for some time.  modernization has produced operational efficiencies, including fewer and shorter delays. NATS, for example, reduced its average delay per flight from 2.7 minutes in 2002 to 0.74 minutes in calendar year 2003, while handling almost 2.1 million flights. Commercialization has allowed the commercialization of air travel, the ANSPs say, which has led to a reduction in the number of flight delays and cancellations. It has also led to an increase in the efficiency of air traffic, they say. NTS was extremely vulnerable to the decline in air traffic after September 11. DFS is currently undergoing a valuation of its key assets in preparation for selling 74.9 percent of its equity to private investors in a formal competitive bidding process. Some countries that commercialized their ANSP had difficulty retaining control of their networks, says John Defterios, former CEO of NATS in the UK and U.S. He says NATS reduced its net operating costs by almost $161 million from 2002 through 2004, in part through management actions. information, consulting, and training. In 2003, DFS’s consulting service generated revenue of about $2.8 million. In the UK, NATS competes with other service providers to provide terminal services at UK airports. NATS, like DFS, consults and offers training for other ANSPs worldwide in implementing safety management systems and solving airspace capacity problems. From this business unit, NATs generated profits of $11.7 million in 2003 and about $14.8 in 2004. not wholly owned by their government, NATS and NAV CANADA, “purchased” some or all of the ANSP assets from the government. Although the UK government retained the largest share of NATS, the second-largest owner, the consortium of seven UK airlines known as “The Airline Group,” provided approximately $1.4 billion, according study of the NATS reorganization. The National Audit Office found that the UKgovernment raised some $ 1.3 billion from the sale of ANSP to a consortium of 7 UK-based airlines. to information from the National Audit Office, including about $112.2 million from the group’s own resources and the remainder from a loan taken out with a consortium led by four major banks. The group used this sum to acquire NATS and meet associated transaction costs, leaving cash assets of approximately $1.2 billion, according to the report. It also used the money to pay for the acquisition of NATS’ parent company, NATS, and to meet associated costs. The UK’s NATS is a public-private partnership (i.e., a cooperative venture between the public and private sectors that is designed to meet defined public needs) The risks and rewards divided between both parties. The government holds the largest share of NATS.corporations ( i.e. companies wholly owned by the government). The government also owns a large stake in the UK”s National Health Service (NHS), which provides health care for the elderly and sick. NATS faced insolvency in early 2002, leading it to implement operational cost savings, obtain a temporary loan credit, refinance its debts and renegotiate prices for users. NATS brought in a new equity partner (BAA, plc. from its lending banks and then refinanced. However, the combination of lost business and increased debt threatened NATS with insolvencies in early 2001. The company was eventually rescued by BAA and refinanced, bringing in an equity partner, BAA plc, in 2002. $6.0 million in the business. In total, the government received an estimated $1.3 billion in cash proceeds from the transaction. NAV CANADA purchased all of the ANSP assets from the Canadian government. Instead of going through a formal competitive bidding process, it negotiated a selling price with the government, and purchased the air navigation system in 1996 for about $ 1.5 billion. Using a $2.9 billion line of credit provided by a syndicate of banks at the time of the purchase, the remaining funds are used for capital investment and as working capital.  NAV CANADA estimates that it is saving the airlines approximately $80.3 million annually in reduced aircraft operating costs. The airlines are now paying 20 percent less in user of about $96.9 million. By the end of 2004, it reduced the deficit to approximately $26.0 million, according to its 2004 annual report. However, as aviation industry representatives have noted, the fee increases have not been popular with users. The fee increases were implemented to maintain operations, NAV CAN Canada says. $1.5 billion value that the government negotiated with NAV CANADA in 1996 fell short of the $2.3 billion to $ 2.4 billion estimate developed in 1995 by a third party. NAV CAN Canada reported that both it and Transport Canada disagreed with the OAG’s estimate and its underlying assumptions. In a statement, NAV CANCanada said the government's estimate and the third party's estimate were not consistent with each other and with the underlying assumptions of the third-party estimate. CANADA has observed the charging principles in establishing its rates. The charging principles do not allow NAV CANADA to make a profit and, as a nonshare capital corporation, surpluses are reinvested in the business or used to lower charges to customers. Airways Corporation of New Zealand, Ltd., operates under a had the inadvertent effect of disrupting the business cycles of air carriers, which faced the same difficult economic circumstances. The company was able to raise its fees unilaterally, without having to negotiate increases with representatives of the air carriers. for instance, subsidizes service to some regional areas under the Location-Specific Tower Subsidy Program. Transport Canada is legislatively required to maintain service to remote locations in the northern region. In addition, NAV CANADA charges the same price for services toremote locations as for services for the general public. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. as a public-private partnership, along the lines followed in the UK. NAV CANADA is a nonshare capital, private corporation. The corporation has 4 members representing government, airlines, noncommercial users, and the unions. These 4 members appoint 10 of the 15 board directors: 4 Traffic Management Group. In Canada, stakeholders (i.e., associations, unions, and airports, including international and U.S. representatives) are involved in theNAV CANADA Advisory Committee. The committee provides a vehicle for stakeholders who are not on the board of directors to raise issues and concerns. their administrative staff or flattened their management organizations. For example, NAV CANADA closed most of its regional administrative offices and centralized corporate functions to its headquarters. Airways Corporation of New Zealand also reportedly reduced its personnel costs by £1.5 million. For more information on how to get a job, visit the National Employer’s Association website. The National Employers’ Association is a trade group for employers who want to reduce their workforce by 20 percent or more. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. their ability to deliver projects on time, within budget, and to specification. For example, Airways Corporation of New Zealand deployed its new oceanic system, FANS1, in less than a year. The management of NAV CANADA estimates that it is producing new technology faster than the government once did and at a higher rate than it once did. For more information, visit NAVCANADA's website or go to: http://www.navalcanada.com/technology. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here. Airways Corporation of New Zealand reduced en route charges by 22 percent in 1995 and by another 13 percent since 1997. For general aviation operators, however, commercialization has sometimes meant an increase in fees. Before commercialization, many only paid for their flights through air travel agents or through air carriers like Virgin Atlantic and Air New Zealand. For more information, visit www.airwayscorporation.com/en-route-charges-reduce-en route-charges by 22 percent in 1995 and 13 percent since 1997. Corporation of New Zealand charges general aviation operators a fee of $68 for 50 landings. In addition, Airways eliminated the en route charge for light aircraft. Some governments have provided for air navigation services at small, remote general aviation and regional airports, viewing such services as a public good. Australia, Australia, New Zealand, Canada and the UK have all provided air navigation service at small and remote airports. New Zealand and Australia have provided services at remote airports at a cost of up to $100,000 per year. Some countries, such as Canada and New Zealand, have tried to make the fees affordable for small operators by charging a flat fee. NAV CANADA, for instance, charges general aviation operators a flat annual fee of $58. According to the Aircraft Owners and Pilots Association–New Zealand, Airways, Airways New Zealand and Qantas are among the most expensive airlines in the world for general aviation. The average cost of fuel in the U.S. is about $2,000 per flight. memorandum of understanding with its airline users. Under this memorandum, Airways uses the principle of ‘economic value added’ (EVA) to self-regulate its pricing. EVA is the difference between the net operating profit after taxes and the cost of capital. A portion of any EVA above a certain level is returned to the airline. The memorandum was signed in 2007 and is still in force. It was signed by the airline’s board of directors and the chief executive of Air France-KLM, among others. In 2004, Airways reported its net operating profit after taxes as about $8.3 million. After subtracting the cost of capital ($4.4 million), the resulting EVA was approximately $3.9 million. Of this amount, $1.8 million was returned to users in the form of a rebate. In 2005, the company reported a profit of about $2.5 million, down from $3 million in 2003. In 2006, it reported a loss of $2 million, up from $1 million the previous year. ACCC rejected Airservices' second proposed fee increase. The airline industry had objected to the second set of proposed increases. The ACCC ultimately decided that a longer term arrangement should be considered. ACCC directed Airservices to focus on 5-year pricing plans. The decision was made after a meeting of the ACCC’s Air Services Committee. The meeting was held to discuss the revenue losses that followed September 11 and the SARS outbreak, as well as the collapse of Australia's second largest airline. fees for air traffic services. Airservices must notify the commission whenever it wants to raise fees. The commission then evaluates Airservices’ pricing proposal and decides to accept or reject the price change. If the commission rejects the proposed price, it can set a lower price. ACCC rejected one of two proposals for a new fee for air travel services. The other was a proposal for an increase in the cost of air travel from £1 to £1.50 per hour. The proposal was rejected by the commission. of all financial data used to determine the basis for charges. Assess and encourage efficiency and efficacy in the operation of providers. Establish standards for reviewing the quality and level of services. Monitor and encourage investments to meet future demand. Ensure user views are adequately taken into account. The five-year plan is designed to improve the quality of services provided by the NHS. It also aims to ensure that the health and safety of the NHS is protected and the environment is well-being of the public is protected. rely primarily on user fees to cover their costs. An industry downturn presents a fundamental financial risk for such ANSPs that they must be prepared to mitigate, whether through a reserve fund, cost-cutting measures, user fee increases, additional borrowing, restructuring, or some combination of these or other options that will help them survive an industry downturn. The ANSP industry is expected to experience a downturn in the second half of this year. The downturn is predicted to be the worst for the industry since the early 1990s. Economic Regulation Group sets price caps for 5-year periods, basing them generally on the retail price index. The German Transport Ministry reviews and approves any changes in user fees, but it does not independently evaluate the price caps. The group’s own analyses of allowances for NATS’S estimated operating and capital costs are used to set the caps, the group says. The price caps are generally based on the Retail Price Index and the group's own analyses for the NATS budget. charges over the next 5 years at general aviation and regional airports. The increased charges have been approved by the regulator. Although the increases will be gradual, the plan has raised concerns about further price increases and any future need to close or reduce services at these locations. Some have called for the plan to be scrapped, while others say it is necessary to protect the aviation industry from a potential downturn in the economy. The plan to increase charges has been approved, but there have been calls for it to be axed. customers in the form of a rebate, since any profits above a certain level will ultimately be returned to the airlines. According to the aviation industry, the EVA mechanism has been key in making pricing of user fees more transparent. In the UK, CAA exercises economic regulation over NATS. CAA’s EVA scheme has been in place for more than a decade. It was introduced to make user fee pricing more transparent in the UK in 2007. The scheme was introduced in response to a public outcry over high fees. The CTA rejected an appeal of the increases brought by certain operators. Its board approved the fee increases to balance revenues and expenses as required by legislation. According to the ANSPs, involving stakeholders in efforts to design, acquire, and deploy new technologies can be beneficial. For more information, visit the CTA's website at: http://www.cta.org/news/press-releases/2013/01/30/cTA-rejects-appeal-of-increase-in-fees-brought-by-certain operators. The Canadian Transportation Agency (CTA) reviews the price-setting process against an established set of statutory principles. Appeals may be made to CTA by the users as to whether NAV should be increased. CTA: robustness of the airlines should be taken into account when a price is set. NAV: The price of air travel should be based on a long-term plan, not a short-term price. The price should be set in line with the cost of living in Canada, not per cent of the time. reviewed have a number of common characteristics: First, all focus on safely moving aircraft. Despite differences in ownership structures, all operate as businesses rather than as government organizations and are self-financing. All are largely monopoly providers that are subject to some form of price- setting constraint achieved through the use of government subsidies or bailouts. They are all subject to price-setting constraints achieved through government bailouts or subsidies. They all are largely monopolies that are used to control the price of air travel. report to interested congressional committees; the Secretary of Transportation; the Administrator, FAA; and the chief executive officers of the ANSPs in our sample. We will also make copies available to others upon request. In addition, the report will be available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. The report will also be available on the FAA's Web site, which is available to the public for free, at www.faa.org. Please call me at (202) 512-2834 if you or your staff have any questions about this report. Contact points for our Offices of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of the report. Major contributors to this report are listed in appendix II. We developed this report with the help of a team of analysts and analysts from the Center for American Progress, a think tank based in Washington, D.C. We are proud to have worked with them on this project. contributions to this report. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. For more information on suicide prevention, visit www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org. For support on suicide matters in the UK, call the national suicide helpline on 0800 273-TALK (8255). of each country into U.S. dollars using the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development’s purchasing power parity historical series. We did not compare performance before and after commercialization or across countries. Such comparisons are generally not feasible because data for assessing performance are typically unavailable for the time before commercialization, or the measures have changed in the past. We adjusted for inflation using the Gross Domestic Product price index of the Congressional Budget Office's economic projection for 2005 to obtain the estimated value of each country's currency. organizations, the ANSPs follow corporate practices. Each ANSP has established performance measures and gathers and reports financial and other performance data. The independent auditors for each ANSP found that the annual financial statements were unqualified and fairly presented, in all audited annual financial reports, which had been independently reviewed and evaluated. To assess the reliability of these data, we (1) interviewed the officials from each AN SP and its independent safety regulatory authority who were responsible for compiling these data and (2) corroborated the data through comparison with other sources of information. to ensure that adequate accounting records have been maintained, and that internal controls have prevented or detected any fraud and error in the accounting policies and estimates. In addition, the UK and Germany report their data to EUROCONTROL, whose Performance Review Commission collects data for benchmarking and publishes comparative studies. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. CANSO and EUROCONTROL are working to standardize performance measures and compare ANSPs across dimensions such as safety, cost, and efficiency. ICAO, for example, stresses the importance of having transparent financial data available for economic oversight. We are sending copies of this to each ANSP in the U.S. and around the world. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. A supervisory board oversees policy making and operations and has fiduciary responsibilities to shareholders. The members of this board may represent key stakeholders, such as the airlines, employees, general aviation, and the national government. For example, in the UK, government makes its own strategic, operating, and financial decisions. In the U.S., the board is responsible for the management of the airline's global network of more than 1,000 airBaltic airports. For more information, go to: www.airBaltic.com. appointees, the airlines, and BAA (the airport consortium) are represented on NATS’s board of directors. In Germany, DFS employees, government ministries, and the private sector are also represented on a supervisory board. As in a corporation, an executive officer implements the ANSP board's policies and is, in turn, accountable to the board. The executive officer is responsible for implementing the board's decision-making process and for making sure the airline consortium is on board. are appointed by the airline industry, 3 by the government, 2 by employees such as air traffic controllers and engineers, and 1 by general and business aviation. These 10 directors appoint another 4 based on expertise and the chief executive officer. Before commercialization, members of the two ANSPs that are that are before commercialization are appointed by these 10 directors. These members are: Air France-KLM, Air Canada, Air India, Air China, Air France/KLM-Nordic, Air Spain, Air Belgium, Aer Lingus, Aeromexico. group and a small Head Office support and lead the business groups. The managers of these five groups form the Executive Committee and work with the chief executive officer to advise the board as well as carry out the board’s policies. While the supervisory board and its executive officers have their own executive officers, the executive committee advises the board on all matters relating to the business. The board of directors of the company has its own executive board, which advises the CEO on all issues relating to business. working groups. This approach to involving stakeholders is consistent with a Single European Sky directive that member states establish a mechanism for consulting with stakeholders. In Australia, the aviation community (i.e., the airports, airlines, safety authorities, and others) participates in Airservices’ strategic investment decision-making process through the Australian Strategic Air working groups. In the U.S., Airservices consults with airlines, airports, and other stakeholders in its strategic investment decisions. In Europe, Air Services consult with airlines and other aviation stakeholders in their strategic investment plans. it is beneficial to involve stakeholders throughout the design and acquisition process. For example, since commercialization, air traffic controllers play a much larger role in the acquisitions process and have come to understand the linkage between service delivery costs and the costs of new equipment. Similarly, Airservices Australia reported that, since the introduction of air traffic control in Australia, the acquisition process has become much more transparent and participative. It is beneficial for stakeholders to be involved in the acquisition and design process, as well as the purchase process. Stakeholders may be involved in and provide input to their ANSP. DFS has developed a Customer Relationship Management System to organize hearings for customers and involve them in decision-making. For example, DFS developed a customer relationship management system to organize hearing for customers. For more information, visit DFS’s ANSP website. The ANSP can be contacted at: http://www.dfs.org/anSP. For confidential support call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org. example, Airways Corporation of New Zealand noted that its investment decisions are very much driven by customers’ needs. Airways said it consults closely with the airlines before deciding to acquire new systems and to implement technology upgrades. According to Airways, if the airlines say they do not want to make an investment, it is not an investment that the company would make. It is a decision that the airlines have to make, not a decision made by the airline itself, the company said. The company said it would not comment further on the matter. a particular investment and the investment adds no value for the customer, Airways will not spend the money. For example, the airlines have reported that they are not currently interested in Automatic Dependent Surveillance-Broadcast, so Airways has no immediate plans to invest in the technology. DFS has also reported that Airways have no plans to spend money on the technology in the near future, and that they will not invest in it in the short-term if it does not add value to the customer. Airways Corporation of New Zealand noted that it has found it essential to involve the same controllers throughout the design process to ensure consistency in requirements. In Airways’ experience, it is essential for controllers, manufacturers, and the ANSP to maintain a thorough understanding of the project’s ongoing specifications. It is also essential for manufacturers and ANSPs to be able to communicate with each other in a way that is consistent and easy to understand. The company has found this to be the most effective way to achieve consistency in design requirements. European Parliament in January 2004. Each member state is to develop an independent safety and economic regulatory authority to oversee its ANSP. The UK established such an authority before commercialization, and Germany is planning to develop one. The five commercialized ANSPs that we look at here are from the UK, Germany, France, Italy and Spain. We also look at the five commercialize ANSP's that we don't look at, from the US, Australia and New Zealand. We look at them here. its oceanic system and automated tower/terminal control system from NAV CANADA. To achieve further purchasing efficiencies, some commercialized European ANSPs have developed an alliance to procure systems. For instance, Germany has developed a strategic alliance with Switzerland and the Netherlands for the joint procurement of a new radar system. Through this alliance, Germany will be able to procure a new radars system for the German Navy in the future. For more information, visit www.navy.com. EUROCONTROL is mandated to develop implementing rules for the European Union’s “Single European Sky’ initiative. Germany plans to create an independent economic regulatory authority by 2006 to comply with the requirements of the Single European Sky initiative. According to information from each of the ANSPs we reviewed, air navigation safety has not declined since commercialization, says the European Aviation Safety Agency. The European Commission is responsible for regulating the safety of air navigation and monitoring the performance of air traffic management systems. Germany faces a similar challenge as the government prepares to develop a safety regulatory authority in accordance with the Single European Sky initiative by the end of this year. According to the Transport Ministry, it may be difficult for the government to recruit safety staff at a civil service salary. It may also be difficult to attract and retain the right people for the job, the ministry says. The government says it is working on a plan to recruit more safety staff by the year's end, but it is still struggling to find the right staff. Each ANSP generally offers en route, approach control, and terminal (or aerodrome control) air traffic services. In some countries, the ANSP may not be the sole provider of approach control and terminal services. All but Germany’s DFS also offer oceanic air navigation services.our review. All five ANSPs are responsible for providing air navigation service. We have compiled a list of the most popular ANSP services. Click here to read our review of the five most popular Air Navigation Service Providers.  Approach control services apply during departure and while climbing from origination airport. Terminal or aerodrome control services are provided while the aircraft is descending to the destination airport toward the end of the flight. The services are available outside terminal airspace and at airports in Europe and the Middle East as well as in the U.S. and Canada. The service is available at a number of airports around the world, including London Heathrow, Gatwick, Stansted, Edinburgh, Manchester, Glasgow, Edinburgh and Glasgow. the Extended Computer Display System (EXCDS) in three London-area airports, Stansted, Gatwick, and Heathrow, as well as to provide NATS with its oceanic system. While NAV CANADA prefers commercial off-the-shelf products, it also invests in developing in-house technologies. Many of the technology products developed by NAVCANADA are available to NATS and other airlines. The company also provides its own software and services to airlines such as Air Canada and Air Canada Rouge. Australian Advanced Air Traffic System (TAAATS) replaced handwritten, paper flight progress strips with screen-based information. TAAATS replaced conventional radar screens with more advanced computer screens that display data from a range of sources. Ground-based surveillance equipment and satellite-linked navigational equipment on aircraft, among others, were used to display data on the screens of the aircraft. The system was developed by the Australian Ministry of Defence in the 1970s and 1980s. It is still in operation today and has a fleet of more than 1,000 aircraft. of the riskiest air proximity incidents for NATS declined from 9 in 2001 to 2 in 2003 and 1 in 2004. Similarly, data from Airways Corporation of New Zealand indicate a downward trend in incidents involving loss of separation for the years following commercialization. NAV CANADA’s annual report for 2004 reported a decline in the number of incidents involving the loss of a passenger in the year after commercialization, from 2 in 2002 to 1 in 2003, and 2 in 2004, according to the report. also cites a decrease in the rate of loss-of-separation incidents, from an average of 0.96 incidents per 100,000 movements for 1999/2000 to 0.79 incidents for 2003/2004. Officials at Transport Canada, the safety regulator, confirm an overall decline in aviation incidents since commercialization. Additionally, stakeholders have told us that there has been a decline in the number of incidents involving commercial airliners in the past three years, as well as in the last five years. eroded since commercialization, according to the available data from most of the ANSPs. For example, data from DFS show a decrease in the number of aircraft proximity incidents in Germany, from 23 in 1995 to 8 in 2003, 3 of which were attributed to DFS. In the UK, the number has also decreased since commercialized, from 1 in 2000 to 1 in 2003. The number of incidents in the UK has also declined since commercializing, from 2 in 2000 and 3 in 2003 to 1 and 1 respectively. information. We determined that the data from each country were sufficiently reliable to identify any major changes in safety since each ANSP was commercialized. In addition to the contact named above, Elizabeth Eisenstadt, Samantha Goodman, Brandon Haller, David Hooper, Hiroshi Ishikawa, Joseph Kile, Jennifer Kim, and Richard Scott made key key contributions to the study. The study was published in the online version of this article. For the full version of the study, please visit: http://www.theguardian.com/science/2013/oct/23/science-and-technology/features/features-features-reports-reports. regulates and promotes aviation safety. In Canada, NAV CANADA and the government, through Transport Canada, share responsibility for the safety of the national civil air navigation system. In Australia, the Australian Transport Safety Bureau investigates aircraft accidents, incidents, and safety deficiencies within the aviation system, according to Airservices Australia. In the U.S., the National Aeronautics Safety Board investigates aircraft crashes, incidents and deficiencies in the national aviation system. Under a law passed by Congress in 1998, the U States can impose fines on airlines that fail to comply with safety regulations. they believe the air navigation system is as safe as it was when the government provided air navigation services. According to some, the separation of operating and regulatory functions has strengthened safety regulation and diminished any potential conflict of interest between promoting the financial interests of aviation operators and protecting the safety of the air traffic. Some believe the separation has made it easier for the government to make air navigation decisions without the need to consult the aviation industry at the same time as the airline industry. They believe it has also made the system more efficient and effective. In Canada, legislation requires NAV CANADA to maintain a fixed level of safe operations. According to Transport Canada, the safety regulator, the Minister of Transport has the authority to direct NAV CANCanada to maintain or increase levels of service in the interest of safety. Although NAV CAN Canada can alter operations in accordance with business principles, it must demonstrate that the changes meet the required level of safety through an aeronautical risk a sufficient number of staff to carry out safety regulation. For example, in Canada, many of the safety staff moved to the newly established NAVCANADA after commercialization, leaving the government regulator with insufficient staff to conduct timely safety inspections during the first 6 months of commercialization. performance-based approach to safety regulation, known as the relations management approach. NAV CANADA, as the operator, must demonstrate compliance by measuring and reporting on program results. Transport Canada, among other things, conducts audits, adjudicates safety issues raised, and adjudicates issues raised by the public. The federal government is responsible for setting the requirements in law and standards, as well as the standards and requirements for the NAV CANada program. The government is also responsible for the oversight of the NAVCANADA program.  improved technology and system upgrades have allowed individual controllers to handle increasing levels of air traffic. Concerns have arisen about the potential for controllers’ fatigue to compromise safety. Data are not available to assess this potential, but some ANSPs have taken steps to limit and monitor controllers�’ workload. The FAA has no plans to change the way air traffic controllers are employed in the U.S. or other countries. The agency is also not planning to reduce the number of aircrews it employs in the United States. A study of controllers’ stress and strain has led to internal regulations on the maximum working hours allowed at individual sectors. To lower their personnel costs, all five ANSPs have reduced personnel costs.a smaller piece of airspace. DFS, in cooperation with its controllers�’ association, has undertaken a comprehensive study of controller’s stress and strains. The study was carried out by DFS and the controllers' association in partnership with the European Aviation Safety Agency (EASA) that is updated automatically. DFS is also eliminating systems that depend on paper strips and expects productivity gains and cost savings to follow. In New Zealand, according to the union that represents air traffic controllers, individual controllers are now able to handle much more flight activity because of improved technology. That is expected to lead to a reduction in the cost of air traffic control in New Zealand. In the U.S., DFS expects to see a decrease in the number of flight attendants and flight attendants because of better technology. economic review or procedural guidelines. For all five commercialized ANSPs, the safe movement of aircraft remains the primary goal. In some instances, government policy requires that the ANSP consider safety in any and all decisions affecting operations and service. German legislation requires DFS to by stakeholders, and licenses air traffic controllers. All five selected AN SPs have also established formal safety programs. For example, DFS and NATS apply a systematic Safety Management System, in accordance with EUROCONTROL’s safety requirements, to all of their operational activities. safety control, and safety monitoring through standards that comply with national and international obligations. DFS’s Safety Management System was also certified by the German Ministry of Transport in 2004. Similarly, Airservices Australia employs a systemic Safety Management system that complies with national. and international requirements. To promote safety, the system is designed to promote health and safety in the air and on the ground. The system is also designed to protect passengers, crew and passengers on board the aircraft and in the surrounding environment. assessment. All five ANSPs are subject to external safety regulation. A separate authority conducts safety regulation and issues relevant certificates or licenses to air traffic controllers and technicians. In New Zealand, for example, the Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) establishes civil aviation safety and security standards and monitors adherence to those standards. In Australia, the civil aviation Safety Authority is an independent regulatory authority that carries out accident and incident investigations and uses information from these investigations to establish an industrywide safety picture and develop safety initiatives. For example, the UK’s CAA has regulated the hours of civil air traffic controllers. In New Zealand, as air traffic has increased, some airspace sectors have been subdivided so that controllers are responsible for some of the airspace. The Safety Regulation Group must be notified of any breach by NATS or by controllers, and must be informed by the UK CAA if it is in violation of the regulations. The CAA must also be notified if the breach is in breach of its own regulations. when the private sector is paying higher salaries for safety inspectors to develop safety standards and procedures. CAA managers with responsibilities for regulating the safety of NATS’s operations also raised concerns about recruiting staff. According to these officials, regulators need the highly skilled expertise of air traffic controllers. However, the public sector is not willing to pay the same salaries for the same level of expertise as the air traffic control staff, the CAA said. The CAA has not commented on the report's findings. Some ANSPs have been able to lower their unit costs and, in turn, lower their charges to major commercial airlines. Airservices Australia, for go up, but charges may not necessarily be prohibitive. When legislation calls for service to remote communities, an ANSP may ultimately be forced to take a financial loss if it is not able to fully recover its costs. Air Services Australia is seeking to control costs at some locations by deploying staff to remote areas. Air services Australia is a joint venture between Air Australia and Virgin Australia. control services. With no alternative provider, operators cannot seek lower prices by changing routes. Since user fees constitute the ANSP’s primary source of revenue, economic monitoring and regulation by an independent third party can protect users and ensure a fair pricing process. countries whose ANSPs we reviewed have taken different approaches to reviewing their ANSP's user charges and price-setting process. In Australia, the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC) oversees Airservices Australia’S process of setting user charges. All five commercialized ANSPs rely on user charges as their primary source of revenue and on capital markets for additional funding. The air navigation fees cover operating and capital costs associated with both en route and approach control services. If an ANSP generates revenues from charges in excess of its costs, it may rebate them to the users, lower the charges for the next year, pay some form of payback. These charges are air navigation service charges. The five ANSPS vary in their treatment of any operating profits or losses. The ANSPs may charge general aviation operators a flat fee for services or additional fees in particular circumstances. They may also exempt charges for spread among fewer operators, usually with smaller planes. Under this arrangement, services at heavily used airports subsidize services at small airports. In the past and in some countries today, the AN SPs charged the same fee for air navigation services at every airport, regardless of its size or location. The fees are not weight-based, but based on the length of the flight. based on a weight-distance formula. If applicable, ANSPs also levy charges for oceanic control. The AN SPs may also charge for terminal-related services. In the UK and Germany, for example, private firms may provide terminal services. These terminal charges are not subject to the same rules as those imposed by the ANSP. The charges are for services provided by private firms, not ANSP-provided services. For confidential support, call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here. ICAO says commercialized ANSP should function as an autonomous body. It should have greater freedom from the government in conducting its financial affairs and developing infrastructure funding. ICAO says the government should still regulate the safety of the ANSP’s operations, but the AnSP should be encouraged to be as competitive, efficient, and cost-effective as possible. The ANSP must be self- financing, subject to the usual business taxes, and required to seek a return on capital. According to ICAO policies, the ANSPs may choose to recover less than the full costs of some services in recognition of local, regional, or national benefits. For example, in Canada, aircraft or flights dedicated to search and rescue, air ambulance operations, and firefighting services are all exempt from some ANSP recoveries. Some services, such as air ambulance services, are also exempt from ANSP recovery payments. Some ANSP's may also choose to recover less than the full costs of some services. ICAO recognizes the need for an independent mechanism to provide economic regulation of air navigation services. According to ICAO, the objectives of economic regulation should include the following: Ensure nondiscrimination in the application of charges. Ensure that there is no overcharging or other anticompetitive practice. Ensure the transparency and availability of air transport services to the public in a fair and efficient manner. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. Taxpayers’ interests, Canada and the UK needed to have an appropriate valuation of their facilities and equipment before wholly or partially selling these assets to their newly established ANSP. According to its Office of the Auditor General (OAG), Canada did not properly value its ANSP assets and infrastructures. The approximately of baseline measures before commercialization makes it difficult to gauge its development before and after commercialization. For instance, the Canadian OAG considered the assets of NAV CANADA to be undervalued, due to the absence of good financial information. An ANSP may provide services and technology to other regions of the world to generate revenue. Airservices Australia manages the upper airspace in the Solomon Islands. NAV CANADA recently signed a contract with NATS to install ANSPs we selected for review. NATS, with the greatest debt load, had to take additional steps to address the revenue losses during the downturn. The company had a net loss of $1.5 billion in 2004, down from $2.1 billion in 2003. dividend to shareholders, or retain the revenues in reserve to protect against future losses. If costs exceed revenues, ANSPs use different strategies to meet those shortfalls. For example, NAV CANADA established a “rate stabilization fund,’ which it used to store revenues when the aviation industry was healthy. The fund could be used to meet shortfalls in revenues or to cover future losses, for example, if costs exceeded revenues, or to meet future losses if revenues were low. To pay for capital projects, the five ANSPs can either use current operating revenues or borrow funds. All five can borrow funds through access to debt financing and private capital. For example, NAV CANADA obtains all of its funds through debt financing. Before commercialization, the ANSP's relied on annual appropriations for capital Projects. Now, all five can borrowing funds through Access to Debt Financing and Private Capital (ADF) and can borrow up to $1.5 billion. services to both civil and military aviation. In addition, the ANSPs may offer other air navigation-related services, such as meteorological, training, and consulting services, and charge for these services. For example, Airservices Australia is structured around three market-oriented business groups—the Air Traffic Management, Airport Services, and Infrastructure Support Services groups. The governments of all five ANPS are members the board. Individual business units within the ANPS report to the chief executive officer and are directly responsible for various aspects of the AN SP’s day-to-day operations. of ICAO and, therefore, all five ANSPs adhere to ICAo principles. All five ANSPS are also members of the Civil Air Navigation Services Organization (CANSO), a voluntary international trade organization. In addition, the UK and Germany are members of EUROCONTROL, which represents the interests of commercialized ANsPS in the European market. The UK and German ANSPs are also part of the European Air Navigation Service Association (EASA), which represents commercial ANSps in the EU. requires activities such as operational risk assessments, surveillance, audits, and incident investigations. The five commercialized ANSPs vary in the extent to which they are owned by the government. Three of these AN SPs are state-owned Zealand’s Airways Corporation of New Zealand, Ltd.; and the United Kingdom”s National Air Traffic Services, Ltd. (NATS) Because we selected these ANSPS to illustrate specific characteristics, our results cannot be generalized to all commercialized AnSPs. eliminating some middle management and administrative positions. All five ANSPs have closed, relocated, or consolidated facilities. For example, Airways Corporation of New Zealand reported consolidating four radar centers into two over 8 years. In general, the ANSP's have not reduced their air traffic controller staffs. To lower their facility operating costs, all five AN SPs have closing, relocated or consolidating facilities. for example, Air New Zealand has closed four radar centres over eight years and consolidated them into two. years following commercialization. To identify any changes in safety since commercialization, we collected and analyzed information provided by each ANSP and by its independent safety regulator. We interviewed officials from these regulators, and we relied on safety data from the ANSPs and their independent safety regulators. We determined from our review of the independently audited financial reports of each AN SP that the financial data we obtained and used for our engagement were material respects, the financial condition and position of the AN SP. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. Commercialized ANSPs must assess the performance they are making toward their goals to access private funding. However, lack of performance data is a major problem. The countries whose ANSP's we reviewed did not collect baseline data or measure performance as extensively as the commercialized AN SPs have since done. The results of this review will be published in a special issue of the magazine, ‘The World’s Most Innovative Companies’, published by Oxford University Press on November 14 and 15. and the European Commission to obtain their perspectives on these issues. We obtained additional information on the performance of each ANSP, including its safety, costs, and efficiencies, since commercialization. To identify lessons learned about the commercialization, we conducted computer research and analysis of documents obtained during our site visits. We also conducted an in-depth analysis of the ANSPs' safety and costs, including their operational efficiencies. We concluded that there were no lessons to be learned from our research. and all five ANSPs have taken steps to control costs. Formerly, the uncertainty associated with the annual appropriations from national governments made it difficult to plan over multiple years. Access to cash flow and borrowed funds has allowed them to plan and execute projects more efficiently and has improved. At a minimum, safety has not been a concern for the AN SPs to implement modernization projects more efficiency. The ANSPS maintain that some of these outcomes would not have been feasible in a government organization. Each of the five commercialized ANSPs is its country’s sole provider of en route services and functions as a monopoly. NATS purchasedoutside organizations, such as NATS, enabling them to reduce their costs and avoid development risks. Some of the commercialized AnSPs maintain that they have achieved the benefits of modernization faster and at less cost by purchasing commercially available systems and upgrades or modifying off-the-shelf technologies to meet their needs, rather than developing their own systems from the ground up. Two ANSPs have adopted an alternative pricing scheme, called location- specific pricing. The fee for some service matches the cost of providing that service to a specific location. Airservices Australia has reported that it plans to phase in location-specific pricing to ease the transition from network pricing. According to Airservices, it will increase the fee for air navigation services to small or remote locations. Once this scheme is fully implemented, it is expected to increase the price of air navigation service to these locations. Airservices Australia is planning to install Automatic Dependent Surveillance-Broadcast ground stations. The ground stations will allow air traffic surveillance services over remote regions of Australia where no surveillance currently exists and where the introduction of radar would not be cost-effective. To protect the environment, Airservices Australia will be using lower cost technologies to serve remote communities. For more information, visit www.airservices.gov.au/airtraffic-surveillance-broadcast-ground-stations. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here. commercially viable because it typically generates less revenue than providing services for larger communities. Even though the minimum cost of an air navigation service is the same, regardless of the location, the cost per plane is often higher at small or remote locations because the cost of the service is higher. The cost of air navigation services can be as high as $1,000 per hour for a single flight, or as much as $10,000 for a two-hour flight. The average cost of a flight is about $2,000. implemented, formerly subsidized air navigation services to small or remote locations may likely cost more. If an airline decides that it does not want to pay the increased fees, it may discontinue service to the location. However, air service may be the only means of public transportation to some small towns and cities. For more information, go to airnavigation.org or call the National Transportation Safety Board at 1-800-273-8255 or go to www.nasa.gov. reach agreement in order to establish realistic expectations for system design from the very beginning. In some instances, an ANSP's need to recover its costs may be at odds with a small or remote community’s need for scheduled air service. Providing air navigation services for such communities may not be possible without an agreement with the ANSP. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. fear that needed air services to remote bush locations will be lost. Others fear that secondary services, such as flight school training, will be affected. The impact of location-specific pricing on remote communities and small operators is difficult to predict. Costs may be higher in remote areas than in other parts of the country. It is also more expensive to fly in and out of remote areas. The cost of flying to remote areas can be as high as $1,000 per hour. It can also be as low as $500 per hour in some areas. traffic controllers); the ownership, management, and funding structures of each country’s ANSP; and institutional mechanisms for stakeholder input. We interviewed government officials, ANSP executives and representatives, union officials, and representatives of aviation stakeholders in each country. We conducted interviews and reviewed literature on commercializing air navigation services and implementing performance- based air traffic organizations. We asked them about the lessons they had derived from commercialization. We also asked them how they had delivered air navigation before commercialization and the of air navigation Services. and representatives, national audit officials, union officials, and representatives of aviation stakeholders. In addition, we interviewed officials from the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO), the Civil Air Navigation Services Organization (CANSO), EUROCONTROL, and others. We asked them how safety, cost, and efficiency have changed since air navigation services were commercialized. We also asked them to share their views on how safety and cost have changed in the past 20 years. We will publish the results of our interviews in a special, special edition of this magazine. as any other commercial business. In the five countries whose air navigation services we reviewed, the ANSP continued to provide nationwide services after commercialization. We conducted a computer search on key elements of each ANSP and conducted interviews in each country. We collected information on the size and scope of air traffic (e.g., number of aircraft movements and number of air key elements and characteristics of commercialized ANSPs) We then analyzed the characteristics and performance of five such organizations, which we selected as illustrative. information we had gathered to identify lessons learned about the commercialization of air navigation services. Our review included site visits, agency interviews, and analyses of documents provided during our site visits and obtained through our own research. We also reviewed literature from academics and experts on commercializing air navigation service. We synthesized information from our interviews with information from the literature to arrive at some general lessons. Unless otherwise noted, we converted the local currencies to make it easier for readers to read the article. The ANSPs are Australia’s Airservices Australia; Canada’S NAV CANADA; Germany’ s Deutsche Flugsicherung GmbH (DFS) to the rest of the country. The price is based on a formula that considers weight and distance. We have derived a number of lessons from our research on the commercialization of air navigation services in the five countries we selected. The following paragraphs summarize these lessons. Because commercialized ANSPs are based in the U.S., we are able to provide this information to our readers in the form of a free e-book. We are happy to share this information with our readers, if you would like to. Commercialization of air navigation services was part of a larger movement to reform government enterprises. In 1987, the New Zealand government established 14 state-owned enterprises, including air navigation and rail services. In some instances, the country as a whole faced widespread fiscal problems and the commercialization was simply part of an effort to save money. For instance, in 1987, New Zealand had a deficit of more than $1.5 billion. In 1988, the government had a surplus of $1 billion. The government also reformed electricity as a state-owned enterprise in 1994 and telecommunications in 2004. Although fiscal problems often drove the commercialization of air navigation services, commercialization was generally intended not only to relieve the government of a fiscal responsibility but also to free the ANSP from some of its responsibilities. Postal services were also privatized in the 1990s and early 2000s. The government still owns some of the postal services it used to run, such as post offices and post offices in rural areas. operating costs for air traffic services by another $21.4 million through cost control measures. All five ANSPs said they have improved productivity through modernization. Obtaining baseline measures before commercializing a country’s air navigation services will allow the government and others to assess the new ANSP's performance in the areas of safety, cost, and efficiency. Some of Airservices Australia reported increases in controllers’ productivity following the introduction of the high salaries of air traffic controllers of the AN SPs. Before commercialization, air navigation services under government control faced increasing strains. Many were underfunded, as evidenced by freezes on air traffic controllers’ wages and insufficient funds to replace aging technologies. Technology replacement programs often cost more, took longer, and delivered less than promised, and stakeholders complained about performance and customer service. The U.S. Air Traffic Control System is a joint venture between the Federal Aviation Administration and the National Transportation Safety Board. It provides air traffic control services across the United States.