administrative fees paid to housing agencies, contingent or unexpected costs, and increased program expenditures caused by residents losing their welfare assistance in 1997 and 1998. For 1997, HUD determined that this amount was unnecessary. HUD found that its assumption that housing agencies would begin to feel a significant impact from welfare reform starting in 1997 was not borne out by what was happening across the country. Instead, the states’ early experiences with the impact of welfare reform showed little or no increased cost to the program as a result of the falling incomes of assisted housing residents.  HUD valued the welfare supplement at $138 per unit ($46 in 1997 and $92 in 1998) However, after submitting its budget estimate to the Congress in February supplementary amounts could be supported with historical or other data. An official from HUD’s Office of Policy Development and Research stated that the amount to reflect welfare reform's impact was removed from the average unit cost because states’ early experiences with welfare reform did not show an increased cost to the program. HUD predicted an annual need of $150 million for fiscal years 1998 through 2002 to amend its contracts.  HUD overestimated its need for funding to amend existing housing assistance contracts because accurate data were the average cost per assisted housing unit. Double-counting caused HUD to greatly overstate its estimate for renewing expiring contracts. In September 1997 HUD proposed changes in its contract renewal estimate that lowered the average unit cost by approximately 14 percent. This change represented a decrease of $1.123 billion in the budget authority requested by HUD for its tenant-based program. HUD’s revised unit cost estimate produced the most substantial reduction to the original contract renewal estimates. the cost to HUD of assisting low-income families to live in decent housing during the coming year. However, after obtaining the estimated costs, HUD did not compare these estimates with the actual cost of that assistance for the most recently completed year. As a result, HUD overfunded many tenant-based contracts, the agency said in a statement. The agency did not say how many contracts it overfunded, but said it was in the range of 20 to 30%. The agency said it would not comment further on the matter. modify its information system to calculate the actual average cost per unit before completing the annual settlement process at each housing agency. This change will verify the reasonableness of theAverage cost per Unit. HUD settles all program costs at the end of the year with the housing agency, and the new system will be used for that purpose. The new system is expected to be in place by the start of the 2015 fiscal year on October 1. For more information, go to www.hud.gov/housing.  HUD officials had already included this fee in the baseline unit cost; adding it again resulted in double-counting it. The second supplementary amount was for covering unknown costs or contingencies. For this supplement, HUD added approximately $204 to the unit cost, or 2 weeks of disbursements. We found, and program officials agree, that better coordination and oversight among the officials in the program office would have been better. The program office’s estimate was accepted without an independent review of the added costs and underlying basis. $9.9 billion. This was HUD’s second attempt to estimate this figure. The Department revised its initial estimate after an independent accounting firm determined that critical data used could not be verified because they were maintained manually at HUD”s field offices. The revised estimate of $9. 9 billion has been verified by HUD and has been released to the public. The department has no immediate plans to make changes to the program. The program is expected to be completed by the end of the year. the office of the comptroller, and the departmental budget office could have prevented this error. For example, the program office’s comptroller reviewed the actual disbursement data obtained from the accounting system. The comptroller did not review the final average unit cost calculation until after HUD submitted its budget to the Congress. It is unclear how long it will take to fix the problem, which is expected to be fixed by the end of the year. It will take at least a year to get the system fully operational. The OIG concluded that serious deficiencies existed in the controls and procedures in HUD’s Section 8 accounting and budgeting systems. As a result, HUD could not assure the Congress that its Section 8 budget requests for fiscal years 1992 and 1993 were reasonably accurate. The estimate of the cost to fund expiring contracts turned out to be estimates, including estimates of Section 8 contract renewals. The Chief Financial Officer has lacked the ability to link budgeting with strategic planning and financial management, the OIG said.  HUD has been unable to estimate accurately the budget authority it needs for Section 8 contract renewals and amendments. Historically, HUD’s accounting and information systems did not contain reliable, complete, or accurate data on Section 8 contracts. As a result of these problems, HUD had to continually revise its Section 8 estimates and often request estimates and to find ways to improve the process in the future. The team determined that HUD was unable to accurately estimate Section8 contract renewal and amendment needs because HUD”s data systems were inadequate for the timely retrieval of accurate information. For example, the OIG found that because of a breakdown in the budgeting.  HUD completed an extensive accounting reconciliation and data verification process that it had begun in February 1996. With improved systems and better data, HUD has the opportunity to report in more detail its unexpended Section 8 funding. HUD has several means—including its financial statements and budget submissions—to keep the Congress informed of its spending. The OIG concluded that, for the sample reviewed, the amounts reserved and obligated in the Section 8 tenant-based information system were correct. The Department could not accurately report its excess balances in the tenant- based program.  HUD implemented a new Section 8 tenant-based information system in fiscal year 1995. The system contains the actual cost incurred by each housing agency for providing rental assistance. HUD officials believe that these improvements will correct past problems and enhance their efforts to more accurately estimate their Section 8 budget needs. HUD plans to automate and integrate the “reservation pricing’ used to estimate the accuracy of the budget estimating for contract renewals. HUD also plans the following additional modifications to the tenant- based Section 8 information system and the budgeting procedures used to estimates contract renewal needs. an independent accounting firm. HUD calculated its revised estimate by using data exclusively from its Section 8 tenant-based information system. HUD would not supplement the average unit cost with additional amounts even if they made sense from a policy standpoint unless the policy made sense. HUD developed the revised unit cost using only the program’s historical expenditure data from the tenant- based information system, she said. She also stated that in the future HUD wouldnot supplement theAverage Unit Cost with Additional Amounts even if They Made sense From A Policy standpoint. Waterhouse LLP assisted HUD in evaluating its revised estimate and determined the estimate to be accurate. The accounting firm compared information in HUD’s tenant-based information system with information in the housing agencies’ most recent year-end settlement statements. By extrapolating the results from the test sample to the information system as a whole, Price Waterhouse LLP found that the totals differed from HUD”s by 5 percent or less. The estimate of excess unexpended budget authority is $9.9 billion.  HUD’s tenant-based information system is generally reliable, says the inspector general. The OIG traced the information in the original contract files first to the original contracts. For those contracts that were Section 8 tenant- based contracts, the OIG trace the information first to those contracts. The inspector general did not systematically verify the accuracy of HUD”s data or conduct a reliability assessment of HUD's databases as part of this assignment. The audit of the consolidated financial statement shows that the information is reliable, the report says. In response to the data access problems noted by HUD’s OIG, HUD plans to improve the security over access to the unit tables within the information system. HUD will compare monthly the number of contracted units in the system to the previous month's total to reconcile any differences. Finally, to fix the problems, HUD will change the way the system is accessed and updated. The changes are expected to be in place by the end of the first quarter of 2014. The new system is expected to take effect in the second quarter of 2013. of this sample and performed similar tests at two field offices. On the basis of these tests, we concurred with the OIG’s findings. We provided a draft of this report to HUD for review and comment and we address HUD’S comments at the end of each applicable chapter. We performed tests on a sample of 1,000 people and found no evidence of problems with the program. We found no problems with any of the other 2,500 people who took part in the test. maintain a reasonable level of excess budget authority. Excess budget authority that exceeds a full year of housing assistance payments is excessive. To ensure that excess unexpended budget authority does not reach unreasonable levels, HUD would need to annually review each tenant-based housing assistance contract it has with housing maintain better control over the amount of program reserves. HUD has recognized the need for improving coordination and oversight among program, budget, and financial management officials in order to achieve more reliable budget, HUD says.  HUD could ensure that the Congress is informed about the funding on hand before appropriating new budget authority. OMB’s guidance on budget formulation, agencies should consider available funding onhand before requesting new funding. A second means for HUD to improve its reporting of excess would be to report it to the Treasury Department, which has the power to appropriate funds for federal agencies that fail to meet their obligations. The Treasury Department has the authority to appropriate money for federal programs that do not meet the requirements of Congress. The amount of unexpended budget authority that was not needed to meet existing housing assistance needs at the beginning of fiscal year 1998 would be $9.9 billion. While a reserve for contingencies is prudent, it is not clear that a reserve of $1.2 billion is reasonable and necessary. HUD plans to adjust its reserve level after it examines in more detail housing agencies’ actual use of available unexpending budget authority in fiscal years 1996 and 1997. However, much less than $1 billion likely will be needed toMeet unanticipated costs during a 1-year period. In fiscal year 1998, the Congress appropriated $25 billion in discretionary budget authority for the Department of Housing and Urban Development’s (HUD) programs. HUD provides rental housing assistance-about $21 billion in fiscal year 1996—that enables about $600 million. In fiscal year 1995, HUD began reducing the terms for renewed contracts. Although HUD has supporting documentation for its need for amendment funding, the Department's prediction of needing future amendment funding is not consistent with the significant changes HUD has made to its contracting practices. HUD called this amount “carryover’ and used it to offset the Department’s fiscal year 1998 contract renewal needs. Identifying this carryover occurred too late in the budget process to have an impact on HUD’S fiscal year 1997 budget request. Therefore, HUD reflected it in the Department's fiscal Year 1998 budget. HUD used the carryover to offset its contract renewals for the fiscal year of 1998. The carryover was used to offset HUD's contract renewing needs for fiscal 1998. not available from its accounting system at the time. HUD has acknowledged many of its problems with its budgeting process and has begun implementing corrective actions. HUD is recently enhanced its tenant-based information system and plans changes to related procedures to improve the accuracy of its budget estimates. Also recognizing the need for improving coordination and oversight among the HUD officials involved in preparing and reviewing the budget submission, HUD moved the Office of Budget under the control of the Department of Housing and Urban Development (Hud HUD) analyzed the impact that HUD’s budgeting processes had on its fiscal year 1998 budget submission to the Congress. HUD has a lengthy history of budget estimating problems and faces some uncertainty now about personnel to oversee and make policy for the budgeting function. Because HUD has recognized many weaknesses in its budget process for estimating contract renewal needs and has undertaken significant actions to improve its process, we are not making recommendations at this time. However, we will continue to monitor HUD”s budget process. build in enough time for adequate coordination, oversight, and communication, these plans have not been completed. HUD’s Office of the CFO will need to exercise strong leadership to complete these changes and to develop specific budget procedures to guide the new organizational changes. Otherwise, the fiscal year 2000 budget estimate and future estimates may also misestimate program funding needs. HUD will begin to prepare the budget estimate in May 1998 and submit it to the White House in September 1998. The budget submission is expected to be in time for the start of the new fiscal year in October 1998. process, the Department’s budget office did not use more reliable estimates developed by the program offices for the Department's initial fiscal year 1996 budget submission to OMB. HUD has not prepared a timetable for implementing these changes. Although HUD recognizes these problems and has plans to correct them, it is too soon to measure the impact of these problems, the inspector general says. The inspector general concludes that HUD has made or plan to make several important changes to its information system and organization to address the problems that they have identified. Since 1989, HUD's estimates of Section 8 contract renewals have been either too low or too high. HUD has taken action to correct these problems, but budget estimating problems still remain. We believe that HUD should be given additional funding to address these problems. The agency should also be required to submit reasonably accurate budget estimates to the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) to support fiscally responsible agencies. This inability to accurately forecast corrective actions and implement those it has planned has been a problem since 1989. excess of current obligations and recapture amounts that accumulate above what is prudently needed to address contingent costs. In commenting on a draft of this report, HUD’s Chief Financial Officer said that HUD agreed with the report’S major findings, conclusions, and recommendations. In addition, HUD's Office of Public and Indian said it agreed with many of the report's findings and recommendations, including those on recapture and contingencies. The report was released to the public on Tuesday. determine whether cost estimates are adequately supported. In commenting on a draft of this report, HUD agreed with the report's major findings and conclusions. HUD also provided several comments to improve the report’s factual representation and to ensure clarity. In particular, HUD believed that we should recognize that its initial initial estimate was not accurate and that the report should have been updated to reflect this. The report was published by the Government Accountability Office, which is part of the Department of Health and Human Services. to analyze all budget submissions, including the contract renewal estimate. Previously, the departmental budget office accepted the cost estimates with only limited review of the supporting documentation that detailed how the estimates were developed. The Office of the CFO also plans to develop budget estimating policies and procedures that will be used in the future. The office is based at the University of California, San Diego, and has offices in San Diego and Los Angeles. The CFO's office is also based in Los Angeles, California and has an office in San Francisco. its fiscal year 1999 contract renewal estimate to OMB in September 1997 with limited analysis. He also said that because of time constraints, his office was limited to reviewing the budget estimates for their numerical accuracy and could not question the estimates’ reasonableness or their underlying basis. For example, he said, he could only review the budget estimate for its numerical accuracy, not for its underlying basis, which is why he couldn't question the estimate's accuracy. He added that he could also only review it for its accuracy, which he said he could do because it was based on his office's analysis. budget authority for programs that are at the level of the tenant-based and project-based Section 8 programs. The federal accounting standards established by the Financial Accounting Standards Advisory Board require that agencies disclose this information. The agency must also disclose whether unexpended budget authority is needed to meet program requirements or is available for other purposes. For more information, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/28/politics/cnn-cnnmoney-money-michael-mcconnell-budget-authority-disclosure. the status of budgetary resources, including the amount obligated. The standards do not, however, require agencies to disclose such information below the major budget account level. Each agency should disclose information that is most useful to the users of their financial statements. In a note to its fiscal year 1996, the federal government said it would release information that would be most useful for the public to see. The agency did not say what that information would be, but said it was likely to be more than $1 million. fiscal year 1996. The note does not identify the portion of the $43 billion attributed to the two Section 8 assisted housing programs or the amount in excess of the programs’ needs. By reporting on the status of budgetary resources, the note fulfills the advisory board’s requirement to report on the Status of Bipartisanship. The report does not name any of the recipients of the funds or the extent to which they are being used for Section 8 housing. The U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development is responsible for funding the two housing assistance programs. Housing said that the report presents a balanced assessment. The CFO and officials of the housing office provided several comments to improve the report’s clarity, and we incorporated them as appropriate. Accurate budget estimates are essential to federal agencies meeting their fiscal responsibilities. Such estimates facilitate sound policy decisions, the report says. The report is available online at: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/28/politics/budget-reports/top-10-budget-issues-2013/story. estimate of the impact of welfare reform on fiscal year 1998 budget needs was based on the best information available. We agreed and made changes to reflect this concern. We are happy to clarify that this was not the case in the case of the welfare reform bill, which was approved by the House of Representatives and the Senate in March 1998. The bill was passed by both houses of Congress and signed into law in April 1998. It is estimated to have had a positive impact on the federal budget for 1998. to mirror the operations of the Department’s Office of the CFO. Previously, the budget director and comptroller reported to a deputy assistant secretary. Under the new structure, the division’S budget director, comptroller will report to the program’‘s chief financial officer who will coordinate the agency’'s CFO and other top officials. The program division will have a budget director who reports to the director of the program division, not to the deputy secretary of state. the program office to ensure adequate oversight. At the time of our review, a chief financial officer for the tenant-based program had not been hired. Second, the Office of the CFO is developing a model for the program. The program’s comptroller had been detailed to the Department’S Office of General Counsel, the review found. The review also found that the program had been overspent by more than $1.5 million on the first year of operation.  HUD has placed all departmental budget operations under the Office of the CFO. HUD also is in the process of implementing two changes directly related to the budget estimate. All program divisions are hiring a chief financial officer agency’s reserve account at the end of the year. HUD will consolidate the 10 accounting divisions in HUD's field offices into one office responsible for all accounting operations. It also has implemented a risk management program to protect the Department's fiscal integrity. It will also develop management controls to ensure that employees are accountable. excess budget authority in the two programs in its consolidated financial statements. HUD would instill greater confidence in the accuracy of these balances because they also would be reviewed as part of the annual consolidated financial statement audit required by the Chief Financial Officers Act of 1990. The CFO has collected all financial management deficiencies identified by HUD’s OIG, GAO, and others and is working to correct these deficiencies within all HUD programs. While these actions appear to be appropriate, HUD would like to make it clear that these actions are part of a larger effort to identify resources from fraud, waste, and abuse. reserve accounts to extend the funding of expiring Section 8 contracts. Congress provides budget authority for HUD’s Section 8 tenant-based assistance. HUD and the Congress have worked together during recent years to renew every Section 8 contract. Renewal assistance represents the vast majority of Section 8 tenants' assistance. The federal government has a responsibility to provide housing assistance to those who need it most, says HUD Secretary Julián Sánchez. The U.S. House of Representatives passed a bill that would extend Section 8 subsidies through the end of 2015. with public housing agencies that administer its Section 8 tenant-based and moderate rehabilitation assisted housing programs. Generally, amending contracts refers to the process of changing specific housing assistance contracts to add more funding. These contracts might need additional funding because the budget authority initially obligated to them—as long ago as 10 years ago. The federal government has a responsibility to provide housing assistance to low-income residents, the Department of Housing and Urban Development says. The agency says it is committed to providing housing assistance in a cost-effective and fair way. fiscal year 2002—nearly a fivefold increase in the amount of budget authority needed to fund Section 8 tenant-based contract renewals. The increase in budget authority is attributable to the large growth in the number of expiring contracts. This growth reflects the renewal of the initial expiration of the budget authority requirements for contract renewal. Budget authority appropriated for Section 8 tenants-based contracts is “no-year” money and does not expire if it is not expended. These unexpended funds have been obligated to the housing agencies but will not be needed to meet planned requirements.  HUD’s actions have resulted in contract lengths ranging from as long as 15 years to as short as 1 year. HUD estimates that the cost of Section 8 contract renewals for the tenant-based program alone will increase from $2.5 billion in fiscal year 1997 to $10.5billion in request. House Committee on Appropriations reviewed HUD's fiscal year 1998 budget request for Sections 8 contract renewal funding. HUD reduced estimate for Section 8 tenant-Based Contract Renewals by $1.6 billion. expiring contract. renewing these contracts will require a sharp increase in budget authority over the next few years. The sharp growth in expirations has two causes. First, the number of contracts expiring for the first time will increase sharply in the coming years. Second, there will be a need for more money to cover the cost of the new contracts, which will need to be negotiated over a longer period of time than the old ones were originally agreed to by the government. The new contracts will have to be approved by a majority vote of the House of Representatives. household discontinues its need for and use of a certificate or voucher and returns it to the housing agency. The housing agency must wait 3 months before reissuing that certificate or vouchers to another eligible household. However, HUD does not factor the effect of this requirement into its budget estimates by the current holder. But because the budget estimate assumes constant use, the effect is to estimate more funding than will actually be needed. HUD could recapture such excess funding when it analyzes the housing. long-term contracts, as well as the re-renewal of shorter term contracts begun in the 1990s. Renewing expiring contracts will require a sharp increase in budget authority over the next several years, as shown by figure 1.1. In 1995, the Congress encouraged HUD to use available unexpended funds in the Section 8 program to offset in effect, credited to housing agencies’ program reserve accounts. In fiscal year 1995, HUD began to draw on unused budget authority from previous years. Section 8 program began in 1974, HUD entered into long-term contracts with housing agencies. Initially, contract terms for tenant-based assistance were for 15 years. As the federal budget deficit grew larger, HUD reduced contract terms to reduce the amount of budget authority it needed to set aside to fully fund the contracts over their whole terms. Beginning in fiscal year 1995, Section 8 tenant- based contracts were written for 1-year terms, thus minimizing the amountof budget authority HUD needs to fund. 15 years—may not have been sufficient to provide adequate rental assistance over the life of the contract. Most of the tenant-based contracts should have 1-year terms by fiscal year 2003. Because of the greater certainty about the future costs of a program operating under contracts with mostly 1- year terms, HUD does not appear to need additional funding for tenant- based amendments, according to HUD’s budget submission to the House of Representatives. The House is expected to vote on the HUD budget this week. the coming years. These consist of 15-year contracts issued in the late 1970s and early 1980s and short-term (5 years or less) tenant-based contracts issued since the early 1990s. Second, HUD must renew an increasing number of contracts that it has renewed at least once previously, a circumstance that has expiring contracts from 3 to 5 years to 1 year. This change to shorter contract terms has made estimating contract renewal needs more certain because changes in housing are expected. Under the certificate program, an assisted household pays 30 percent of its adjusted income for rent. In contrast, households with vouchers may elect to pay more or less than 30 percent. To operate the certificate and voucher programs, HUD enters into contracts with local and state housing agencies. The housing agencies certify applicants for eligibility, inspect units found by the tenant for compliance with housing standards, and verify that the lease terms meet HUD’s requirements. HUD also pays the housing agency a statutorily determined administrative fee for managing the program. depending on the rent charged for the unit in which they elect to live. The voucher program assists the household by making a subsidy payment to the landlord equal to the difference between 30 percent of the household’s adjusted income and a payment standard for the housing unit. In turn, the landlord pays the household a subsidy equal to that difference between that subsidy and the payment standard. The program is funded by a combination of federal, state and local tax dollars, as well as private sector funding. unexpended budget authority in the Section 8 tenant-based program is through its financial statements. HUD’s consolidated financial statements comply with the federal accounting requirement to disclose unexpended budgets by major budget account. However, the statements do not currently show the amount of unexpending consolidated financial statement, HUD says. HUD says it has $43 billion in unexpends appropriations in the program (tenant-based and project-based) At the end of future, we recommend that the Secretary of HUD direct the Office of the Chief Financial Officer to modify the agency’S consolidated financial. statements. provided the amount of unspent budget authority credited to each housing agency at the end of the agency’s fiscal year. The 1997 Emergency Supplemental Appropriations Act (P.L. 105-18) directed us to determine the existence and amount of excess unexpended budget authority. We believe that to adequately address economic contingencies, such as rising rental rates or falling tenant incomes, HUD should better informed in the future of the amounts of excess budget authority in the Section 8 tenant-based program.  HUD provides housing subsidies through nearly 4,300 contracts with local housing agencies and state housing finance agencies. HUD’s estimate of new budget authority to renew expiring Section 8 tenant-based and project-based contracts increases from $3.6 billion in fiscal year 1997 to $18.1 billion in 2002. In fiscal year 1996, HUD spent about $7 billion to provide tenant- based rental assistance. These programs are designed to allow low-income households to live in decent and affordable private rental housing. an extensive examination, called “reconciliation,” of the Section 8 tenant-based program’s reserve accounts at all housing agencies. The results of this examination were not completed until 1997. In November 1996 HUD identified approximately $1.6 billion that had not been obligated to the tenant- based program. In the June 1997 Emergency Supplemental Appropriations Act, the Congress directed HUD to recapture unexpended budget authority that was not needed to meet the current obligations. Figure 2.1 provides a chronology of the actions taken by the Congress and HUD.  HUD intentionally established program reserves during the early years of a multiyear housing assistance contract to help fund the program in the later years. Over the more than 20 years that HUD has provided housing assistance through the Section 8 tenant-based program, approximately $9.9 billion of budget authority excess to program needs has accumulated in housing agencies’ reserve. We reviewed HUD’s process for developing the contract renewal estimates and evaluated supporting documentation. We also reviewed federal laws and regulations, OMB policies, and HUD's guidance. Our objectives for this report were to evaluate the accuracy of HUD’s estimate of its unexpended funds in the Section 8 tenant-based program. In the past, HUD field offices deducted tenants’ expected contributions to rent from the local fair market rent to develop an estimate of the amount. We reviewed documentation and discussed the amount of budget authority each housing agency is likely to need annually to operate its tenant- based program. We also assessed HUD”s budget formulation process for the Section8 tenant-Based program. of available unexpended funds would far exceed the $1.6 billion that HUD disclosed in its fiscal year 1998 budget request. HUD is not required to and does not currently report in its annual budget justifications the aggregate amount of excess unexpending budget authority credited to housing agencies’ reserve accounts. We reviewed and discussed the results of Price Waterhouse LLP’s independent evaluation of available unexPended funds in the tenant-based program with officials from Price Waterhouses LLP and with HUD officials in the Offices of Public and Indian. Housing, the Chief Financial Officer, and Inspector General. discussed the need for retaining unexpended funds in housing agencies’ program reserve accounts. These organizations were the Council of Large Public Housing Authorities, the National Association for Housing and Redevelopment Officials, and the Public Housing Association of New York City and New Jersey. We contacted national associations representing housing agencies to discuss the need to retain unexpending funds in the reserve accounts for housing agencies. We discussed the needs of housing agencies in New York, New Jersey and New York. the participating housing agencies’ accounts as a reserve for contingencies equal to about 2 months of assisted housing payments to landlords. The remaining $1 billion was not recaptured because it represented amounts that had not yet been credited to housing agencies' reserve accounts at the time of the recapture. As a result, the federal government will not be able to recapture any of the $2 billion it recaptured in the first place. The federal government also will be unable to recaptured $1.5 billion in the second and third quarters of 2014. The Congress rescinded $4.2 billion, and after other adjustments, the current balance is about $3.5 billion. The $9.9 billion that had accumulated as excess exceeded the $7.4 billion that housing agencies expended on payments to landlords during fiscal year 1996-97. HUD recaptured $ 7.7 billion of this excess balance and retained the difference of $2. 2 billion to cover contingencies and to account for future transactions. Until completed 8 or other needs, the balance will remain in the Section 8 Reserve Preservation Account. also established the Section 8 Reserve Preservation Account as an accounting repository for recaptured excess budget authority. In response to this direction, HUD recaptured $7.7 billion of the excess budget Authority and placed it in the Preservation Account. Of the $2.2 billion not recaptured, about $1.2billion was left in the reserve account. The reserve account is intended to be used to pay for HUD programs that are not required to be paid for by the federal government. The Reserve Account was established in response to the direction from HUD. After two congressional rescissions totaling $4.2 billion, GAO has calculated on the basis of data obtained at the end of fiscal year 1997 that about $3.5 billion remains in the Reserve Preservation Account. (However, more recent financial information maintained by HUD shows that this balance may not be as large as previously thought) The Reserve Preservation account is the government's reserve fund. It is intended to be used to preserve the U.S. government's financial stability and to provide security for the nation's financial future. As tenants had income and contributed to their rent, the amount of budget authority the housing agency drew down from the program was less than budgeted. HUD assumed that all certificates were in constant use, even though the leasing of housing units would necessarily take some time to accomplish. HUD began to consider tenants’ income in its contract renewal budget requests for fiscal year 1991, but it continued to assume that all units were fully leased. For instance, currently, a statutory requirement exists that once a once a  reserves accumulate in the housing agencies’ reserve accounts because the agencies do not make housing assistance payments to landlords for housing units not under lease. At the time that HUD developed this estimate, almost all housing agencies participating in the tenant-based program already had individual reserve accounts equal to at least 2 months of disbursements. These reserves could be used to cover contingencies such as rent increases and decreases in tenants’ income. The build-up of reserves in HUD’s Section 8 tenant- based program is indicative of long-standing problems. program officials stated that they added the 2-week reserve as another safeguard against the risk that families might lose rental assistance because of unexpected increases in program costs. The officials said, however, that they could not determine whether housing agencies actually needed additional funding or were using available reserves for the program. The program is funded by a combination of federal, state and local grants and loans, as well as donations from individuals and foundations. It provides assistance to families in need of housing, food, medical care and other necessities. while prospective tenants shopped for housing and the housing agencies determined the tenants’ eligibility and ensured that the selected units met quality standards. reserves accumulated during the time housing units were not leased because housing agencies did not make housing subsidy payments for unleased units. As a result, the reserves accumulated over the years and were used to pay for housing subsidies for tenants who were not living in the units at the time they were being leased. The reserves are now being used to help pay for new housing for tenants. unanticipated costs. They said that because the tenant-based information system could give them only 1 year’s worth of complete and reliable information on the use of reserves, a sufficient basis did not exist for making informed decisions about the need for contingency funding. The third supplementary amount that HUD used removed this request for funding. HUD would use historical data as the basis for future budget estimates, HUD would make no future requests for contingency funds for the tenants-based program. As a result of misestimating the unit cost and using cost estimates in. costs or tenants’ incomes could be predicted more easily over the shorter period. HUD official told us that the tenant-based information system more accurately estimates funding needs 1 year at a time and, therefore, greatly lowers the risk of underfunding contracts and could ultimately eliminate the need for the program. The program could be rolled out across the U.S. by the end of the year or in the next few years, HUD officials say. It could also be expanded to other countries. and the excess funding contributed to the accumulation of program reserves. By creating a “reservation pricing” subsystem within the information system, HUD now will use the actual historical cost data to evaluate the fair market rents and tenants’ contributions. HUD officials believe that this process will eliminate overfunding and improve the housing system in the United States. It is hoped that the process will also improve the quality of housing in the U.S. and around the world in the long-term. that the unexpended budget authority in the tenant-based program was $20.7 billion and that $9.9 billion of that amount was not needed to meet current program needs. This error was caused by an ineffective internal budget process that lacked adequate oversight and did not make effective use of actual expenditure data for the program. For example, insufficient review of the estimating methodology led to double-counting a large component of the program’s spending. Because this $ 9.9billion of excess budget authority wasn’t needed to fund current obligations, it therefore was available to meet future obligations. and 1996 also appeared to be overstated. In response, the Assistant Secretary for Public and Indian Housing pointed out that the tenant-based program had included a “cushion” in its amendment estimates to cover shortfalls in budget authority that could not be estimated by the Department’s systems. To help correct the error, the Department of Housing and Urban Development has set up an online tool to help people with questions about the program. The tool can be found at: http://www.hud.gov/hud/housing/housing-and- urban-development. stated that the Budget Office was unaware of the program office’s budgeting assumption that all tenant-based certificates are in constant use. This assumption, however, does not reflect the current practice of housing agencies that administer the tenant- based program. As stipulated by current appropriations law, after a certificate is turned in, it is no longer considered a tenant certificate, the agency said. The program office said it was unaware that the budgeting assumptions were not in line with the practice of the housing agencies.