from the ground to the plant or mills in which such treatment processes are applied thereto as is not in excess of 50 miles unless the Secretary [of the Treasury] finds that the physical and other requirements are such that the ore or mineral must be transported a greater distance. So much of the transportation of ores or minerals (whether or not by common carrier) from the point of extraction from theGround to the plants or mills is not more than 50 miles. The Secretary finds that such a distance is too great.  IRC §613(c) defines the treatment processes that when applied by the mine owner or operator are considered as mining. The following treatment processes are not considered to be mining processes (and are thus NOT included in gross income):. The costs of such processes are included in the value or price for purposes of physical and other requirements are such that the ore or mineral must be transported a greater distance to such plants or mills. To be considered a mining process, the process must be carried out in a way that requires the ore to be transported at a distance of at least a certain distance from a plant or mill. and any treatment processes necessary or incidental to the mining process, specific treatment processes and also generally the costs of transporting the ores or minerals from the point of extraction to the plant or mill in which the treatment processes are applied. More specifically, The term "mining" includes not merely the extraction of the o Res or Minerals from the ground but also the treatment process considered as mining described in paragraph (4) and so much of the transportation of ores and minerals (whether or not common carrier) from thePoint of extraction. roasting, thermal or electric smelting, or refining), or by substantially equivalent processes or combination of processes used in the separation or extraction of the product or products from the ore or the mineral or minerals from other material from the mine or other natural deposit [IRC §613(c)(4)(D)];" In addition, "and" in addition to "and," the process used in extraction is called "separation or extraction" or "extraction" and includes "refining" and "retaining" fully phased in by 2010. For the domestic mining industry (which includes the oil and gas industry), the deduction applies to any primary product "manufactured, produced, or extracted in whole or in significant part in the United States" Note that extraction is considered to be manufacturing for purposes of this deduction. The deduction is not required to be paid in full or in part, but it is required to pay a portion of it to the federal government if it is earned in the U.S. for refining/smelting (and other processing) only—the mining company still owns the ore. If the miner's output is sold in an arm's-length transaction (this would generally occur for certain iron ores sold by independent, i.e., "small" mining companies), then there is a sale of the mineral and that is the actual sale. If there is no sale, the mineral is still owned by the mining company, and the ore is sold to a third party. firm is an integrated producer, i.e. it has smelting/refining operations, and also applies non-mining processes to the ore concentrate before the mineral is sold. There may be no sale of either the raw ore, or ore concentrate, and hence no price for the mineral firm's output until the final metal is produced. For more information, visit the company's website, or go to: http://www.goldmanresources.com/goldman-resources. is further complicated when the firm or industry is vertically integrated. In such cases, there may not actually be a sale throughout the mining-production-processing-marketing (sale) stage. Any price or value would have to be constructed, i.e., estimated or derived, from values further upstream when they are first determined or estimated. In this case, the value would be based on the value that has already been determined or derived from the upstream value, rather than the actual sale price. at arm's-length. The price is determined at the point of sale, which for coal is typically at or near the mine-mouth when the coal is weighed and loaded. Transportation and washing costs, and other costs not deemed to be mining or production, are also included in the cost of a coal shipment. For more information on how to buy coal, visit the National Coal Association's website or call 1-800-Coal-Buying (1-800) or visit www.coal-buying.org.  extraction or quarrying of the raw minerals (e. g., iron ore, bauxite, galena, and non-metals such as barite, uranium, diatomite, fluorspar, clay, calcium carbonate, etc., that exist in the hard formations of the earth) generally involves various stages. Crushing, grinding, and beneficiation by concentration (gravity, flotation, amalgamation, electrostatic, or magnetic), cyanidation, leaching, crystallization, precipitation (but not including electrolytic deposition) production stages are shown for the typical case or mineral in Figure 1. Within these production stages, from extraction to the first sale to manufacturers, there may be various points at which there is created a valuable output. Depending on the type of mineral, and the structure of the mineral, these points may be at different points. For more information, visit the Minerals Industry Association (MIA) website or go to http://www.miamio.org/minerals/minerals-industry. For most hardrock minerals extraction produces a raw mineral ore, which of itself has little value and is generally not marketed. First marketable mineral product created as a result of mining and before any non-mining processes (e.g., manufacturing processes such as refining or smeltering) are applied. For most minerals, for most minerals the first marketable product created is the raw ore. The raw ore is the product of mining, not the ore that is later refined or made into a product. mineral rights, for example. However, mineral production, like all business, is risky. It is difficult to know in advance of production precisely the quantity and quality of the mineral. There are long lead times between exploration, discovery, and actual production, and it's difficult to project what mineral prices will be. For more information on how to invest in mineral rights, visit www.mineralrights.org.uk or go to www.goldenresorts.com/mineral-rights. are: At what point can the value of a mine's output first be determined? Further, since throughout the production stage value is added or increased, at what stage does mining value end, and non-mining value begin? Production of valuable mineral products from raw hardrock minerals (e.g., metals such as iron, industry) may be several different types of mineral products with value. For example, copper is traded in many forms that relate to different stages of processing: at the mine, copper may be sold as ore, concentrate, or precipitate. to prepare for the initial processing, beneficiating or concentrating to derive an ore concentrate. At this stage, there is a demand for the mineral ore concentrate as an input into the smelting/refining process for final sale in the wholesale commodities or manufacturing markets. The price of the ore concentrate would depend on the (wholesale) prices of the final metal (including related metals) and the percentage of the metal in the ore. Consider gold, for example. Gold refiners are generally the primary market for a mining process or any transportation. In general, such ore concentrates are either sold to a broker or to a smelter refiner, or they are tolled, which means the ore is not sold, but is rather sent. The value of the mineral to be derived therefrom can be anything from copper from copper ore concentrate, to aluminum from aluminum oxide, etc. In general, the value of a mineral is the amount of it that can be derived from the ore concentrate or other source of energy or power. Raw gold is usually delivered to the refiner where it is purchased from the miner, processed, and refined. At the point of sale to therefiner, funds received are considered gross income to the miner. After the milling or mining processing stage, the ore concentrate has value due to the value of the gold it is extracted from. The gold is then sold to a refiner to be refined into a more valuable product. The refined gold is sold for a profit to the gold miner. The market price of the final cast copper on the commodities exchanges is $3.60/lb. One metric tonne (2,205 lbs) of pure copper would be valued at $7,938. One ton of copper ore concentrate contains only 30% pure copper, so that the value of one tonne of that ore concentrate is 30% of that, or $2,381. To calculate smeltering and refining costs assume that these are 10% or $0.36/lb of the price of cast copper. Then costs would be $238/tonne of copper concentrate. remaining 70% is sulfur, iron, and other impurities that have no value. And finally, to simplify further, assume that mining costs represent 75% of the total costs of producing the final pure copper. Then, under the constructive gross income method, gross income per tonne from mining operations would be calculated as follows. If the mining company produced 100,000 tons of copper ore concentrate (equivalent to 30,000 tonnes of pure copper) total gross income would be $7,937/tonne. in cases where there is no representative price from sales of the same ore concentrate (the mining output) in other markets, then gross income from mining is estimated. Gross income is estimated by multiplying gross sales by the ratio of mining to total costs or one of various other methods to estimate the price. In the mining industry, gross income is usually calculated by dividing mining costs by the total number of ounces of ore concentrate sold. In some cases, this is less than or equal to the total cost of mining. Net smelter return is the amount received by the mine or mill owner from the sale of the mineral product to the treatment plant that converts the output of the mill to marketable metal. From the gross proceeds received there may be (2%) of net smalter returns payable to the Vendor. For the purpose of this clause "Net Smelter Returns" shall mean the actual proceeds received by. the Purchaser from a smelters or other place of sale or treatment in respect of all ore. removed by the Purchasers from the Claims as Smalter Return. landowner (the vendor) and the mining company (the purchaser), illustrate the legal language used in defining a net smelter return. As additional consideration for the Vendor entering into this Agreement, the Purchaser acknowledges that the Claims shall be subject to a royalty or charge in the amount of two percent. The Purchaser also acknowledges that it may be charged a royalty of up to two percent for the use of the smelting process. In this case, the royalty would be in the form of a two percent charge. of transportation and handling of such concentrates, metals (including bullion) or products from the Claims to any mint, smelter, refinery or other purchaser. c) related insurance on such concentrate, metals, bullion or products. Thus, continuing with the above hypothetical copper example, the net smalter return would be the net Smelter return on the copper produced by the Claims. For example, if the copper was sold to a mint, the mint would make a profit on the sale of the copper. from mining in this one year would be $178.6 million. At 8%, the royalty on this would be$14.24 million. Net smelter return is a common term used in the mining industry. It would equal the actual (or constructive) sales revenue to the mining company of the ore concentrate. If annual sales were 100,000 metric tonnes of copper concentrate, total net smalter return revenues would be  $214 million at 8%. At 8% of this revenue, the royalty is $17 million. This is because final metal prices are high relative to smelting/refining costs. In general, the higher are metals prices relative to costs, the more net smelter returns diverge from gross income. Another royalty base that has been mentioned in the General Mining law debate is net profit. Here the royalty would be a certain percentage of the miner's net after-tax profit or income, which is essentially gross revenue less all other costs. A constant royalty rate also tends to minimize both economic distortions—intra-industry resource allocations among mineral types. The Net Smelter Return is the amount of money which the smelter or refinery pays the mining operator for the mineral product. It is usually based on a spot, depending on the nature of the commodity, for marketing costs. If the operator ships to its smalter, charges should not exceed those that would be charged by an arm's length smelters in similar circumstances. The similarity of these definitions of net smelTER return (gross price less non-mining costs) times output is that it is a ratio of gross price times output. A net smelter return will be ... the net value of minerals from the property, where Net Value is Gross Value less certain permitted expenses. Gross value will usually be defined with reference to the spot price of an average weekly or monthly spot price on specified markets for the property. For more information, visit www.smelterreturns.com or go to www.somelterrevenues.com. In the UK, smelters can also use the Smelter Return Calculator to see how much minerals they have produced. refer essentially to the net average revenue per unit of the smelted mineral product sold by the miner. It is essentially an estimate of the price the miner receives, or equivalently, the price paid by the smalter, for the ore concentrate produced. This estimate is based on the (gross) price received by the refinery or smelter when it is sold in the commodities market, less the costs of smelting/refining and other costs. The price received is the marketable metal (e.g., the price on the London Exchange or the Chicago Commodities Exchange) stage in the mineral producing process should value (or price) be measured? Should it be based on gross income (value of the mineral at the mine) or net smelter return? When does a mining company produce a saleable or marketable product whose measured, and the deductions allowed? Because value is added as mining production moves from the extraction or quarrying state to the smeltering stage—the market price, if one existed, would increase throughout these stages. A net price (such as net smalter return) further downstream, would generally be greater than a gross price. or current price of the mineral, with deductions for the costs associated with further processing. In non-metal mines the selling price is usually 'fob mine site' because of the transportation costs involved in delivering the mineral product to the buyer. In Canadian law, net smelter return is defined in the law of the province of Ontario. In the UK, the term is used to refer to the cost of transporting the product from the mine to the customer. In Australia, it refers to the costs of shipping the product to and from the customer's home. America, formed the basis for the granting of the rights to lands including those containing minerals, including a share of the minerals (a royalty) One of the earliest statutes was the "Royal Code of 1783" This Spanish law became the basis. for acquiring mineral rights in Spanish colonies in the Spanish colony in the U.S. in the 1800s and 1900s. The law was passed in 1783, and it was used by Spain to grant mineral rights to its colonies in America. The land charters issued by England to the original thirteen colonies provided generally that 1/5 th of the minerals on chartered lands were reserved for the crown. Independence for the American colonies meant that issues of land and mineral ownership between the colonies was used to settle claims disputes.Americas, and was used by the British government to settle disputes with the colonies over land and minerals. The land charter was issued by the king of England and was known as the "Land Charter" It was issued to the thirteen colonies in 17th century and was called "The Land Charter" The Lode Law of 1866 provided free and open access to federal lands with lode deposits for prospecting, claiming, patent nonmineral, noncontiguous lands to mill and process the ores. As noted, the General Mining Law was enacted to promote westward migration and the economic development of the West. The land and mining rushes that followed further accelerated the great Westward settlement and expansion. Originally, the Mining Law applied to non-mineral lands, but later it was expanded to include all mineral-rich lands. The General Mining Law of 1872 (17 Stat. 91) can be traced to 16 th Century English and Spanish property and mineral rights laws and customs, which, as practiced in Colonial America, were very different from those in the U.S. Today, public domain lands can be patented, but this issue is not addressed in this report. The report also doesn't address the issue of whether public domain land should be patented at all, which is a separate issue and is not covered in the report. The General Mining Law of 1872 was approved by President Ulysses S. Grant on May 10, 1872. It was the consolidation of amended versions of both the 1866 Lode Law and the 1870 Placer Act. Under the law, placer deposits were subject to mining and patenting laws. The law also applied the same provisions to gold and silver deposits. It took effect on July 1, 18 72. The bill was signed by President Grant and signed into law by President Andrew Johnson. It became the first mining law of its kind. the national government, the states, localities, and even private individuals had to be decided. Several ordinances were enacted, but these did not address the question of mineral royalties specifically. The "California gold rush" of 1849 and the "Gold Rush of 1851" led to a change in the law. The Preemption Act of 1841 was the first law to address the issue of royalties in the state of California. The law was passed in 1841, and the first royalties were paid in 1851. several temporary leasing or land sales acts for gold, silver, lead, and iron. Prospectors disregarded them, trespassed onto federal lands, laid their claims anyway, and paid no royalty to the federal government. Also after the Civil War, congressional policy became more openly geared to gold and silver prospectors. The U.S. gold rush of the 1860s and 1870s led to a gold rush in the United States. The gold rush was a major factor in the creation of the U. S. gold industry. silver strike in Nevada of 1860 caused a significant westward population migration for the purposes of prospecting and claiming public domain lands. During this pre-Mining Law period, the issue of land ownership and easy and free access to federal lands was very controversial and fiercely debated. The Congress had approved a bill that would have made it easier for people to claim public domain land. The bill was never passed, and instead the land was given to the state of Nevada to use for mining. The mining law was later changed to make it easier to claim federal lands. original bill; establish a new definition of "undue degradation" of public lands and resources; give the Secretary of the Interior broader authority to block mining operations that would cause such harm; allow Native American tribes to petition the federal government to withdraw federal lands with cultural and religious values. original bill;establish a new definitions of "Undue degradation of public Lands and resources and give the. Secretary of Interior broader Authority to blockmining operations thatWould cause such. harm. Original bill; Allow Native American Tribes to Petition the Federal Government to withdraw Federal lands with Cultural and Religious Values. from mining activities (similar language has been in place for states and localities) Set guidelines for administrative and judicial review of actions authorizing mining on public lands. Allow citizen lawsuits challenging federal decisions. Set guidelines to allow citizen lawsuits against federal decisions on mining activities. Allow for citizen lawsuits to challenge federal decisions about mining activities on public land. Allow state and local governments to sue the federal government to stop mining on their land. For more information on the bill, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/29/politics/mineral-mining/index.html. Law have been made almost from the time it was signed by President Grant. Many Presidents—Presidents Roosevelt, Nixon, Carter, and Clinton—have endeavored to reform the law. One of the contentious issues has been that the law makes no provision for the disabled. The law was passed in 1864 and has been in effect since 1864. It was signed into law by Grant on July 25, 1864, and has remained in effect ever since. It has been amended several times since then, most recently in 1998. Committee-approved bill, 50% of the cleanup funding would be directed to the state in which the royalties were generated. Direct the Secretary of the Interior to prioritize reclamation projects that protect public health and safety, particularly from water pollution, and for projects that restore wildlife habitat. Under an amendment to the amendment to. the bill, $1.5 billion would be dedicated to clean-up projects in the state of the royalties generated, with $1 billion going to each of the five states. the Committee bill, watershed areas would be designated as eligible reclamation projects and among the top priorities for receiving cleanup funds. establish environmental standards specific to the hardrock mining industry. Environmental standards in the substitute version of H.R. 2262 would be less prescriptive and more performance-oriented than those in the original bill. The bill would also set environmental standards for the mining industry that would be specific to hardrock miners. The substitute version would set standards that are more performance oriented than the original version. a 4% royalty. On October 2, 2007, the Subcommittee on Energy and Minerals of the House Natural Resources Committee held a hearing on this bill. A substitute bill was marked up and approved by the full committee on October 23. The House approved this committee on November 6, 2007. The bill was passed by the House of Representatives on November 13, 2007 and signed into law on November 14, 2007; the bill was never introduced in the Senate or the White House. The Senate passed the bill on November 16, 2008; the House passed it on November 21, 2008. costs for such actions as processing and recording applications, certain exploration permits, name changes, and corporate mergers. On November 1, 2007, the United States House of Representatives approved a substitute version of H.R. 2262 (with amendments) The Hardrock Mining and Reclamation Act of 2007 was passed by the U.S. Congress on November 2, 2007 and signed into law on November 3, 2007. The act is known as the Hardrock mining and reclamation act of 2007. bills were introduced in the 103 rd Congress to impose a royalty. H.R. 322 went to conference in 1994 but was not approved reportedly because of opposition from Western lawmakers. In 1995, there was an unsuccessful attempt to incorporate a royalty as part of the FY1996 budget. S. 775 passed the Senate in May 1993 and was incorporated into H. R. 322 which was approved by the House in November 1993. In its 1993 session of Congress, the House of Representatives passed a bill that would have imposed a royalty on the U.S. Virgin Islands. FY1998 budget proposal, and again in FY2001, the Clinton Administration proposed a 5% "net smelter" royalty but, like previous efforts, this failed. At this writing, the major reform bill in the House is H.R. 2262, which, among other things, would impose an 8% ad-valorem royalty. There is currently no Senate bill, but the House has passed a bill that would impose a royalty of 8%. The Senate has yet to pass a bill. bill, with minor amendments, on November 1 by a vote of 244 to 166. A summary of the provisions of the House-approved version of H.R. 2262 is described in the Appendix to this report. The comparable bill in the Senate is S. 2750 , which also proposes an 8% royalty and is similar to the House bill. The Senate bill also proposes a royalty of 8%. The House bill is identical to the Senate bill, but the Senate version has a higher royalty rate. several hearings on proposed Mining Law reform, e.g., on S. 1126 (101 st Congress) which among other things would have imposed an 8% ad-valorem royalty. In 1993, President Clinton's comprehensive economic proposal, part of the State of the Union Address, included claims fees and a 12.5%Ad-Valorem Royalty. Several hearings were held on proposed mining law reform in the 1990s and 2000s, including one on S 1126. than price and output—it does, however, avoid the usual complexities associated with determining value (price), costs, or even profits. For oil, gas, and coal, federal royalties are calculated on the gross proceeds (or gross sales revenues) from the contract sale. Royalties on coal extracted from federal lands, at the 8% or 12% royalty rate, are also assessed on the "gross proceeds" from the sale of coal. This is essentially the price of the coal in a free-market transaction between unaffiliated parties. or is sold without a contract, royalties are based on various types of benchmarks such as comparable sales or even local spot-market oil prices. In situations where the oil or gas is transported before it is sold, then transportation charges are generally higher. In cases where the gas or oil is sold after it has been transported, transportation costs are generally lower than in other cases. The royalties are adjusted for any quality differences and transportation costs, as well as other factors such as the quality of the oil. wellhead, and so the contract price is used to determine gross proceeds. Typically, for example, oil and gas is sold at a posted price to a pipeline company, and that is the price on which the royalty is based. In situations where oil is not sold in an arm's-length transaction, such as in the United States, the price is not as important as it would be if it was sold to a company in a legal arm's of the deal, the company says. rate of return. In theory, they accrue naturally to the owner of any natural resource but are not necessary to secure the continued supply of the resource. Only a normal long-run return is necessary to ensure such a supply. This is an important rationale for the payment of bonus bids. It is also the reason why bonus bids are paid in the first place. It's a way of ensuring that a resource is produced at a normal rate of return in the long-term, and not at a higher rate. payments, combined with the bonus bids, would appropriate for society the economic rents—the abnormal or excess profits (i.e., windfalls)—from the production of scarce natural resources. In reality, of course, the federal government policy is just the reverse: It charges a royalty rate of zero, which is definitely below the market-determined rate. The U.S. government has a policy of charging a royalty rates of zero. The federal government has also charged a royalty Rate of 0. the federal government leases lands for oil and gas development in return for a bonus bid, annual rents, and royalties. Lease sales are conducted through a competitive bidding process, and leases are awarded to the highest bidder. The highest bidder makes an up-front cash payment called a bonusbid in order to be awarded the lease. The lowest bidder is awarded the right to lease the land for a set period of time, up to 20 years, if the lease is approved by the federal government. money, one would expect him to receive the monetary equivalent of the value of the output. Rational landowners would not settle for less than what the deer, crop, or metal is worth because they could always have the deer,. crop, and metals taken to market and sold for at least $1,000 per ton. "Rational landowners would never settle for anything less than $1.1,500 per ton," he says. "They would always want to sell it for that amount," he adds. Renters could have negotiated a smaller share if they wanted less rent. It would not be rational for the renter to pay to the landowner a royalty based on market value. If they wanted to pay less rent, then presumably that would have been negotiated as a smaller part of the rent, not less than 1 deer out of 5, it would perhaps be 1 out of 6. The renter could have asked for less rent by paying a smaller percentage of their rent, rather than a larger percentage. secure the lease. Annual rents range from $5 to $9.50 per acre, with lease sizes ranging form 2,500 to nearly 6,000 acres. royalty rates are, as noted above, either 12.5% or 16.67%. These mineral rents are an attempt to capture the returns to the land above and beyond the land's mineral rents. These leases are not available in all parts of the U.S., but are available in some parts of Canada and the United States. or the return, to land as both a marketable capital asset and input to production. It is a payment made by the renter of the land to the landowner (whether private or public) in a voluntary exchange for the flow of services provided by that land over time. As a returns paid to labor (wages), capital (interest), entrepreneurship (profits), and other factors, and above any taxes that have to be paid to government. With perfect knowledge and no risks, for example, the rents resulting from mineral lands could be captured as up-front payments. Forgoing royalty and other payments through the location system in effect means that the services of a factor of production are provided free of charge. In this case, federal land is provided free to the producer by virtue of the fact that they earn a return on that land for the public. For example, in the U.S., if a company makes a large amount of money from selling a piece of federal land, it can use that money to pay off its creditors. The company can then use the money to make a profit from selling the land. the federal government is the steward of the public lands which it holds as trustee of American public. The development of public resources should only occur at a fair market value return to the nation, it is argued. An implication of the location system on federal lands is that all public lands should be accessible to the public at the same time. The U.S. government has a responsibility to protect and develop public lands as well as to protect the environment, the authors argue. They argue that the current location system is not the best way to do this. to establish their enterprises and produce goods and services—minerals that provide utility to consumers. Just as mineral producers must pay a wage in exchange for the services of labor, or interest for the service of capital, they generally must pay landowners for their services. Lands producing minerals of higher quality and value, gold for instance, pay a higher royalty amount. Those producing lower quality or value minerals, lead for example,pay a lower amount. It would be inconsistent with the concept of sharing. mineral deposit. In the case of mineral lands, rents could be paid in various forms such as a bonus bid, annual rentals, or a royalty. The royalty becomes a way of allowing for mineral land rents to be paid, for the landowner to earn a return on the land, in a way that simultaneously minimizes the risk. For example, under the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act of 1953, as amended, bonus bids and annual rentals depends primarily upon how production risk is shared between landowner and mineral producer. a claim holder could obtain title—called a patent—to the land and mineral rights upon demonstrating the discovery of economically recoverable minerals. Patenting basically means that the title to the land is conveyed to the claimant. The mineral lands become private property. The claim holder may also claim and claim and may also be granted a mineral patent by a court of law or an act of the Supreme Court of the United States. A patent is a legal right that entitles a person to a certain amount of land or minerals. Most of the revenues estimated under H.R. 2262 would come from existing claims. The 4% royalty on existing claims would generate revenues early. No royalties would be paid in 2008 due to a provision that would defer royalties during the first 12 months after enactment. The 8% royalties on new claims would be higher than the 4% for existing claims, but would be lower than the 8% royalty for new claims, which is higher than 4%. The 8%, however, would not be as high as the 4%, which would be more than 8%. mine shafts) generally ranked fairly low, relative to assets used in other industries. mining companies pay a variety of claims fees (location fees, Bureau of Land Management processing fees, annual maintenance fees) The claims location fee or more claims (those with 10 or fewer claims are exempt) are adjusted for inflation. The BLM also assesses a processing fee of $15. These fees help the BLM cover its costs of administering the mining law and regulations. They cover the cost of maintaining the mine shafts. holding fee, from $30 to $50 per claim, and from $125 to $150 per claim respectively. The projected revenue effects from the proposed higher fees are shown in Table 3. The revenue estimates are net of federal income taxes. There would be some decline in income tax revenues due to the decline in tax revenue due to a decrease in the number of claims made to the government. The proposed fee would be $30 per claim and $50 for each new claim. The fee would increase to $125 per claim. is presently $30 per claim, which is about 20 acres. This fee is charged for first-time locators to locate and record a claim. The annual maintenance (or holding) fee, necessary to hold a claim on public land, is presently $125 per claim. this fee applies to claim holders with 11 acres or more. It is not required to have a claim in order to hold public land. It can be applied to claims that are more than 10 acres in size or more than one acre in size. also qualify for expensing treatment. These are costs associated with bringing the mine to production. Activities associated with development are building roads, clearing the land, and other activities to prepare a site for the production stage. Expensing applies only to domestic mines; exploration and development cost of foreign properties must be either depleted or amortized over a 10-year period using straight-line method. The costs of constructing or sinking a mine shaft, or the costs of driving tunnels and galleries, are development costs, which may be expensed. companies incur geological and geophysical (or surveying, and reconnaissance investigation) costs. These include the costs of staking the claim, removal of property line obstructions, limited removal of overburden, and limited sluicing. The removal of large amounts of overBurden would indicate that a deposit may have already been found and the mine may be in a different stage. Exploration expenditures include the Costs of Surveying, test pitting, trenching, drilling, driving of exploration tunnels and adits, and similar types of work. The costs of exploratory drilling to ascertain the extent of commercially marketable ores are treated by the tax law as a mineral exploration cost. These types of costs are all deductible rather than capitalized. Expenditures made after the existence of ores or minerals has been disclosed are considered mine development expenditures, and these are deductible as well as exploration costs. The tax law does not apply to exploration expenditures made in connection with the development of a new mine or a new ore deposit. It only applies to the exploration costs associated with the discovery of new ore deposits. amortization. Corporate mining companies may only expense 70% of the exploration and development. The remaining 30% must be amortized over five years, i.e., deducted evenly over 60 months (IRC §291 (b) Both exploration and. development costs must be recaptured (i.e. taken back) once the mine is opened and. The cost of the mine must be split equally over the five-year period (IRC §291 (a) and (b) production commences (for exploration expenses) or when the mine is sold (for development expenses) Recapture is accomplished by either including the amount expensed as ordinary income or by subtracting it from the percentage depletion allowance. This makes it especially important for mining companies to determine when exploration ends and development begins. For more information, visit the mining company's website or the Mining Company of the Year website, which is run by the Australian Mining Association (MNC). For more details on the MNC, visit its website. If there are sufficient positive economic and social effects from the use of public lands for mining, there might be an economic rationale for charging the mineral producer a lower than market rate. Such externality arguments can be overcome if the market for the leasing of mineral lands between landowners and mining companies is not competitive. In the first case, if private landowners exercise monopoly power or some other other way, the market may not be competitive. The second case is if the mining industry itself is notcompetitive. type of market power, then it would be possible to extract from the mining companies higher than competitive royalty rates—monopoly rates. In the second case, if the mining industry is concentrated and exercises market power—control over prices, for example—it might lead to underpayment of royalties. The market-determined royalty rates might actually be higher than the market- determined rates, he says, and this could lead to a higher royalty rate. He says this could be the case if the industry were concentrated and exercised market power. of return on capital for the U.S. mining industry have also been higher as compared with many other industries. These negative industry and regional effects would be a natural and unavoidable part of the transition from a policy of resource subsidization to a Policy of resource neutrality. As the above shows, the U S. needs to change its approach to the mining industry to make it more sustainable and less dependent on foreign aid and subsidies. The country needs to move away from its current policy of subsidizing the mining sector and towards one of resourceneutrality. based on the value of the minerals as defined under the gross income definition of the income tax code. The 8% royalty would apply to new production. Production from existing mining operations would pay of the proceeds for the cleanup of abandoned sites. impose an 8% gross income royalty future hardrock mining operations, and an 4% royalty rate on current mining operations. require miners to seek additional permits to explore for and develop mineral resources. and meet certain standards related to reclamation of mined. resources. of external costs is considered significant, the appropriate federal policy would be a tax rather than to impose no royalty on the use of the land. This is the economic rationale for the abandoned mineland reclamation fee under SMCRA, the Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act. Two other conditions might be required for the fee to be reintroduced in the future. The fee would be in addition to the tax on land reclamation, which would be levied on all land in the U.S. and Canada. Mining companies can deduct costs of mine closing and land reclamation in advance of the actual closing and reclamations, i.e., before the occurrence of the activity giving rise to the expenses. This provision is contrary to the general tax rule. The provision (IRC §468) allows mining companies to deduct the costs ofMine closing and Land Reclamation. This Provision (IRC §468) is contrary to the general tax rule, and is not deductible in this case. lands; create an abandoned mine reclamation program similar to the one currently in place for coal sites; make the income from hardrock mining fees and royalties available, subject to appropriation, to support reclamation programs and to provide assistance to certain state, local, and tribal governments; under an amendment to the Constitution; and create a program to clean up abandoned mine sites. The bill was approved by the House and the Senate on a vote of 419-3. The Senate passed the bill on a voice vote on Thursday. Without land reclamation, there would presumably be damage to the environment, which is an external cost to society. This is a cost that the typical profit-maximizing hardrock mineral producer does not usually account for in its business plan. The damage is to the utility of the land for other potential uses. It is also to the health of the environment as well as to the economy as a whole. The cost of this damage is often not considered by the hardrock mining industry when it is planning for the future. the economic rationale for the payment of royalties on hardrock minerals. A royalty is a factor payment, part of the rent paid, be upon production and sale. The type of royalty that most closely is intended to capture the rents from mineral lands whose future productivity cannot be precisely determined due to risk. In general, the precise division between royalties or be hard rock minerals, coal, or oil and gas is not clear. The issue of how to structure such a royalty is also a matter of debate. for the payment of a royalty on the production of the hardrock minerals from federal lands. Hardrock mining on acquired federal lands (as opposed to public domain lands) is required to pay a royalty of 5%. The royalty rates currently in effect on various types of minerals, both leasable and locatable, from federal Lands are shown. In particular, the report addresses the minerals, although some tend to use the fixed royalties. The report analyzes the economic issues underlying proposals to impose a royalties on hardrock (locatable) minerals on public domain Lands. Much of the land from which hardrock minerals are produced is owned by the federal government. The government might be in a position to take advantage of its power to obtain royalty payments above the competitively determined rates. On the other hand, much land is also privately owned or owned by state or local governments or Indian tribes, which suggests that the market-determined royalty rates might be a reliable indicator of competitive rates. These are complex issues which are difficult to analyze. As to the hardrock mineral industry structure, available data suggest that the industry, both government and private, is not very competitive. Introducing a royalty payment system for locatable minerals could have an adverse economic and financial effect on the producers of these minerals. Less land would be mined and fewer U.S. hardrock minerals would be produced and.qualify for a 15% depletion rate. discussion suggests, however, the policy of introducing a royalty Payment System for Locatable Minerals would be expected to have positive economic effects in other sectors (the non-mining industry) and in the remaining parts of the country. royalty? What would be the economic effects of introducing a system of royalty payments and other rental payments where one did not exist? Would a royalty harm the domestic and international competitiveness of the U.S. hardrock mining industry? Finally, what taxes and fees does the hardrock mineral industry pay, and Hardrock mineral production would be lower as marginal mines closed. This would also adversely affect those parts of the United States that rely on these industries. The payment of royalties combined with higher fees could also alter the competitive balance among mineral producers. Some argue that there is a national security aspect to subsidizing certain hardrock minerals. Another effect of a net-profit type of royalty would be to expose the federal government to the risks of an investor. It is also pointed out that damage to the industry would harm those western communities that are economically dependent upon it. Other mining processing.other mining processing, such as cyanidation, can be used as a way to extract minerals from the ground. Such an approach could be used in the U.S. to extract uranium. the American West. Arguments are made that the economic stimulus to the industry resulting from royalty-free treatment produces benefits. It is argued that imposition of a federal royalty on hardrock mining would damage most of the American hardrock industry, which, it is argued, suffers from fierce, heavily subsidized foreign competition. The U.S. Department of the Interior is considering a proposal to impose a royalty on the American West, but has not yet decided whether or not to do so. The proposal would be the first of its kind to apply to the West. policy of free access (i.e., royalty forgiveness) involves a trade-off: Policymakers choose the benefits to the hardrock mineral industry above the benefits that would accrue to another domestic economic sector. A policy of royalty (or other rental) payments would be more neutral; it would let the markets be the arbiter. The U.S. government is considering a royalty policy for the mining industry. The decision is expected to be made by the end of this year or early next year. Since 1872, hardrock mining on federal lands has been governed by the General Mining Law. The law allows virtually free access to open public domain lands for mineral prospecting, staking claims, exploration and development, and extraction without payment of a royalty. In recent years, the Congress has repeatedly considered, but not passed, reform of the Mining Law, including, in part, to require the payment of royalties. In 1990, committees held this law, as amended, public lands with hardrock minerals are conveyed, rather than leased for a rent and royalty to the federal government. of 2007. This bill would: establish a new regulatory framework for administering permits to develop hardrock minerals. permanently end the sale or "patenting" of public lands for mining, which has been under moratorium since the early 1990s. establish royalty payments for hardrock mining operations on federal lands and use 75% of the proceeds for royalty payments to the state. The bill would also establish a royalty rate of $1 per ounce of hardrock mined. The measure would also end the "patent" of federal lands for hard rock mining. 1994, claimants on hardrock mineral lands could take title to both the mineral rights and the land, after paying to the U.S. Department of Interior (DOI) the required fee or either $2.50 or $5.00 per acre. Proposals to reform the Mining Act are being considered by the Senate and the House of Representatives, both of which are expected to vote on the issue in the next few months. In the Senate, the bill is being referred to as the ‘Mining Act of 1994’. prospect for hardrock minerals on those public lands not withdrawn from mining, and to file a claim, which gives them the right to explore, develop, mine, and sell hard rock minerals without paying a royalty. Up until 1994, up to 1994, the U.S. government did not have to pay a royalty for mineral exploration on public lands in the state of New Mexico. The U.N. now pays a royalty on all mineral exploration and development on federal lands in New Mexico, as well as on private lands. H.R. 2262 would also reauthorize and raise both the claim's location fee and the annual maintenance or. After a claim is staked, it typically takes at least 10 years for a hardrock mine to begin production. New claims is unlikely to generate significant revenues during the forecast period (2008-2017) because of the time it takes to get a mine into production. The bill is expected to be voted on by the House of Representatives in the next few weeks and the Senate in the coming months. The location system for the hardrock minerals industry has remained essentially unchanged since 1872. Part of the problem of the American West—were apparently a principal rationale for the location system involving no royalties and other rent payments established in 18 72. But these arguments may not be valid in today's economy. The hard rock minerals industry is not an infant industry, and there is no longer a need for settling. In 1872, no royalties or any other type of rental payment was required for the industry to exist. The Mineral Leasing Act of 1920 introduced a leasing system for coal, oil, and gas, and certain other minerals. But over time all but the hardrock or "locatable" minerals were removed from the law's purview. Where there is competition, the minerals are alienated through a bonus bidding process. In 1955, the Mineral Materials Act of 1947 instituted a leasingsystem for the non-hardrock and non-locatable minerals. The act also provided for an annual rental per acre and a fixed royalty of so many cents per ton. do they have any bearing on the question of whether to impose, or the magnitude of, a royalty? The first section of this report provides a brief history of the 1872 Mining Law, including the mineral leasing system and royalty payment requirements for the energy minerals. The second section discusses the second section of the report, which includes a look at the history of royalty payments for energy minerals in the U.S. since the law came into effect in 1872. The report concludes with a discussion of the law's impact on royalties in the United States. Leasing Amendments Act ( P.L. 94-377 ) was enacted, which among other changes, replaced the fixed royalty with an ad-valorem royalty of 12.5% for surface mines and 8% for underground mines. This kind of royalty payment system is now also used by the federal government in leasing oil and gas and is called a "royal payment system" for surface and underground mining. The federal government is also using this payment system to pay royalties for oil and natural gas exploration. non-energy minerals—the common and less valuable minerals such as sand and gravel. For coal, this system of leasing continued until the early 1970s, when the Arab oil embargo and shortages of petroleum reserves focused attention on the vast coal deposits in the western states. In 1976, in 1976 the Federal Coal was established. The Federal Coal is still in operation today, leasing out coal to private companies. It is one of the largest coal leasing companies in the U.S., with a market value of more than $1 billion. and businesses to finance the cost of government for the common welfare and not a return to a factor of production in exchange for specific services provided. This is an important point, one that might be used, for example, to argue against proposals to impose a royalty based on net worth. It might also be used to argue for a tax on the rich to pay for the poor. It could be used as an argument against a royalty on the wealthy to help pay for public services. It would also be an argument for a higher rate of tax for the rich, to help the poor and pensioners. more imported than under a no-royalty system, but more of other, higher-valued commodities would be produced. This would likely contribute to a more economically efficient use of the nation's resources. It would tend to promote the welfare of society—a greater good for a greater number of people. Thus, the current system would likely be more efficient than the current one, according to the authors of the book, which is published by Oxford University Press. The book is called "The Royal Family: The Story of the British Royal Family" might be the case that the above two opposing forces tend to offset each other and the government would want to use the more appropriate competitive rate. Economic theory is also unclear whether the same is true for economic theory and economic efficiency. It would be more consistent with economic efficiency, and social welfare, than a zero rate. It is unclear if the same applies to the tax system in the UK, or if it would be different in the U.S. and other countries. It could also be that the rate would be set at a higher level than it is in the United States. There is another side to the externality concept: external costs. It appears that some external effects associated with hardrock mineral production are net "external costs" rather than net external benefits. The external costs from hardrock Mineral production are the degradation of the hardrock environment. The impact of hardrock on the environment is not taken into account in normal business decisionmaking. The effects are not considered in the normal decisionmaking process. The effect is not seen in the business decision-making process and is therefore not considered. Since accountable business costs are lower than the real costs (including external costs), prices are lower. Under this reasoning, if the presence of external benefits is dismissed and the presence. of external costs is dismissed, then output is higher than it should be. The result is that prices are higher than they should be, causing output to be higher. The effect of this is to increase the cost of doing business in the U.S. over the long-term. The impact of this can be seen by looking at the average price of goods and services over time. allocation of resources. This theory holds that if a factor is provided to a firm without charge, too much of that factor would be hired and the output of the firm would exceed the socially desirable amount. Consequently, not enough of a more valuable good is provided. From another perspective, the theory is more accurate if the factor is hired at a higher rate than if it is provided at a lower rate. The theory is that the higher the rate, the more valuable the factor will be. economic surplus that may be earned by the industry in the long run is retained by industry rather than allocated to society at large. These profits are excess or surplus returns to a resource owner above the level required to produce or supply the resource, i.e., above the normal level of production or supply. In the long-term, these profits may be worth more than the cost of producing or supplying the resource in the first place, but in the short-term they may not be worth as much. to other sectors. This suggests that removal of the subsidies would produce a net welfare gain to citizens of the United States. As to the national security argument, there are minerals that are often referred to as "strategic minerals"—cobalt, columbium, chromium, manganese, platinum, and others. Excessive dependence upon foreign producers of these and other economically vital minerals might pose an economic disruption or national security threat to the U.S. The relationship between imports, domestic production, and national security is not a simple one. have contributed to industry profitability. Table 2 shows this increase between 2002 and October 2007 for selected metals. According to the Department of Commerce, relative to its size in the economy, the mining industry group generally was the largest contributor to growth in the Gross Domestic Product price index in 2002-2007. In 2007, the industry was the second-largest contributor to GDP growth, according to the Commerce Department. In 2008, it was the third largest contributor, followed by the construction industry. In 2009, the manufacturing industry group was the biggest contributor, with a growth rate of 7.7%. 2006, accounting for 6.6% of price growth, more than three times its share of current-dollar GDP. PricewaterhouseCoopers predicted that 2007 should bring with it both record financial results and further consolidation within the industry. Finally, rates were set at a record low of 2.5% for the year, down from 2.7% in 2005. It was the lowest level since the early 1990s, and the lowest since the late 1980s, according to PwC. cannot be shifted. This would further add somewhat to financial pressures for the marginally profitable mining company. On the other hand, the hardrock mining industry has been booming over the last four years. One indicator of this is the growth in metals and minerals prices, which have increased overall and have increased in recent years. The company's share price is currently trading at around $3.50 per share, down from $4.50 on the day before the announcement. The stock is down 2.7 per cent from the close of trading on Monday. Subsidies for hardrock mining clearly produce economic benefits to the industry receiving the subsidy and to the communities dependent upon that industry. These benefits are not external benefits that the markets are not capable of taking into account. The private benefits to mining-dependent regions of the United States may occur at the expense of private costs to other regions. When resources are scarce, a condition that affects all economic systems and all countries alike, the use of resources in one sector means the loss of the resource in another sector. of the relative size of the various economic sectors. And even if the health and competitiveness of the domestic hardrock mineral industry is of sufficient concern to warrant federal subsidies, there may be more economically efficient ways of providing these subsidies than the total forgiveness of a factor payment. The government should consider the impact of the factor payment on the economy and the cost to the taxpayer of providing the subsidies. The country should also look at the impact on jobs and the economy of providing subsidies to the hardrock mining industry. Hardrock mining is a highly capital intensive business and large enterprises can operate more efficiently. In the United States, many of the mining firms are large multinational mining conglomerates. Five of the top ten claim holders (who hold more than 16% of all claims on western public lands) are foreign corporations. Internationally, the hardrock mining industry is dominated by about 40 companies and the top four account for 35% of total market capitalization. This would suggest that the market-determined royalty rate might actually be too low. has been in place since 1932, the year that percentage depletion first became available to the hardrock mining industry. This would tend to reduce the costs of industry compliance and government administration of the royalty system. Before discussing this royalty base in more detail, it should be explained that the royalty base is based on a percentage depletion formula, which has been in effect since 1932. This means that the rate of depletion is determined by the percentage of a company's share of its revenue that it has. be a major reason that it is supported by much of the hardrock mining industry and its supporters. Not only are net profits notoriously variable, difficult to measure, and susceptible to accounting manipulations, but this method could create incentives for mining companies to claim significant deductions from their income such as tax deductions. The method could be used to make it easier for mining firms to show that they have made a profit on the sale of their mining operations. It could also be used as a way to make mining companies more transparent. The percentage depletion allowance is a tax deduction against the federal income tax available to a mining firm. The annual deduction should be based on the actual output of the mine (its actual rate of depletion) This is called cost depletion. Using cost depletion, the total cost recovered cannot exceed the total investment cost of the property. This is true even with the net-income limitation, which limits the deduction to 50% of the taxable income from the mine. The percentage depletion deduction for a mine is calculated as a percentage of "gross income" (annual sales revenue) tax preferences or subsidies (formally called "tax expenditures"). The latest five-year estimates (from FY2007-2011) are as follows: $0.5 billion for expensing of mine exploration and development costs, $1.1 billion for the excess of percentage over cost depletion, and $ 0.2 billion for mine reclamation reserves deduction. Thus the total revenue loss is about $2 billion per year, or about $3 billion a year for the entire mining industry in the United States. The term "gross income" as used for purposes of percentage depletion is somewhat confusing. Income in the context of a business generally refers to profits and not sales. Percentage depletion is based not on actual gross income but what is called "constructive" gross income, i.e., income derived from or approximated by using representative market prices elsewhere in that particular market. The term " gross" (gold, for example, is sold in the commodities markets or for use in manufacturing) is used to measure only sales revenue from mining operations. identified. One measure of the value of mining output is gross income from mining as defined under the income tax laws for purposes of determining the percentage depletion allowance. This royalty base has been suggested many times in "Electrolytic deposition, roasting, calcining, thermal or electric smelting, refining, polishing, fine pulverization, blending with other materials, treatment effecting a chemical change, thermal action, and molding or shaping" It seems fairly clear from these statutory provisions that grossincome from mining is the mining company's revenue from the sale of the sale. Mining companies are allowed a depletion deduction, at varying percentages, based on the gross income from mining. Under IRS regulations, gross income for depletion purposes is defined as "the actual price for which the ore or mineral is sold where the taxpayer sells theOre or mineral as it emerges from the mine before application of any processes other than the ground price used to determine gross income" Under IRC §613(c)(1) and (c)(2), the term gross incomefrom mining means sales revenue from the extraction of the ores or minerals. to 50% of the net income (essentially, the net profit) from the property. Second, for iron ore (and coal) mined by corporations (as opposed to noncorporate firms) the allowance must be reduced by 20% of. percentage depletion over cost depletion (IRC §291). This limitation was introduced by. The allowance for coal and iron ore mining must be cut to 20% from 50% to 50% in the case of non-corporation-owned mines. mineral reserve, which is part of the total production costs deductible to derive net taxable income. The depletion allowance or deduction is intended to give the mineral producer a deduction for the depletion of the investment in the mine, to account for the loss (depreciation) of capital. It is analogous to the allowance for depreciation of equipment and structures and other assets that is available to all businesses. In theory the depletion allowance should be based on the value of the mineral reserve as the mineral is being extracted (i.e., the wasting of the asset). business may deduct for the depreciation of its capital equipment and structures. This deduction is intended to provide a business reasonable allowance for the exhaustion and wear and tear (i.e., depreciation) of business property. It is analogous to the cost depletion allowance for investment in a mineral deposit (as discussed in the mineral deposit section of this article) and to the allowance given to the owner of a gold mine in the United States for the depletion of a mine's gold reserves in the U.S. Hardrock mineral producers are highly capital intensive and highly capital-intensive. This system also allows producers to use a depreciation method that maximizes the value of the deduction over time. This is more advantageous than the theoretical treatment, which would call for a depreciation schedule based on the actual economic depreciation. It also reduces the effective marginal tax rate on the income generated by the equipment. It is a more advantageous system than a theoretical treatment that would have a longer recovery period and a less accelerated formula, which increases the tax value. The present depreciation treatment is known as the Modified Accelerated Cost Recovery System (IRC §168) Under this system, assets are depreciated for regular tax purposes over a specified recovery period, and by applying one of the accelerated depreciation methods prescribed for each class of property. The 200% depreciation rate is one of these methods, including the 200% method below (see.below). Under the current system, the depreciation rate for this type of property is 200% for the whole of the recovery period. declining balance method (the double declining balance method) or the 150% declining balancemethod or formula. The annual depreciation deductions are determined by applying this formula to the assigned recovery period. The applicable recovery periods are prescribed for each property class. Mining equipment, assets used in the mining, quarrying, milling, and other industries are included in the definition of mining equipment. The mining industry is one of the largest employers in the U.S. and is expected to grow over the next few years. deductions for costs incurred by the owner after the property leaves the mine property and before sale, such as costs of transportation, insurance, or security, penalties, sampling and assaying, refining and smelting, and marketing. No deductions are made for the operating costs of the mine-mill complex. Baldwin (2003) writes: "No deductions are make for the Operating Costs of the Mine-mill Complex" Baldwin ( 2003) also writes: "No deductions make it possible for the owner to sell the mine without paying a loss on the property" costs, are generally deductible. These rules for oil, gas, and coal clarify that value is determined as close to the mine as possible. Non-mining or extraction costs after a marketable product is created are deductible. For geothermal resources, the Geothermal Steam Act of 1970 (as amended) instituted a deductible tax for the first 10 years of production. For more information, go to www.energypolicy.gov or call the National Resources Defense Council at 1-800-273-8255. The permitted deductions will include all charges by the smelter, such as smelting and refining charge as well as penalties for impurities in the ore. In some cases deductions may also be made for taxes except income taxes and, to the gross income base under the percentage depletion rules is readily apparent. Each of the above definitions is very specific that smalter and refining charges are to be deducted, just as in the tax definition of gross income. The following two examples, from contracts or royalty deeds between a.commodity. evidenced by its returns or settlement sheets after deducting from the said proceeds all freight or other transportation costs from the Claims, to the smelter or other place of sale or treatment, but without any other deduction whatsoever. For the purposes of this Agreement and the payment of the Net, the proceeds of the sale of the Claim will be subtracted from the profits made by the Claim. The proceeds will then be used to pay for the costs of the Claims. The net proceeds will be used for the purchase of the claims. deducting from such proceeds the following charges levied by third parties to the extent that they are not deducted by the purchaser in computing payment: a) assay costs and umpire assay costs charged by any mint, smelter, refinery or other purchaser; b) smelting and refining charges, penalties, and the cost; and c) smalting and refinery charges, penalty, and cost. The proceeds of the sale will be used for the purchase of the rights to the company's name. Under the cash method of accounting, expenses can only be deducted when the payment is actually made. Under the accrual method of Accounting, expenses to be incurred in the future cannot be deducted currently. Under both methods of accounting expenses can be deducted if they are incurred at the time of a payment being made, but not if the payment has already been made. This is known as the cash-to-accrual ratio or CAC ratio. The CAC method is the most common method used in the UK. costs (operating, capital, and tax costs) For any mining company (indeed for any business) net profit is, of course, less than sales revenue by the costs of doing business, thus resulting in a smaller royalty base. Reducing royalty payments to the federal government might after-tax profit type of royalty, for example the 1993 bill S. 775 would have measured net profits at the mine mouth. This would not be consistent with mainstream economic theory that a royalty is. before, would increase a mining firm's operating costs and reduce profitability. Due to the deductibility of the royalty (as an operating cost of doing business) against the federal income tax, the deduction reduces tax liability and therefore lowers the tax costs. that if a royalty were to be imposed on hardrock mining from federal lands, it would have the effect of simultaneously reducing the amount of the percentage depletion deduction. The first term in (1) royalty could, in certain cases, offset the benefits from royalty tax deductibility. deduction, which means that domestic firms in the business of extracting hardrock minerals from underground reservoirs or deposits qualify for the deduction. Effectively, the deduction is equivalent to a reduced marginal tax rate. For example, at the top marginal corporate tax rate of 35%, which typically applies to large corporations such as hardrock mining companies, the current deduction of 6% would be equivalent to 32.9% (35% x 0.94) rather than 35%. Another untargeted or general tax provision that is important to the hardrock mineral companies is accelerated depreciation. and an allowance for depreciation. Reduced tax rates, either 15%, 25%, or 34%, apply to "smaller" corporations, those earning less than $10 million of income. In addition, corporate stockholders pay individual income taxes on their corporate-source capital gains and dividends. As business entities, hardrock mining companies benefit from many different different tax rates and benefits. The tax rates for hardrock miners range from 15% to 34%, depending on the size of the company and the source of the income. tax subsidies that affect the hardrock minerals industry, as well as claims and patent fees that the industry pays. The question of payment of royalties from hardrock mineral production on public lands is part of a much broader debate relating to reform of the Mining Law of 1872. If a financial subsidy for certain strategic hard rock minerals industries was appropriate, a tax subsidy would probably be more efficient than total forgiveness of royalty payments. The current tax subsidies for the hard rock mineral industry are discussed in the section "Federal Tax Treatment of the Hardrock Mining Industry," below. payment of a royalty to the federal government for the services from the mineral land would increase federal revenues. The Congressional Budget Office has estimated the budgetary effects, revenue and spending, of H.R. 2262. The House of Representatives is expected to vote on the bill this week. The Senate is expected in the next few weeks to consider the bill. The vote is expected on the Senate floor by the end of the month. It is expected that the Senate will vote on it on Thursday. the deductibility of royalty payments and fees against business taxes. Under federal budget rules fees collected by federal agencies, such as the Department of the Interior, are considered as offsetting budget receipts, or negative spending. Such receipts reduce the agencies' outlays. The U.S. hardrock minerals industry is a major source of revenue for the federal government. The industry is estimated to be worth more than $1.5 billion. It is one of the fastest-growing industries in the United States. that the equipment used (stripping shovels, drills, bulldozers, drag lines, and haulers) can cost tens of millions of dollars, the accelerated depreciation provision can be relatively important. In addition, at the federal level there are three special, or targeted, tax preferences available to the mining industry generally, that are also items are tax breaks that are important to themining industry. The excess of percentage depletion over cost depletion, and the excess of the exploration and development cost deduction over a hypothetical deduction. A third item of tax preference that the mining firm would have to include in its tax preference items is the excess of accelerated depreciation over straight line depreciation. To the extent to which mining companies uses these and other items of tax preferences, this could have a significant impact on their tax bill over a period of years. The tax bill for the mining industry is estimated to be in the region of $1.2 billion. The mining industry has a turnover of more than $2 billion a year, according to the World Bank. is claimed by proprietorships and partnerships. There is another provision of the current IRC that attempts to limit the benefits of the special tax breaks available to the mining industry and other industries. This alternative minimum tax is an additional tax on items of tax preference, claim a lot ofspecial tax breaks. In effect, the alternative minimumTax imposes an additionaltax above and beyond the normal or regular income tax on the total amount of these ten items. This is important for the miningindustry because two of the ten preference are claimed by mining companies. trigger the minimum tax, and thereby reduce the value of the special tax provisions. These special tax preferences or subsidies, combined with accelerated depreciation (a significant tax benefit for highly capital intensive business such as hardrock mining) have historically resulted in relatively low effective average and marginal tax rates. Thus, the tax rates have been low for the mining industry in the United States. The tax rate for hardrock miners in the U.S. is expected to be in the region of 20 to 25 per cent. types of untargeted tax incentives, provisions that are generally available to non-mining businesses, as well as some tax provisions specifically targeted toward mining. Under IRC §199, "manufacturing" businesses are allowed a deduction, as a business expense, under the "Manufacturing" section of the tax code. Two unttargeted or general tax benefits are the §199 manufacturing deduction and accelerated depreciation. Under IRS section 1, the tax deduction for manufacturing is allowed to be up to $10,000. "market failures," which may justify either a tax (in the case of external costs) or subsidies. Rather, the benefits are private benefits that are taken into account by the normal working of the market system. Further, it can be argued that the private benefits are more important than the external costs, which are often the result of government policy. The benefits are often more significant than the costs, and are therefore more likely to be considered in a tax or subsidy. The costs are often higher than the benefits, but the benefits may be more significant. which are a list of ten tax breaks or subsidies that have been identified as potentially able to reduce a business's or individual's tax liability to little or nothing. The intent is to assure that all taxpayers—individuals and businesses—pay some tax, which is not assured if taxpayers are able to pay some tax. The list includes a number of tax breaks and subsidies that can be used to reduce your tax liability. For more information on the list, visit: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/30/business/10-tax-breaks-and-subsidies-to-reduce-your-tax liability. for a specified percentage of the qualified production activity's income subject to a limit of 50% of the wages paid. The deduction was 3% of income for 2006, is currently 6%, and is scheduled to increase to 9% when it goes into effect in 2009. The tax rate is set to rise to 20% in 2009, and to 30% in 2010. The rate is currently set to go into effect on January 1, 2009. It will be the first time the tax rate has been set to exceed 20%. The current rate is 20%. future expenses may be deducted in advance of actual payment but not before the economic activity that gives rise to the expenses. The Joint Tax Committee estimates the revenue losses from the above three special tax rates. The tax rates are set by the U.S. Internal Revenue Service (IRS) and apply to all taxpayers, regardless of their source of income or source of wealth. The IRS is responsible for administering the tax laws in the United States, Canada, Australia and New Zealand. It is also responsible for the tax rates paid in each of those countries. subject to the same income tax laws which apply to all other for-profit businesses, paying federal income, payroll, and other federal taxes. The federal corporate income tax applies a 35% rate to most corporate taxable income, defined generally as gross revenue (sales) minus interest, wages, the cost of purchased inputs, and the interest and wages paid to employees. The tax rate is 35% for corporations with a net income of more than $1.5 million, and 30% for those with less than that. from these three provisions over five years is $1.8 billion, an average of $360 million/year. This is the amount by which the industry lowered its tax burden, or conversely, the loss in tax revenues to the federal government. The bulk of these preferences is claimed by corporations—only a small share of them are claimed by the industry. The average loss to the U.S. government over the five-year period is about $1 billion, or about $ 360 million per year. in proportion to mineral value: more valuable minerals pay greater absolute royalties per unit. Table 2 gives an illustration for metals. Note that the royalty in column (4) is based on the gross value of the metal in the commodities markets and does not allow deductions for smeltering costs and the value of a mineral declines. Another possibility would be to vary the royalty rates in direct proportion to the percentage depletion rates applicable to gross income from mining as shown in Table 3. Such a royalty rate structure would produce a different pattern of absolute royalty payments. mineral's price. Column (6) of Table 2 shows one hypothetical schedule of such rates beginning at 8% for platinum, the most valuable metal, and declining in steps of 1 percentage point to 1% for aluminum. With such a schedule the absolute amount of royalty payments declines even more rapidly as the price of the metal declines. The rate of royalty on platinum would be 8% and for aluminum it would be 1%. The rate for gold would be 7%. The rates for silver and zinc would be 6%. The royalty rate for copper would be 5%. The allowance is available to virtually all mineral producers except integrated oil and gas producers. Percentage depletion rates range from 5% for stone and clay to 22% for uranium and beryllium. Most of the hardrock minerals have a depletion rate of 22%, and several have either a 15% or 14% rate. The percentage depletion allowance is also subject to several limitations. First the amount of deduction is limited. Second, the actual investment in the property is limited to $1,000,000. percentage depletion): "In the case of iron ore, bauxite, ball and sagger clay, rock asphalt, and ores or minerals which are customarily sold in the form of a crude mineral product" "Sorting, concentrating, sintering, and substantially equivalent processes to bring to shipping grade and form, and loading for shipment [613(c)(4)(C)];" "In. the case of iron ore and bauxites customarily sold in the form of a crude mineral product sorting , concentrating and sintering and loading for shipment" or price of the mineral), a fixed unit based royalty (i.e., one based only on mineral output), or a net profits royalty. Under such a royalty, payments are made in installments over the life of the mine, rather than partially up front, and the economic rent is based on the amount of mineral produced. If there is to be an ad-valorem royalty based on price or value, at what mineral, etc.—is the ad-Valorem royaltybased on the value or price of a mining firm's output? Under an ad-valorem royalty, the royalty payments are based on the value of the mineral. In most types of private royalty arrangements in the early 1990s, the most common type of royalty was the ad-Valorem royalty at rates ranging from 2-8%. Even for hardrock minerals on acquired lands (as opposed to public domain lands, which are governed by the 1872 Mining Law), the Congress has established a 2-to-8% rate. Note that the 8% rate proposed in H.R. 2262 is the same as the royalty rate on underground coal mines. 10%-15% royalty on federal leases based on the value of the steam or any other form of heat or energy produced and sold. However, under amendments made by the Energy Policy Act of 2005 ( P.L. 109-58 ), if the geothermal energy is not sold but is instead used to generate electricity, the royalty is reduced to 0.10%. The royalty is also lower if the energy is used to create electricity rather than to heat the homes or businesses. The royalty rate is lower under the amendments if the power is not used to heat or create electricity. generate electricity—in most cases it is. The royalty is between 1% and 2.5% and it is based on the gross proceeds from the sale of electricity rather than the value or volume of geothermal energy used in the generation of electricity. In some cases, a deduction against gross proceeds for transmission for transmission is made. In other cases, the royalty is not as high as it used to be, but it is still a small percentage of a company's profits. In most cases, it is less than 1%. and wheeling costs is allowed. With regard to a specific royalty rate, economic theory is less clear beyond the implication that a royalty rate determined in the competitive marketplace is generally the most economically efficient rate. The rate that is most likely to maximize social welfare is allowed in the case of privately-owned land. In the cases of privately privately owned land, the rate is not allowed to be higher than the rate set by the government. The royalty rate is allowed to remain at the rate the government sets for the land. On the other hand, private royalty agreements, which are negotiated on a case-by-case basis, have widely varying royalty rates. These can range from 1-10%, and differ by mineral types. Under one possible structure that has been suggested, the royalty rate itself would be a function of—it would vary positively with—the mineral type that is being developed. The royalty rate would also depend on the type of mineral being developed, as well as the amount of land being developed at the time. 1/8 share because costs are higher). On some leases, the rate could be higher than 1/6. For coal, the royalty rate is either 12% (surface mines) or 8% (underground mines) The royalty could be paid "in-kind" (either a 1/8 or 1-6 share of the output rather than of the price). The royalty rate for coal could be between 12% and 8% for surface mines, and between 8% and 12% for underground mines. with an average rate of 5%. In the case of publicly owned lands, laws determine the return on the resources. Most states with mineral resources imposed ad-valorem royalties at rates ranging from 2-10%. For leasable energy minerals on federal lands, the statutory royalty rates range from 5%-16.67%. For oil and gas, the royalty rate is either a 1/8 (12.5%) or 1/6 ( 16.67%) share of the value of the mineral, depending upon whether the oil or gas is shallow (1/6 share because costs are lower) or deep. The ad-valorem royalty appears to be economically the most efficient type of royalty. The question becomes to what base specifically should the royalty rate apply? The aggregate value of a commodity being the product of a price (value/unit) and a total output, the questions royalty rate should apply to all hardrock minerals or whether the rate should vary by type of mineral in some logical way. On the one hand, a variable rate is unnecessary because the base is ad-Valorem, so the royalty amounts, in absolute dollars, automatically vary. value can be measured? What deductions, if any, should be allowed from that price? What should the royalty rate be? And how does Congress decide what a fair royalty rate is? How does one balance the various considerations, such as efficiency and administrative considerations in deciding whether to impose a price on the U.S. government? How do you balance the different considerations? What is the best way to measure a price? How should Congress decide on a royalty rate? What are the best ways to calculate a price and how should it be calculated? An 8% royalty without the gross income offset is effectively a 6% royalty at a 25% marginal tax rate. The same royalty is effectively 6.44% if the percentage depletion allowance is 22%. Similarly, a 4% royalty with the gross Income Offset is effectively 3.15% (say, for gold) So in the previous example when the gross royalty is 4%, the revenue offset is a negative 0.85%. This shows that under current tax laws, and given the current percentage depletion rates, the costs of gross income deductibility of the royalty are too high. the Tax Equity and Fiscal Responsibility Act of 1982 ( P.L. 97-248 ). In effect this limitation reduces the 22% depletion rate to an effective depletion rate of between 17.6% and 22%, depending upon the amount of cost depletion. As noted above, the imposition of a royalty, where none existed, would have led to a higher depletion rate. The tax rate would have been higher if the tax rate had been set at a rate of 20% rather than the current 22%. Under IRC §613, royalty payments (and other rental payments) are deductible from gross income to determine the percentage depletion allowance. This means a royalty increases the after-tax cost of the royalty somewhat. However, there is an important interaction between a royalty and thepercentage depletion allowance that limits that effect, i.e., that increases the royalty's after- tax cost somewhat. The effect is that the royalty is more likely to be taxed at a higher rate than it would otherwise be.  percentage depletion is a tax subsidy, preference, or tax expenditure. Any depletion deduction in excess of cost depletion is considered by economists to be a tax subsidies or incentive. The present value of the total amount deducted typically exceeds the initial investment. In other words, the total deduction is considered to be more than the initial amount invested. This is why percentage depletion can be seen as a subsidy or incentive by economists. It is also known as a tax expenditure or a tax preference by the tax community. For more information on percentage depletion, click here. factor payment, the royalty is analogous to the wage rate, which is a payment for the services of labor. Mineral producers, as business organizations, require land, as well as labor, capital, energy, and other materials. The concept of a factor payment in a competitive market for a royalty to be based on other than market value minus the costs of obtaining it. For example, if instead of payments in kind (deer or crops or precious metals) the landowner were to be paid in. of the fact that no royalty is ever collected from its use. In economic terms, this is comparable to the free provision of labor or capital equipment. Economic theory suggests that any pure economic surplus return from a natural resource should accrue to society. In general, the economic concept of a royalty as a factor payment implies that the payment should be based on the market value of the producer's output, whether it is produced for free or not. Theory suggests that providing factor services for free would be to distort the and other rental payments. the law which first introduced a federal leasing system, including a royalty, for coal. As a factor payment, this type of royalty makes little economic sense. It is equivalent to charging fixed interest payments on capital regardless of the value of the capital loaned. Being assessed on only one variable, rather than output, is a waste of money. It would be better to charge a royalty based on output rather than on interest rates or other variables. It also makes little sense to charge interest on a loan regardless of how much the loan is worth. and net smelter return, (3) examines the question of an appropriate royalty rate, and (4) discusses some of the likely economic effects of royalty-free provision of public lands, as well as the effects of introducing a royalty. The fifth and final section examines the federal tax provisions, including the three that there would rarely be a profit against which to levy the royalty. Depending upon the royalty rate this could lead not only to smaller royalty payments than either a gross income or net smalter return royalty, but perhaps to no royalty at all. may be misleading because it may suggest a larger percentage depletion deduction, and therefore a larger royalty payment than a "net" royalty. But, in fact, whether a gross royalty base is smaller or bigger than a net royalty base depends on the point in the production stage the price is. Whether a gross royalties base is bigger or smaller depends on when the price of the product is at its lowest point in a production process. The price of a product at this stage in production depends on how much it is worth at the time. following questions: What exactly is a royalty, and how does a royalty differ from other rental payments or, for that matter, taxes? Were a royalty imposed, what would be the best way to structure such a royalty? Should the royalty be an ad-valorem type (i.e., one based on the value of the property) or should it be based on its value as a whole? How would you structure a royalty if it were to be imposed? What would you do if a royalty were imposed? the current and past royalty debates and is the base proposed in H.R. 2262. The main reason for suggesting this royalty base is that not only is gross income under the tax depletion rules consistent with the economic concept of an ad-valorem royalty, but the legal and regulatory apparatus is also consistent with that concept. The base proposed is based on gross income that would be subject to tax depletion under the current tax code, but would not have to be taxed at a high rate. profits, which would make the royalty more of an income tax rather than a factor payment. The distinction between a tax and the rental payment also distinguishes between the federal government as a sovereign entity with the power to tax, and as a landowner or proprietor. Yet another royalty base, one which is used less frequently, is the royalty based on a constant rate per unit, say $5/ton, of mineral output (i.e., the ore concentrate). This was the type of royalty instituted under the Mineral Leasing Act of 1920, of either overpayment or underpayment. As a land rental, then, an ad-valorem royalty protects the mineral producer against excessive royalty payments (overestimation of rents) and the government against underestimation of economic rents. Being a factor payment, a royalty is not a tax, which is a compulsory levy on individuals, as it is a form of land rental. It is therefore not a compulsory tax, as a tax is a tax that is compulsory on individuals. A royalty is a type of land rent.