system for providing assistance to low- income people is highly fragmented. Each federal assistance program usually has its own eligibility criteria, application, documentation requirements, and time frames. A review of federally assisted transportation services for “transportation- disadvantaged” seniors found that 5 federal agencies administer 15 programs. Service providers told GAO that certain characteristics of federal programs, such as what the providers view as burdensome reporting requirements and limited program guidance, are to blame. The GAO report was released on Tuesday. such as the potentially large service needs of a growing elderly population, increasingly calls for effective interagency coordination. However, our work has shown that a number of barriers inhibit coordination among agencies. In reporting on the coordination of programs for the homeless, we noted that the federal government’s can impede the implementation of practices that enhance senior mobility. More generally, we have noted the range of barriers to coordination that agencies often face, including missions that are not mutually reinforcing or that may even conflict. has previously reported, virtually all the results that the federal government strives to achieve require the concerted and coordinated efforts of two or more agencies. This shared responsibility is an outgrowth of several factors, including the piecemeal evolution of federal programs and service delivery efforts. Achieving results on public problems, the government says, requires a coordinated effort from multiple agencies. The federal government says it is committed to working with its agencies to achieve the best results for the public. The government says the shared responsibility for achieving these results is a shared responsibility. cash grants, in-kind support, and donations from sources such as state and local governments, educational institutions, private foundations, and corporations. The ROSS program has five funding categories, including the Resident Service Delivery Models for the Elderly and Persons with Disabilities. Resident Services funds can be used to hire a project coordinator; assess residents’ needs for supportive services and link residents to federal, state, and local agencies. This program differs from the Service Coordinator Program in that it is designed specifically for public housing residents. The Elderly/Disabled Services Coordinator Program under ROSS has provided no new grants since 1995. Congress has provided funds to extend expiring grants on an annual basis. The Neighborhood Networks program encourages property owners, managers, and residents to cover at least 10 percent of their fees. The Congregate Housing Services Program has not provided any new grants in more than a decade, but Congress has extended some grants in the past. The program is funded by a combination of federal, state, and local funds. Guthrie Properties has established a relationship with the local Area Agency on Aging. The agency assists residents of Guthrie Properties in obtaining a variety of food products. The United Way provides most of the funding for the senior center in Guthrie, Oklahoma. It is also a Section 515 property in the town of 2,000 people. It has a senior center that is open to the public every day. It also has a food pantry that is available for the public to use. It's also a place for the community to get together and socialize. services programs that assist the elderly. For further information on this testimony, please contact David G. Wood at (202) 512-8678. Individuals making key contributions to this testimony included Emily Chalmers, Natasha Ewing, and others. Mr. Chairman, this concludes my prepared statement. I would be happy to answer any questions at this time. Back to Mail Online home. Back To the page you came from. The U.S. Senate is set to vote on a bill that would change the way the federal government provides services to the elderly and disabled. The vote is expected to take place in the fall. care through clinics that are located either within public housing properties or in immediately accessible locations. The program awards grants to public and nonprofit private entities to establish the clinics. The organizations must work with public housing authorities to obtain the physical space for the clinics and to establish relationships with the housing authorities. The clinics must also be located in an area that is easily accessible to the public, such as on the street or in an easily accessible location such as a parking lot. The programs are funded by donations from the public and private sectors. Currently, there are 35 grantees, 3 of which are in rural areas. According to a program administrator, although clinics are not specifically geared toward public housing designated for the elderly, they can be established at such properties. Elderly residents of federally subsidized housing may also be eligible for the program.with residents. The program is funded by donations from individuals, foundations, corporations, and the federal government. For more information on the program, go to: http://www.elderlyclinics.org/. The Elderly/Disabled Service Coordinator Program has not provided new grants since 1995. The Program provides funding for managers of multifamily properties designated for the elderly and disabled to hire coordinators to assist residents in obtaining supportive services from community agencies. These services may include personal assistance, transportation, counseling, meal delivery, and health care. Service coordinators can be funded through competitive grant. The Service Coordinator program is funded by federal, state, and local grants. It has been in existence since 1995 and still services existing grants. owners and local organizations and through programs provided by HHS. Property owners can establish relationships with local nonprofit organizations, including churches, to ensure that residents have access to the services that they need. At their discretion, property owners may establish relationships that give the elderly access to meals, according to the program's website. For more information on the program, visit HHS.gov/HHS/Elderly-Serving-Older-Residents. For information on how to help the elderly in your community, visit www.ElderServingOlder.gov. a week in the community’s senior center (a $2 donation is suggested) A local hospital donates the food and a nursing home facility prepares it. The senior center uses the funds collected from the lunch for its activities. In addition, local grocery stores donate local food to the senior center as well as donations from local residents and businesses. The center also uses the money raised from the meals to fund activities for its residents and the community. For more information, visit www.seniorcenter.org or call the center at (858) 615-8255. Carolina, Dolan Manor has established a relationship with a volunteer group from a local church. The volunteer group provides a variety of services such as transportation for the residents. In Plain City, Ohio, residents of a Section 515 property called Pleasant Valley Garden receive meals five times a week. The service is provided by a group of volunteers from a church in Plain City. The group also provides transportation for residents of the property. The services are funded by donations from members of the community. For more information, visit www.justgiving.com/carolina-dolan-manor. Section 502 Rural Housing Loans (Direct) Section 502 Direct Housing Natural Disaster Loans Section 502 Guaranteed Rural Housing loans Section 504 Rural Housing Repair and Rehabilitation Loans Section 515 Rural Rental Housing Loans. Section 521 Rural Rented Assistance (Section 8 and Rent Supplement) (inactive) Section 8 Moderate Rehabilitation (in active) Section 207 Mortgage Insurance for Manufactured Home Parks Section 207/223(f) mortgage Insurance for Existing Multifamily Properties. Section 213 Mortgage insurance for Cooperatives Section 221(d)(3) Below-Market Below- market. according to the type of facility. USDA’s Section 515 Program, which provides loans to construct or to purchase and substantially rehabilitate multifamily rental or cooperative housing and recreational facilities in rural communities. Tenants eligible to live in program properties may also receive rental assistance through HUD or USDA programs. The program is available to people in rural areas of the United States who live in multifamily or cooperative rental housing or recreational facilities. It is not available to those living in non-rural areas. Before fiscal year 1992, the Section 202 program also supported the development of housing for the disabled. The Section 515 program’s Congregate Housing subprogram requires properties to provide supportive services. Section 221(d)(3) Mortgage Insurance Section 236 Mortgage Insurance and Interest Reduction Payments (inactive) Section 236 (d)(4) mortgage insurance and interest reduction payments (in active) Section 221 (d) mortgage Insurance and interest Reduction Payments ($1,000 to $1,500) ($2,500 to $5,000) multifamily property may be insured through a HUD or USDA program, and the property may have tenants that receive rental assistance from these agencies. In general, both HUD and USDA programs target families at lower income processes, data, and computer systems. Of the 23 housing assistance programs that target or include the elderly among potential beneficiaries, only 4 require the owners of properties developed under the programs to ensure the elderly are among the potential beneficiaries. The programs are not required to provide supportive services to the elderly.  HUD’s Section 202 program subsidizes the development and operating costs of multifamily properties for elderly households with very low incomes. Congregate Housing subprogram funds the development of assisted, group living environments. Property owners typically obtain other funds, either from federal programs, local charities, and civic groups to provide supportive services. HUD administers four service-related programs that can be used in conjunction with subsidized housing programs. None of these programs are targeted exclusively to the elderly, but they either can’t used in properties designated for the elderly or offer funding specifically for services. Beginning in the 1930s, a number of federal housing programs have provided assistance to low-income renters and homeowners. These programs include rent subsidies, mortgage insurance, and loans and grants for the purchase or repair of homes. Housing developments can be assisted by multiple programs. For example, a loan or mortgage on a home can help pay off a mortgage. For more information, go to www.housinghelp.org or call the National Housing Helpline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.housinghelpline.org/. transportation, and housekeeping and personal care services. GAO did not obtain data on the extent to which such services are made available at all public and federally subsidized multifamily housing. But in site visits to HUD and USDA multifamily properties, we found several examples of such partnerships. In Greensboro, North Carolina, for example, the city's housing authority provides transportation, housekeeping, personal care and other services to low-income residents. The city also provides free haircuts and massages to those who need them. levels. HUD programs target families with incomes that are extremely low. USDA programs also target families that are very low and low. However, these programs do not reach all needy households. waiting lists for many types of subsidized housing, including housing for the elderly, are often long. and low (no more than 80 percent of an area’s median). Some USDA programs target Families with moderate incomes ( no more than 115 percent of a area's median) and very low (No more than 50 percent of the median)  HUD has specific goals for increasing housing opportunities for the elderly. HUD’s Assisted Living Conversion Program provides private nonprofit owners of eligible properties with grants to convert some or all of their properties. Applicants for Section 202 funding must demonstrate that services will be available at the development or in the community where new construction is proposed. The goal is to increase the number of assisted-living units, and to very-low-income elderly households. For more information, go to HUD.gov. increasing the number of elderly households living in privately owned, federally assisted multifamily housing served by a service coordinator. (4) increasing elderly families’ satisfaction with their Section 202 units. USDA does not have specific goals related to the elderly in its fiscal year 2004 Annual Performance Plan. As GAO says, USDA should focus on the needs of the elderly, not just the general population. The agency's goal should be to increase elderly households' satisfaction with Section 202 housing, according to the GAO.  HUD service coordinators were serving more than 111,000 units in elderly properties in 2003. Elderly residents of public and federally subsidized multifamily housing can also receive supportive services through partnerships between property owners and the federal government. Fundings can include residual receipts (excess income from a property), or rent increases. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. the delivery of meals and nonmedical supportive services to elderly and disabled residents of public and multifamily housing. USDA’s Section 515 housing. While HUD provides up to 40 percent of the cost of supportive services, grantees must pay at least 50 percent. Program participants pay for the rest of the costs, and HUD does not cover the full cost of the meals and other services provided to the elderly, disabled, or chronically ill. The cost of meals for the elderly is about $1,000 per person per week.  HUD does not fund each center’s planned costs but encourages property owners to seek funding. Computer accessibility is not a traditional supportive service for the elderly. Having computers available enhances elderly residents’ quality of life, senior HUD official says. The center will be available to residents of HUD-insured and -assisted housing to develop computer centers. The centers will be open to the public, not just the elderly, and will be free to the residents of the housing. The program will be funded by HUD. Elderly residents of public and federally subsidized housing may also obtain health-related services through programs run by HHS. HHS’s Public Housing Primary Care Program provides public housing residents with access to affordable comprehensive primary and preventive health for assisting the frail elderly in public housing. In addition, eligible elderly residents of federally subsidizedhousing may receive health care through the Program of All-Inclusive Care for the Elderly (PACE) Like the HCBS waiver program, this program enables eligible elderly individuals to obtain needed services without having to live in an institutional setting. the Medicaid Home and Community-Based Services (HCBS) Waiver Program, which is administered by HHS’s Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. Through this waiver program, individuals eligible for Medicaid can receive needed health care without having to live in an institutional setting. HUD has identified these waivers as an innovative model, and has identified the HCBS waiver program as an example of how to use them. The program is available to individuals in need of home and community-based health care. units into assisted living facilities for the frail elderly. The reconfigured facilities must include enough community space to accommodate a central kitchen or dining area, lounges, and recreation and other multiple-use areas. The facilities must provide supportive services such as personal care, transportation, meals, housekeeping, and laundry. HUD’s Section 232 provide room, board, and continuous protective oversight and have at least 5 accommodations. All insured facilities must providing supportive services, but these services vary. The services vary by facility. Mortgage Insurance Program, which provides mortgage insurance for the construction or substantial rehabilitation of nursing homes. Nursing homes are facilities that provide skilled nursing care and have 20 or more beds. Intermediate care facilities are those that provide minimum but continuous care. Board and care homes arefacilities that provide board and care services and have more than 20 beds. The mortgage insurance program is funded by the U.S. Federal Housing Administration (FHA) and the Federal Mortgage Association (FMA). The FHA offers mortgage insurance on mortgages for nursing homes and intermediate care facilities.