The Constitution defines "Officers of the United States" as all officers of the national government. With the exception of officers in the army and navy, the Court has made clear distinctions between superior and inferior officers. The Court has acknowledged that its "cases have not set" the boundaries of the term "civil Officers" for purposes of and which shall be established by Law. The court has also acknowledged that it has "not set the boundaries" of what it means to be a "civil officer" noted that "[g]enerally speaking, the term 'inferior officer' connotes a relationship with some higher ranking officer or officers below the President ... [and] whose work is directed and supervised at some level by others who were appointed by presidential nomination with the advice and consent of the Senate" " Thus, "Inferior Officer" can be a lower ranking officer, or an officer who works for a higher ranking official. " Thus" the term can be used to refer to a lower-ranking officer who does not work for the president. In analyzing whether one may be properly characterized as either an inferior or principal officer, the Court's decisions appear to focus on the extent of the officer's discretion to make autonomous policy choices. Other officials to supervise and to remove the officer. Applying the principles established in this case, we can determine whether an officer is a principal officer or an inferior officer. We can determine if an officer can be considered a principal or inferior officer on the basis of his or her role in the agency's policies. The amount of authority that an individual exercises will generally determine his classification as either an officer or employee. An officer is "any appointee exercising significant authority pursuant to the laws of the United States," whereas employees are viewed as "lesser functionaries subordinate to the officers" The Supreme Court has further subdivided "officers" into two categories: principal and non-principal. "Officers" are those whose appointment is subject to the requirements of the Clause. "Non-officers," also known as employees, are those who do not exercise significant authority. forth an exclusive criterion for distinguishing between principal and inferior officers for Appointments Clause purposes. The clearest statement of the proper standard to be applied in differentiating between the two types of officers appears to have been made in Edmo nd v. United States. In Edmond , the Court said the standard should be the same as that used in Edmond v. U.S. and the standard was the same in both Edmond and Edmond. The Court said that the standard is the same because it is the standard used in both cases. asserted that "[i]t appears to me ... the most horrid ignorance to suppose that every officer, however trifling his office, is to be impeached for every petty offense ... I hope every gentleman ... must see plainly that impeachments cannot extend to inferior officers of the United States" Governeur also said that impeaching an officer for a "petty offense" would be "the mosthorrid ignorance" to think that such an action would be appropriate for an officer of any rank. Morris, member of the Pennsylvania delegation to the Constitutional Convention, arguably implied that inferior officers would not be subject to impeachment. He said that "certain great officers of State; a minister of finance, of war, of foreign affairs, etc. ... will be amenable by impeachment to the public justice" Notwithstanding this, he said inferior officers could be impeached if they were found guilty of a crime by a jury of their peers. Morris was a member of Pennsylvanian delegation to Constitutional Convention. of authority, the abuse of which would be harmful to the separation of powers and good government. The writings of early constitutional commentators also arguably suggest a broad interpretation of "civil Officers of the United States" Joseph Story addressed the reach of the impeachment power in his influential Commentaries on the U.S. Constitution. Joseph Story: "The impeachment power is not a power to be abused. It is a tool to be used for good government." The impeachment power can be used to remove a president from office if he or she abuses it. The impeachment power was arguably intended to extend to "all" executive officers, and not just Cabinet level officials and other executive officials at the highest levels. Any official exercising "significant authority" including both principal and inferior officers, would therefore qualify as a "civil Officer" subject to impeachment. This is consistent with the text of the Constitution. But who is an officer? The most thorough elucidation of the definition interpretations, that the impeachment power was intended to extended to " all " officers of the United States. by the President or an agency head—would not be subject to impeachment. At the opposite end of the spectrum, it would seem that any official who qualifies as a principal officer, including a Secretary, Administrator, or Commissioner, would be impeachable. The remaining question is whether inferior officers, or those officers who exercise significant authority under the supervision of a principal officers, are subject to impeachment and removal. As previously noted, an argument can be made from the text and purpose of the impeachment clauses, as well as early constitutional documents. or oppressive ministers whom the President might seek to shelter. If the impeachment power were meant to ensure that Congress has the ability to impeach and remove corrupt officials that the President was unwilling to dismiss, it would seem arguable that the power should extend to officers exercising a degree of power. The power should also extend to those who are in a position of trust, such as the vice president, the attorney general, the secretary of state and the Cabinet secretary, the president and vice president. The president should be able to appoint a special prosecutor to investigate him or her. Congress has shown a willingness to impeach Presidents, federal judges, and Cabinet-level executive branch officials. A question which precedent has not thus far addressed is whether Congress may impeach and remove subordinate, non-Cabinet level officials. The Constitution does not define "civil Officers of the United States" Nor do the debates at the Constitutional Convention provide significant evidence of which individuals view would permit Congress to remove any executive branch "officer" There is some historical evidence, however, to suggest that inferior officers were not meant to be subject to impeachment. in the Court's Appointments Clause jurisprudence to define the scope of "civil Officers" for purposes of impeachment, it would appear that employees, as non-officers, are not subject to impeachment. Therefore lesser functionaries—such as federal employees who belong to the civil service, do not exercise "significant authority," and are not appointed. The Supreme Court ruled in favor of President Obama in his impeachment case against former President George H.W. Bush. The case was heard in the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of New York. are properly civil officers within the meaning of the constitution, and liable to impeachment." Similarly, William Rawle reasoned that "civil Officers" included "[ a ] ll executive and judicial officers, fro m the President downwards," from the judges of the Supreme Court to those of the most inferior tribunals. "Civil Officers" include the President, the Vice President, and the Speaker of the House of Representatives, among others. "civil officers" also include the Chief Justice of the United States and the Chief Justices of the European Courts. not extend further than to removal from Office, and disqualification to hold and enjoy any Office of honor, Trust or Profit under the United States. But the Party convicted shall nevertheless be liable and subject to Indictment, Trial, Judgment and Punishment, according to Law. —Article I, Section 3 The Constitution, Article II, Section 4, Article 5, Article 6, Article 7, Article 8, Article 9, Article 10, Article 11, Article 12, Article 13, Article 14, Article 15, and Article 16. United States. Convicted individuals are still subject to criminal prosecutions. Individuals who have already been convicted of crimes may be impeached for the same underlying behavior later. Finally, the Constitution bars the President. from being impeached. If this option is pursued, a simple majority vote is required. If the President were impeached, a majority vote would be required to remove him from office. If it were to happen, the President would be removed from office by a majority of the House of Representatives. The House has impeached 19 individuals: 15 federal the Senate, the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court presides at the trial. The immediate effect of conviction upon an article of impeachment is removal from office, although the Senate may subsequently vote on whether the official shall be disqualified from again holding an office of public trust under the United States. If this option is pursued, a simple majority vote is required. Impeachment proceedings have been challenged in federal court on a number of occasions. The Supreme Court has ruled in favor of the impeachment process on several occasions. all Impeachments. When sitting for that Purpose, they shall be on Oath or Affirmation. When the President of the United States is tried, the Chief Justice shall preside. And no Person shall be convicted without the Concurrence of two thirds of the Members present. Judgment in Cases of Impeachment shall be that of the Supreme Court of the U.S., not of the House of Representatives or of any other House or Senate. The President shall be tried before a jury of three-fourths of the members of both houses of Congress. impeachment. The Appointments Clause provides that the President shall nominate, and by and with the Advice and Consent of the Senate, shall appoint Ambassadors, other public Ministers and Consuls, Judges of the supreme Court, and all other Officers of the United States. The President shall also appoint all other officers of the U.S. whose App appointments are not herein otherwise provided for, as well as those who have been removed from office for cause of impeachment or removal from office. As President of the United States Senate, the Vice President usually presides at impeachment trials. If the President is impeached and tried in Article I, Section 3, clause 6 of the Constitution, the Chief Justice presides over the Senate impeachment trial. When conducting the trial, Senators must be "on oath or affirmation," and the right to a jury trial does not extend to impeachment proceedings. In impeachment trials, the full Senate may receive evidence and take testimony, or may order the Presiding Officer to appoint a committee of Senators to serve be examined. The President, Vice President and all civil Officers of the United States, shall be removed from Office on Impeachment for, and Conviction of, Treason, Bribery, or other high Crimes and Misdemeanors . —Article II, Section 4 The Senate shall have the sole Power to try thus has discretion over whether to impeach an individual and what articles of impeachment will be presented to the Senate. The Senate, in turn, has the sole power to try impeachments. has concluded, the Senate as a whole meets in closed session to deliberate. Voting on whether to convict on the articles of impeachment commences upon return to open session, with yeas and nays being tallied as to each article separately. A conviction on an article of impeachment requires a two-thirds of the Senate to vote in favor of it. The Senate is currently in its second week of a three-week special session, which is expected to last until the end of the month. The vote on whether or not to impeach President Barack Obama is scheduled to take place on Tuesday. has not always voted on every article of impeachment before it. For example, when the Senate did not convict President Andrew Johnson in the votes on three of the articles of impeachment against him, the Senate didn't vote on the remaining articles. The Senate may subsequently vote on whether or not to convict the President of the United States of an impeachment. The U.S. Senate may also vote on a motion to vacate the President's presidency if he is found not guilty of the charges against him. vote of those Senators present. If the respondent is convicted on one or more of the articles against him or her, the Presiding Officer will pronounce the judgment of conviction and removal. No formal vote is required for removal, as it is a necessary effect of the conviction. The Senate has the power to remove the president from office if it finds him guilty of a crime or a breach of the terms of his or her office. The president can be removed from office without a formal vote of the Senate. of President Andrew Johnson, or to a special or select committee. In all prior impeachment proceedings, the House has examined the charges prior to entertaining any of depositions, the issuance of subpoenas, the disbursement of funds, and the hiring of staff. The focus of the impeachment inquiry is to determine whether the person involved has engaged in treason, bribery, or other high crimes and misdemeanors. If a subcommittee or task force is charged with investigating a president, it must be approved by the House Judiciary Committee. A resolution to authorize an investigation as to whether grounds exist for the House to exercise its impeachment power is referred to the House Judiciary Committee. In 2009, the House passed a resolution authorizing the Judiciary Committee or a designated subcommittee or task force to investigate whether Judge Porteous should be impeached. Such matters have occasionally been referred to other committees, such as the House Committee on Reconstruction in the impeachment Committee may designate a subcommittee or Task Force to investigate an individual. The resolution was agreed to by the House. An initial investigation is conducted by the Judiciary Committee, to which investigating and reporting duties are delegated by resolution. However, it is possible that this investigation could be carried out by a select or special committee. If authorized by the House, the Judiciary could conduct the investigation. The investigation could take place as early as next week. The House of Representatives is expected to vote on whether to authorize the investigation on Tuesday. The vote will be followed by a vote by the Senate on whether or not to authorize an investigation. The Senate will issue a writ of summons to the respondent, informing him or her of the date on which appearance and answer should be made. On the date established by the Senate, the respondent may appear in person or by grounds for impeachment. The respondent may also choose to answer the articles brought against him or herself. The House has traditionally filed a replication to the Respondent's answer, and the pleadings may continue with a rejoinder, surrejoinder, and similiter. When pleadings have concluded, the Senate will set a date for a hearing. Member declaring a charge of impeachment on his or her own initiative. A Member presenting a memorial listing charges under oath, or by a Member depositing a resolution in the hopper, which is then referred to the appropriate committee. The impeachment process may be triggered by non-Members, such as a charge from a state or territorial legislature or grand jury. Resolutions regarding impeachment may be of two types. A resolution impeaching a particular individual, who is within the category of impeachable officers under Article II, Section 4 of the Constitution, is usually referred directly to the Constitution. The respondent may demur, arguing that he or she is not a civil official subject to impeachment. The respondent may also choose not to appear. In the latter event, the proceedings progress as though a "not guilty" plea were entered. The charges listed do not constitute sufficient for impeachment, according to the complaint. The complaint was filed by the American Civil Liberties Union on behalf of the ACLU of New York and New Jersey. For confidential support, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. exhibit the articles against him or her. After this procedure, the managers would return and make a verbal report to the House. Impeachment proceedings in the Senate are governed now by the Rules of Procedure and Practice in theSenate when Sitting on Impe impeachment Trials. After presentation of the articles, the manager would return to the Senate and give a report to its members on the matter. The Senate is currently sitting on the issue of whether to impeach President Barack Obama. The vote is expected to take place in the next few weeks. to prison. He refused to resign and continued to receive his salary as a judge while in prison. The House of Representatives adopted articles of impeachment against the judge and presented the Senate with the articles. The Senate invoked Impeachment Rule XI, a Senate procedural rule which permits a Senate to impeach a judge. The judge was convicted and sentenced to life in prison, but was released on parole after serving less than a year of his sentence. He was also fined $1,000 a day for violating the terms of his parole. at the Constitutional Convention; the debates at the ratifying conventions; English common law and practice; state impeachment practices; analogous case law; and historical commentaries. Although the term "impeachment" is commonly used to refer to the removal of a government official from office, the impeachment process, as described in the Constitution, is not the same as removing a person from office. The impeachment process is described as a series of steps that take place over a period of time. The process is known as the "Impeachment Process" the resignation of an official under investigation for impeachment often ends impeachment proceedings. For example, no impeachment vote was taken following President Richard Nixon's resignation. And proceedings were ended following the resignation of Judges English, Delahay, and English, and the House Judiciary Committee decided to report articles of impeachment to the House. The House of Representatives voted to impeach President Nixon after he resigned, but the vote was later called off after he was replaced by Vice President Hubert Humphrey. The vote was called off again after President Nixon was re-elected. This section provides a brief overview of the impeachment process. It reflects the roles of both the House and the Senate during the course of an impeachment inquiry and trial. It concludes with a discussion of the limited nature of judicial review for impeachment procedures. The House of Representatives shall chuse their Speaker and other Officers; and shall have the sole Power of in dealing with a wide range of impeachment issues. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. entails two distinct proceedings carried out by the separate houses of Congress. First, a simple majority of the House impeaches —or formally approves allegations of wrongdoing amounting to an impeachable offense. The articles of impeachment are then forwarded to the Senate where the second proceeding takes place. The Senate then votes on whether or not to impeach the president. The House then votes again on whether to convict the president of a crime. The final vote takes place in the Senate and the president is then impeached.  impeachment applies only to the "President, Vice President, and all civil Officers of the United States," and that the grounds for impeachment are limited to "Treason, Bribery, or other high Crimes and Misdemeanors" The decision to impeach an individual rests solely with the House of Representatives. Pursuant to Article I of the Constitution, a vote to impeachment by the House requires a simple majority of those present and voting, upon satisfaction of quorum requirements. If the House votes to impeachment, when the Judicial Conference of the U.S. suggests that the House may wish to consider impeachment of a federal judge. An independent counsel advises the House of any substantial and credible information which he or she believes might constitute grounds for impeachment, by message from the President, by sending a letter to the Speaker of the House. In this case, the letter was sent by the Speaker to the Attorney General of the United States on behalf of the President. The House of Representatives voted to impeach the judge on a party-line vote. The Senate will determine questions of competency, relevancy, and materiality. The Senate may also take further testimony in an open Senate, or may order that the entire trial committee take evidence and testimony. After the committee completed its proceedings, it presented the full Senate with a transcript and report. Both sides then presented briefs to the full House and delivered arguments, and the Senate then voted to convict and remove him from office. The judge thereafter brought the case to the Senate for a vote. be before the full Senate. At the beginning of the trial, House managers and counsel for the respondent present opening arguments outlining the charges to be established and controverted. Final arguments in the trial will be presented by each side, with the managers for the House of Representatives opening and closing. During the trial evidence is presented, and witnesses may Senator may request that a formal vote be taken on a particular question. When the presentation of evidence and argument by the managers and Counsel for the Respondent is complete, the trial is adjourned. The Senate will order the House managers or their counsel to supply the Sergeant at Arms of the Senate with information regarding witnesses who are to be subpoenaed. The Senate will further indicate that additional witnesses may be subpoenaaed by application to the Presiding Officer. Under the terms of the subpoena, the Senate will be required to hold a trial within 30 days of the start of the next session of the House of Representatives. The trial will be held under the rules of evidence, and will be heard by a panel of three senators. managers are then selected to present the matter to the Senate. In recent practice, managers have been appointed by resolution, although historically they occasionally have been elected or appointed by the Speaker of the House. The House will also adopt a resolution in order to notify the Senate of its action. The Senate, after receiving such notification, will then adopt an order informing the House that it is ready to receive the managers. Subsequently, the appointed managers will appear before the bar of the Senate to impeach the individual involved. be reported to the full House. At the conclusion of debate, the House may consider the resolution as a whole, or may vote on each article separately. In addition, "as is the usual practice, the committee's recommendations as reported in the resolution are in no way binding on the House," the resolution says. The House will vote on the resolution at a later date, according to the resolution. The resolution is expected to be voted on by the end of the week or early next week. could review a congressional decision that the plaintiff was "unqualified" to take his seat. That determination had turned, the Court explained, "on whether the Constitution committed authority to the House to judge its Members' qualifications" The Court noted that while Article I, Court concluded, the House's claim that it possessed unreviewable authority to determine the qualifications of its Members "was defeated by this separate provision specifying the only qualifications which might be imposed for House membership" In other words, finding that the House had unreviewability authority to decide its Members’ qualifications would. Case involved a challenge brought by a Member-elect of the House of Representatives. The precise issue in Powell was whether the judiciary violate another provision of the Constitution. The Court therefore concluded in Powell that whether the three requirements in the Constitution were satisfied was textually committed to the House. But the decision as to what these qualifications consisted of was not, the Court said in the case at hand. The case was decided by a vote of the members of Congress on the House floor, and the decision was upheld. Section 5, does provide that Congress shall determine the qualifications of its Members, Article I, Section 2, delineates the three requirements for House membership.Representatives must be at least 25 years of age, have been U.S. citizens for at least seven years, and inhabit the states they represent. Therefore, the Powell amendment does not apply to members of the House of Representatives who have been in office for more than seven years. The amendment does apply to Members of Congress who have served more than one term in Congress. The House and Senate alone can remove government officials in the other branches of government. The Framers "dwelt repeatedly on the need of power to oust corrupt corrupt officials," according to the New York Times. One commentator has suggested that the Framers recognized, particularly with respect to executive branch officials, that there would be instances in which it may not be in the President's interest to remove a "favorite" from office, even when that individual has violated the public trust. The Supreme Court has the power to remove the President from office if he or she abuses their power. it presented a nonjusticiable political question. It was not just a political question, it was a moral one. It had to be decided by a vote of the people, not by a court of law. It is not a political issue, it is a moral issue. It has to be resolved by a ballot box. It's not a legal question, but a moral question. The answer is yes. It must be resolved. It can't be a legal issue, but it must be decided. a suit arguing that the use of a committee to take evidence violated the Constitution's provision that the Senate "try" all impeachments. In addition, several other aspects of the impeachment process have been challenged. The Supreme Court noted that here, in contrast, leaving the interpretation of the word " try" with the Senate did not violate any "separate provision" of the Constitution. Judge G. Thomas Porteous brought a suit seeking to bar counsel from taking evidence in an impeachment case. prudential considerations weighed against adjudication of the case. Judicial review of impeachments could create considerable political uncertainty, if, for example, an impeached President sued for judicial review. The Court was careful to distinguish the situation from Powell v. McC ormack , a case that was decided in favor of the President in the Supreme Court's first term in the early 1990s. The case was decided by a vote of 7-2. The decision was the first in the case's history. Columbia initially threw out Judge Hastings' Senate impeachment conviction. The decision was vacated on appeal and remanded for reconsideration in light of Nixon v. United States. The district court then dismissed the suit because the Senate had tried his impeachment before a committee rather than the full Senate. The suit was later dismissed because the House of Representatives had voted to impeach him instead of the Senate, which would have been more likely to convict him on a vote of the full House. The case was settled out of court. for the Impeachment Task Force of the House Judiciary Committee from using sworn testimony the judge had provided pursuant to a grant of immunity. The impeachment proceedings were initiated after a judicial investigation of Judge Porteous for alleged corruption on the bench. During that investigation, JudgePorteous testified under oath. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S., call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. to the Special Investigatory Committee under an order granting him immunity from that information being used against him in a criminal case. Judge Porteous argued that the use of his immunized testimony during an impeachment proceeding violated his Fifth Amendment rights. He was found not guilty of the charge and the case was thrown out on a technicality. The case was heard in the U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia, which is located in Washington, D.C. The trial is expected to continue in the coming weeks. right not to be compelled to serve as a witness against himself. The court rejected his challenge, reasoning that because the use of such testimony for an impeachment proceeding fell within the legislative sphere. The Speech or Debate Clause prevented the court from ordering the committee staff members to refrain from testifying, the court said in its ruling. The ruling was upheld by the Supreme Court on a writ of habeas corpus in the case of Sen. John McCain, R-Arizona, who was impeached by the House of Representatives in 2010. Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit, however, rejected this "absolutist" concept of the separation of powers. "A merely generalized assertion of secrecy in grand jury materials must yield to a demonstrated, specific need for evidence in a pending impeachment investigation," the appeals court said. The U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia also ruled in favor of the grand jury's secrecy request in a case involving former President George W. Bush, who was accused of lying to grand jury members. Judge Hastings was convicted by the Senate on eight articles. Judge Walter L. Nixon Jr. was convicted in a criminal case on two counts of perjury to that a challenge to the Senate's use of a trial committee to take evidence posed a nonjusticiable political question. In Nixon v. United States , Judge Nixon had been convicted of making false statements before a grand jury and was sent to prison. The Supreme Court ruled in favor of the Senate in the case, and sent the judge back to jail. Judge Alcee L. Hastings sought to prevent the House Judiciary Committee from obtaining the records of a grand jury inquiry during the Committee's impeachment investigation. Judge Hastings' argument was grounded in the separation of powers: he claimed that permitting disclosure of grand jury records for an impeachment investigation risked improperly allowing the executive and judicial branches to participate in the impeachment process. The U.S. Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit ruled in favor of Judge Hastings, who was ultimately acquitted of a conspiracy to commit bribery. English, Louderback, and Ritter all involved "misusing their power to appoint and set the fees of bankruptcy receivers for personal profit" Judge Alcee L. Hastings was impeached by the House on 16 articles, including involvement in a conspiracy to accept bribes in return for lenient sentences for defendants, lying, and lying. The House voted to impeach Hastings on a vote of 419-3. The vote was the first impeachment of a sitting U.S. senator. misconduct in those positions as well as in his previous position as U.S. District Court Judge of the Middle District of Pennsylvania. Judge Archbald was convicted on four articles alleging misconduct in his then-current positions as a circuit judge and Commerce Court judge. He was impeached and convicted in part for behavior occurring before he assumed his current position. The underlying behavior occurred while he held a prior federal office, and he was convicted of misusing his office in that position. He is currently serving a five-year sentence. In 1912, a resolution impeaching Judge Robert W. Archbald and setting forth 13 articles of impeachment was reported out of the House Judiciary Committee and agreed to by the House. The Senate convicted Judge ArchBald in January the following year. At the time that Judge Arch bald was impeached, he was U.S. Circuit Judge for the Third Circuit and a designated judge of the U.N. Commerce Court. The Articles of impeachment brought against him alleged conduct before individuals assumed their positions. In 1912, Judge Robert W. Archbald was impeached and convicted for abusing his position as a judge. In 1936, Judge Halstead Ritter was impeaching and convicted before the House impeached him. The Senate nevertheless conducted a trial in which Belknap was acquitted. And the impeachments of Judges and the impeachment of the President of the United States, Abraham Lincoln, are documented in a book, "Abraham Lincoln and the American Presidency," which is published by Simon & Schuster. The book, published in 1912, is called "The American Presidency and the Presidency of Abraham Lincoln," and is available in English and Spanish. judges and therefore only impeachable when committed by judges," the report said. The report pointed to the impeachment of Judge Claiborne, who was impeached and convicted for falsifying his income tax returns. While it is "devastating" for the judiciary when judges are perceived as dishonest, the report argued, perjury by the President was "just as devastating to our system of government" The Senate voted to convict Judge Claibia on the first, second, and fourth articles of impeachment against him. Claiborne simply laid out the underlying behavior. The third article "rest[ed] entirely on the conviction itself" and stood for the principle that "by conviction alone he is guilty of 'high crimes' in office" The fourth alleged that Judge Claiborne's actions brought the "judiciary into disrepute" thereby undermining public confidence in the judiciary. The fifth alleged that the judge brought the judiciary into dis repute, thereby undermining the public's confidence in its ability to do its job. the manifest injury of the people of the United States." A number of individuals have been impeached for official conduct for an improper purpose. The first type of behavior involves vindictive use of the office. For example, in 1826, Judge James Peck was impeached. for charging a lawyer with contempt, and he was removed from the bench. The second type of conduct involves the improper use of a public office for a vindictive purpose, such as to embarrass or embarrass a public official. imprisoning him, and ordering his disbarment for criticizing one of the judge's decisions. In 1904, Judge Charles Swayne was also impeached by the House and acquitted by the Senate. Among the articles of impeachment was the allegation that he had unlawfully imprisoned several people, including Judge Peck. Judge Peck was acquitted of all charges in the House of Representatives. Judge Swayne, however, was impeached in the Senate and acquitted of the same charges by a vote of 33-2. In 2010, Judge G. Thomas Porteous Jr. was impeached for participating in a corrupt financial relationship with attorneys in a case before him. The Senate convicted Judge Nixon on two of three articles. Judge Porteous is the first individual to be impeached by the House and convicted by the Senate based in part upon conduct occurring before he began his tenure in federal office. He was convicted for misconduct beginning while he was a state court judge as well as for concealing such matters from federal investigators. as misconduct while he was a federal judge. Article IV alleged that Judge Porteous made false statements to the Senate and FBI in connection with his nomination and confirmation to the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of Louisiana. On December 8, 2010, he was convicted on all four counts and sentenced to 10 years in prison. He is currently serving a 10-year prison sentence and was sentenced to ten years in jail in December 2010. He was released from prison in December 2011. bondsmen whereby he received things of value in return for helping bondsman develop corrupt relationships with state court judges. Judge Porteous was convicted by the Senate on all the articles brought against him. Most impeachments have concerned behavior occurring while an individual is in a federal office. However, some have been concerned with behavior while the person is in state or local office. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. in 2009, Judge Samuel B. Kent was impeached for allegedly sexually assaulting two court employees, obstructing the judicial investigation of this behavior, and making false and misleading statements to agents of the Federal Bureau of Investigation about the activity. Judge Kent resigned before the Senate trial was completed. Finally, one year later, Judge Kent was acquitted of all charges against him by a jury of his peers. He was sentenced to 10 years in prison and 10 years' probation, plus a $100,000 fine. a grand jury concerning his relationship with a man whose son was being prosecuted. He was subsequently impeached in 1989 for his behavior, including making false statements to the grand jury about whether he had discussed a criminal case with the prosecutor and attempted to influence the case, as well as making false claims to a grand jury that he had tried to influence a prosecutor's case. He died of a heart attack in 2004 at the age of 83. He is survived by his wife, two daughters and a son. conduct that "br[ought] his court into disrepute, to the prejudice of said court and public confidence in the administration of justice" A number of judges were impeached for misusing their position for personal profit. And a number of federal judges were removed from office for misconduct in office. The Supreme Court ruled in favor of the impeachment of several judges in the late 1800s and early 1900s. The court ruled that the judges' actions had brought the federal judiciary into "disrepute" the nature of an office have merited impeachment procedures. In 1862, Judge West H. Humphrey was impeached and convicted for neglecting his duties as a judge and joining the Confederacy. In 1926 Judge George English was impeaching for showing judicial favoritism which eroded the public's confidence in the court. And in 1939, Judge George E. English was impeachment for showingjudicial favoritism. and undermining the public’s confidence. in the courts. In 2009, Judge William H. Smith was impeachment and convicted of misconduct in a public office. Judge Mark H. Delahay was impeached in 1873 for his "personal habits," including being intoxicated on and off the bench. He resigned before a trial in the Senate. Various other activities incompatible with the role of a judge were also listed as reasons for his impeachment. He was convicted in 1803 for appearing in court "in a state of intoxication and using profane language" and resigned before the trial in1873. He died in 1883. He is survived by his wife and two children. individuals on false charges of contempt. The second type of behavior involves misuse of the office for personal gain. Secretary of War William W. Belknap was impeached in 1876 for allegedly receiving payments in return for appointing an individual to maintain a trading post in Indian Territory. He resigned two in the office held at the time of the impeachment investigation, although the House has, on occasion, investigated such allegations. It appears that federal officials who have resigned have nonetheless been thought to be susceptible to impeachment and a ban on holding future office. resigned two hours before the House impeached him, but the Senate nevertheless conducted a trial in which Belknap was acquitted. However, during the trial, upon objection by Belknaps' counsel that the Senate lacked jurisdiction because he was now a private citizen, the Senate voted in favor of jurisdiction. That said, on the day of his trial, the House voted to impeach him, and he resigned two hours later. The Senate acquitted him on the grounds that the House lacked jurisdiction. restricted the power of the President to remove members of the Cabinet without Senate approval. Considering the statute unconstitutional, President Johnson removed Secretary of War Edwin M. Stanton. He was impeached shortly thereafter on nine articles relating to his actions. President Johnson was acquitted by a margin by the Supreme Court of the United States on November 14, 1864, after being found guilty by a vote of three to one. The case was the first to be decided by a court of law, rather than a jury, and was the last to be heard by the Senate. for an improper purpose or for personal gain. The House has impeached several individuals for abusing or exceeding the powers of their office. For example, in 1868, amidst a struggle over Reconstruction policy, the House impeached President Andrew Johnson on allegations that he violated the Tenure of Office Act, which he had violated in the past. For more information on the impeachment process, visit the House of Representatives' official website, or go to: http://www.house.gov/impeachment. articles, removed from office, and disqualified from holding future federal offices. On the other hand, it does not appear that any President, Vice President, or other civil officer of the United States has been impeached by the House solely on the basis of conduct occurring before he began his tenure. The House has never impeached a president or vice president for conduct that occurred before they were in office. The impeachment of a president, vice president, or civil officer has never been based on conduct that took place before they began their tenure. of the Watergate Hotel break-in, conceal and protect the perpetrators, and conceal the existence of other illegal activity. Second, that he used the power of the office of the Presidency to violate citizens' constitutional rights, "impair[]" lawful investigations, and "contravene[]" laws applicable to executive branch agencies. Third,That he refused to answer questions about his role in the cover-up of the Watergate hotel break- in and the subsequent cover up of other criminal activity. a federal civil rights action brought against him, noted that by doing this, "William Jefferson Clinton has undermined the integrity of his office, has brought disrepute on the Presidency, has betrayed his trust as President, and has acted in a manner subversive of the rule of law and justice, to say nothing of the damage done to his reputation as a man and a president" The suit was settled out of court, and Clinton was never charged with any crime in connection with it. He was also never convicted of any crime. In 1974, the House Judiciary Committee recommended articles of impeachment against President Richard Nixon. The articles alleged that the President, "using the powers of his high office," attempted to obstruct the investigation to cooperate with congressional subpoenas. President Nixon resigned before the House voted on the articles. One of the articles of impeachment against President Clinton also alleged abuse of the power of his office, although the House rejected this article. That article alleged that President Clinton committed tax fraud, but the House also rejected that article. The resolution authorized the House Judiciary Committee to investigate fully whether sufficient grounds existed for the House to impeach President Nixon. H.Res. 803 was called up for immediate consideration as a privileged matter. The resolution specified powers which the House could use to remove Nixon from office. It was passed by the House of Representatives on a party-line vote, 419-0. The vote was the first time the House had voted to remove a president from office since Watergate in 1974. The next day, President Nixon was impeached by the Senate. for a federal judge, but not for the President. While two articles of impeachment were approved by the House, the Senate acquitted President Clinton on both charges. However, generating firm conclusions from this result is quite difficult as there may have been varying motivations for these votes. One possibility is that the acquittal occurred because some Senators—though agreeing that such conduct merited impeachment—thought the House Managers failed to prove their case. Another is that certain Senators disagreed that such behavior was impeachable at all. that "related to the President's private conduct, not to an abuse of his authority as President" The minority did not explicitly claim that the grounds for impeachment might be different between federal judges and executive branch officials, but its reasoning at least hints in that direction. One reading of the minority's position is that certain behavior might be impeachable conduct. It rejects tax fraud as nonpublic behavior that does not qualify, which conflicts with the past impeachment and conviction of federal judges on just this basis. action against him. The House Judiciary Committee report that recommended articles of impeachment argued that perjury by the President was an impeachable offense. The report rejected the notion that conduct such as perjury was "more detrimental when committed by statements in matters distinct from their official duties" The report noted the President's perjurious conduct, though seemingly falling outside of his official duties as President, nonetheless constituted grounds for impeachment. In contrast, the minority views from the report opposing impeachment reasoned that "not all impeachable offenses are crimes and President refused to comply with certain congressional requests for information and provided false and misleading information in response to others. The committee report argued that such conduct "showed contempt for the legislative branch and impeded Congress's exercise of its Constitutional responsibility" of impeachment. A number of individuals have also been also been charged with contempt of Congress and obstruction of the legislative process. The report was compiled by the House Judiciary Committee and the House Committee on Oversight and Government Reform, and was released on Tuesday. It was written by Rep. Darrell Issa, R-California, and Rep. Steve Israel, D-New Jersey. might classify some of the articles of impeachment brought against President Clinton as grounded on alleged behavior considered incompatible with the nature of the office of the Presidency. Both the first article, for allegedly lying to a grand jury, and the second, for alleged obstructing justice by concealing evidence in the Clinton administration, would be grounds for impeachment if they were found to have taken place during Clinton's time in the White House. The first article would be based on the alleged lying to the grand jury; the second would be on alleged obstruction of justice. offenses are "constitutional wrongs that subvert the structure of government, or undermine the integrity of office and even the Constitution itself" "[O]ther high crimes and misdemeanor[s]" are not limited to indictable offenses, but apply to "serious violations of the public trust" The term "Misdemeanor ... does not mean a minor criminal offense as the term is generally employed in the criminal law," but refers instead to the behavior of public officials. "[H]igh Crimes and Misdemeanors" are thus best characterized as "misconduct that damages the state and the operations of government institutions" The meaning of "high Crimes and Misdemeanors" is not defined in the Constitution or in statute. It was adopted from the English practice of parliamentary impeachments. It appears to have been directed against individuals accused of behavior that violates an official's duty to the country, even if such conduct is not necessarily a prosecutable offense. In the past both houses of Congress have given the phrase a broad reading, "finding that impeachable offenses need not be limited to criminal conduct" described impeachable offenses as arising from "the misconduct of public men" Such offenses were " political as they relate chiefly to injuries done immediately to the society itself," he said. According to this reasoning, impeachable conduct could include adultery, sexual misconduct, and sexual abuse of children. The U.S. Constitution defines impeachable behavior as "the abuse or violation of some public trust" by a public official or official. The term was used in the Declaration of Independence to refer to the abuses of public trust. variety of congressional materials support this reading. For example, committee reports on potential grounds for impeachment have described the history of English impeachment as including non-criminal conduct and noted that this tradition was adopted by the Framers. In accordance with the understanding of "high" offenses in the English tradition, impeachable offenses are considered to be high in the tradition of the impeachment process in the U.S. and are considered impeachable in the British tradition. In the case of President Obama, impeachment would be a violation of the Constitution. of crimes against the state and encompassed offenses beyond traditional criminal law. The minority emphasized that the President was not impeachable for all potential crimes, no matter how minor. impeachment was reserved for "conduct that constitutes an egregious abuse or subversion of the powers of the executive office," the minority argued. The debate on impeachable offenses during the not all crimes are impeachmentachable offenses. Examining the impeachment of President Andrew Johnson and ExaminingThe impeachment of. President Andrew Jackson and his impeachment. Constitutional Convention in 1787 indicates that criminal conduct was encompassed in the "high crimes and misdemeanors" standard. Many of the impeachments approved by the House of Representatives have included conduct that did not involve criminal activity. Less than a third have specifically invoked a criminal statute or used the term "crime" For example, in 1803, Judge John Pickering was impeached and convicted for, among other things, his role in the impeachment of President Thomas Jefferson. The notion that only criminal conduct can constitute sufficient grounds for impeachment does not, however, comport with historical practice. The committee left unresolved whether non-criminal conduct outside of the judicial function could support an impeachment charge. The purpose of impeachment is not to inflict personal punishment for criminal activity. The Constitution explicitly makes clear that impeached individuals are not immunized from criminal liability once they are impeached for particular activity. Instead, impeachment is meant to protect the public from the consequences of a person's actions, the committee said. of public duty were grounds for impeachment. Second, if the conduct was not connected to the duties of judicial office, then criminal conduct could constitute grounds for impe. Impeachment is largely immune from judicial review. Grounds for impeachment include abuse of the particular powers of government office or a violation of the "public trust" Members of Congress have historically examined the language of the Constitution; past precedents; the debates is a "remedial" tool. It serves to effectively "maintain constitutional government" by removing individuals unfit for office, writes David Rothkopf, a professor of constitutional law at the University of California, Los Angeles. He says impeachment is a crucial tool for potentially holding government officers accountable. Congressional materials have cautioned that the grounds for impeachment "do not all fit neatly and logically into categories" The remedy of impeachment is intended to "reach a broad variety of conduct by officers that is both serious and incompatible with the duties of the office," the materials say. Congressional precedents reflect three broad types of conduct thought to constitute grounds for impeachment. They are improperly exceeding or abusing the powers of the Office; behavior incompatible with function and purpose of office; and misusing the office. The Supreme Court ruled that the Senate has sole authority to decide whether an individual should be acquitted or convicted. The Court noted the important separation of powers concerns that would be implicated if the "final reviewing authority with respect to impeachments [was placed] in the hands of the same body that the impeachment process is meant to regulate" Further, the Court explained that certain certain impeachment cases could not "afford any judicially manageable standard of review of the Senate's actions" The Court reasoned that impeachment functions as the "only check on the Judicial Branch by the Legislature" The Constitution sets forth the general principles which control the procedural aspects of impeachment. Both the Senate and the House have designed procedures to implement these general principles. The Constitution vests the power to impeach in the House of Representatives, while imbuing the Senate with thePower to try impeachments. The Senate has the power of impeachment, but only if the House votes to do so. The House votes no, and the Senate votes to try the impeachment of the president. The vote is a no-no. The Constitution gives Congress the authority to impeach and remove the President, Vice President, and other federal "civil officers" upon a determination that such officers have engaged in treason, bribery, or other high crimes and misdemeanors. Impeachment is one of the various checks and balances created by the Constitution, and power might reach. The general purposes of impeachment may assist in interpreting the proper scope of "civil Officers of the United States" The congressional power of impeachment constitutes an important aspect of the Various checks and checks that were built into the Constitution to preserve the separation of powers. from using the pardon power to shield individuals from impeachment or removal from office. Congress confronts at least two preliminary legal questions bearing on whether an impeachment inquiry against a given official is constitutionally appropriate. First, whether the individual whose conduct is being investigated is the same person whose pardon power is being used to shield him or her from impeachment. Second, whether a pardon can be used as a shield to shield a person from impeachment if the person is a former or current member of Congress or the president of the United States. under scrutiny holds an office that is subject to impeachment and removal, and second, whether the conduct for which the official is accused constitutes an impeachable offense. The Constitution explicitly makes "[t]he President, Vice President and all civil Officers of the United States" subject to impeachment and removal. Which officials should be considered for impeachment or removal? Vote in CNN's live, interactive poll below or go to CNN.com/Heroes. We'll post a new version of this article each day. Congress appears to be that the phrase "good behavior" simply designates judicial tenure. Under this reasoning, rather than functioning as a ground for impeachment, the " good behavior" phrase simply makes clear that federal judges retain their office for life unless they are removed via a proper constitutional mechanism. For example, a 1973 discussion of impeachment grounds released by the House Judiciary Committee reviewed the history of the phrase and concluded that it was not a grounds for impeachment in the early 20th century. The phrase is still used today. asked whether the "good behavior" clause provides an additional ground for impeachment of judges and concluded that "[i]t does not" It emphasized that the House's impeachment of Judges was "consistent" with impeachment of "non-judicial officers" Finally, the House Report on the Impeachment of President Clinton affirmed this reading of the Constitution, stating that impeachable conduct for judges mirrored impeachment for other civil officers in the government. But one might argue that the range of impeachable conduct differs. judges "hold their Offices during good behaviour." One argument posits that these clauses should be read in conjunction, meaning that judges can be impeached and removed from office if they fail to exhibit good behavior or if they are guilty of "treason, bribery, and other high Crimes and Misdemeanors" However, this argument is not supported by the majority of the American public, who believe that judges should be held in good behavior and should not be removed from their offices. In all of American history, only three members of the executive branch have been impeached: two Presidents and a Secretary of State. Impeachment precedents in both the House and Senate are equally unhelpful with respect to subordinate executive officials. The Founders intended the President and Vice President to be impeachable. They intended the Vice President and the Speaker of the House to be impeachable and to be subordinate executive officials. This is not the way the Founders intended it. Historical precedent provides no examples of the impeachment power being used against lower-level executive officials. One must, therefore, look to other sources for aid in determining precisely how far down the federal bureaucracy the impeachment can go. War. and peace are not the same thing as war and peace, they are two different things. War is not war, it is peace. Peace is not peace, it's the right of the people to decide what they want to do with their lives. war is not War, it’s the right for the government to decide how to spend its resources. between judges and executive branch officials due to the differing nature of each office. For example, one might argue that a federal judge could be impeached for perjury or fraud because of the importance of trustworthiness and impartiality to the judiciary. The same behavior might not constitute impeachable conduct for an executive branch official. However, given the wide variety of factors at issue, it is uncertain if conduct meriting impeachment and conviction for a non-judicial officer has never been convicted by the Senate. The relative paucity of impeachments of non- judicial officers compared to judges. a judge would fail to qualify for a non-judicial officer. The impeachment and acquittal of President Clinton illustrates this difficulty. The House of Representatives impeached President Clinton for (1) providing perjurious and misleading testimony to a federal grand jury and (2) obstruction of justice in regards to a civil rights case. President Clinton was acquitted by a vote of the House of Reps. and acquitted by the Senate of the same charge. He was found not guilty of the charges against him. Some have suggested that the standard for impeaching a federal judge differs from an executive branch official. Article III, Section 1, provides that federal the "Constitutional Convention ... quite clearly rejected" a "dual standard" for judges and civil officers. The "treason, bribery, and high Crimes and Misdemeanors" clause thus serves as the sole standard for impeachment for both executive branch officials and federal judges. The next year, the House Judiciary Committee's Impeachment Inquiry began. judges, one Senator, one Cabinet member, and two Presidents. The Senate has conducted 16 full impeachment trials. Of these, eight individuals—all federal judges—were convicted by the Senate. This report briefly surveys the constitutional provisions governing the impeachment power. It examines which individuals are subject to impeachment, and explores the potential grounds for impeachment. It concludes with a list of possible grounds of impeachment for each individual. The full report can be found at: http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-18054/Impeachment-Report-Examines-Potential-Grounds-For-Impeachment.html. Justice Douglas concluded that impeachment was appropriate in several circumstances. First, if the conduct was connected with the judicial office or the exercise of judicial power. Second, if both criminal conduct and conduct constituting a serious dereliction of duty. Third, if there was evidence that the judge had been involved in a criminal act or had committed an act of misconduct in the course of his or her duties as a member of the judicial branch of the federal government. The impeachment process can take up to a year to complete.