panelists maintained that the federal budget cycle is too long and inflexible to meet the needs of an ATC system. According to one panelist, it is “impossible” to run the U.S. ATC.and DOT officials might be unwilling to publicly release data that could raise questions about their management. Several panelists maintain that it is "impossible" to run a ATC with a budget cycle of more than three years. and DOT officials are unwilling to publicize data that may raise questions. system within the classic federal structure. The federal budget process freezes plans for the system 12 or 18 months in advance. For an ATC system to succeed, “you’ve got to be. much more day-to-day, week- to-week, month-To-month decision- making,’’ he said. “Dramatic,” “dynamic” system requires “more managerial freedom, much more. day- to. week, week, month, year, year decision-making,�” he added. any complex, rapidly evolving operational system, including the ATC system, and overestimates the economic service lives of information technology investments. Whereas the government typically assumes such investments will last for 15 years, he said, a 7-year estimate would be more reasonable. showing large deficits. They suggested, for example, that FAA should be replaced with a new system that would be able to handle the FAA's needs for more than a decade at a time, rather than the current 15-year projection. to see major system outages but predicted, instead, “a slow but sure increase in delays.” Another panelist said, if the ATO did not carefully analyze demand and determine how that demand could be served, it would find itself facing what a third panelist referred to as a ‘slow but sure’ increase in system delays. The ATO will make a decision on how to meet demand in the coming months, the panelists said. The decision will be made on a rolling basis, they said. FAA has not developed a business model or plans for forecasting demand. Panelists noted that the number of regional jets, low-fare airlines, and unmanned aerial vehicles are increasing, but FAA hasn't developed a plan for serving them. The FAA does not evaluate “the anatomy of demand” and determine how that demand will be served, an FAA official said. The agency does not have a plan to forecast demand, an official said, nor does it evaluate ‘the anatomy’ of demand. federal budget process is slow, inflexible, and influenced by the political process; annual appropriations are uncertain and discourage planning. FAA’s capital budget fails to show the impact of investments on the country. This can lead to funding projects that will provide limited benefits for users. FAA developed separate capital (Facilities and Equipment) and operating (FAA) budgets. The ATO’S COO believes that good financial management means linking FAA's capital andoperating budgets. The Strategic Management Process will ensure linkage between FAA’s operating and capital budgets. As a result, FAA says, future budgetary conversations will revolve around the desired level of service, instead of focusing on a product. To become a “performance-based organization” and to become more efficient, FAA wants to focus on services, rather than products. The process is expected to be completed by the end of the year. For more information, go to FAA.services and FAA.com/services. would have a capital investment plan that was predominantly about standing still?” he asked. Another panelist also considered the federal budget process incompatible with strategic planning. In his words, “it is absolutely a problem at FAA’ that “budget drives strategy and strategy does not drive budget” Although FAA is good, it needs to do more to make it better, the panelist said. “It’s time to make some changes,’ he said. improve its operations and financial management, FAA has worked to develop three longer term planning documents. First, it has published its Flight Plan for 2005 through 2009, a multiyear strategic effort that sets a 5-year course for FAA in the areas of safety, capacity, international leadership, and organizational excellence. Second, the FAA has developed a five-year strategic plan for the U.S. Air Force, which will focus on safety and security, as well as capacity and leadership. Third, the agency has released a five year plan for air traffic control, which focuses on safety, security and capacity. FAA plans to increase the capacity of the NAS by one- third. FAA is participating in a multiagency effort, sponsored by the JPDO, to develop a national plan for aviation in 2025 and beyond. It has developed a rolling 10-year effort, called the Operational Evolution Plan (OEP), through which FAA plans to increased the NAS' capacity by one third. The OEP is part of a larger effort to increase air traffic capacity in the U.S. and around the world. that time will show, when completed, how large a funding gap the ATO faces and how far it will have to go to address that gap. FAA says that it is prepared to identify and eliminate redundancies in the NAS and NAS. FAA: We are prepared to Identify and Eliminate redundancies. We are also prepared to Eliminate Unmanned Aircraft System (UAS) redundancies, FAA says. UAS redundancies have been identified and eliminated in the past, FAA adds. Project managers first overpromise capabilities and underestimate costs to increase the chances that new projects will be accepted. Then, after projects are accepted, they overestimate costs because they assume their requests will be.seldom reduces. A third panelist pointed out that the budget process establishes incentives for unrealistic planning and overpromising capabilities. A fourth panelist said the process also creates incentives for over-promising and under-promoting capabilities and underestimating costs. A fifth panelist suggested that the process creates incentives to overpromote capabilities and underpromise costs. Managers could include options in their budget submissions to indicate what could be accomplished at different funding levels. They do not do so because they assume items identified as options will be cut. Finally, managers are reluctant to revise ongoing projects because they do not want to be.cut. The Government Accountability Office is a non-profit, open-source organisation that promotes transparency and accountability in government. For more information, go to: www.gov.uk/government-accountance-officials. seen as fickle. By contrast, a private company that operates under a board of directors and obtains revenue from customers does not have incentives to play budget games to get projects approved. “Your money is your own money,” one panelist said. Some panelists criticized the federal budget for being too generous to private companies. The panelists were speaking at a conference in Washington, D.C., hosted by the Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS) The conference is open to the public and is expected to last through Friday. does not reveal synergies between projects. Then, when the budget request goes to Congress, “you have no opportunity to try to explain to anybody the interconnections of these programs,” he said. As a result, when appropriators decide not to fund a project, they may not understand how their decision came to be, he said, and may not be able to explain it to Congress. He added: “It’s a very, very difficult process.” failing to show priorities and relationships among proposed investments. In the budget, one panelist said, “everything is as important as everything else.” Another panelist observed that the budget sets no capital investment priorities. According to a third panelist, a line item budget tears apart a highly layered, interdependent system and fails to show the relationships between proposed investments and real-life needs of the people it is intended to serve. The budget is expected to be presented to the House of Representatives on Tuesday. The budget procedure requiring that capital investments be funded out of annual appropriations means that major acquisitions generally take many years to implement. The projects may continue to be implemented even after they have outlived their usefulness. Particularly when annual appropriations fall short, panelists noted, it can take years for projects to be fully funded. The full report will be published in full in the next few days, or 18 days ahead of time if it is approved by the House of Representatives and the Senate. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. projects’ development and deployment may be delayed and their costs may increase with time. Until the acquisitions are completed, the benefits of the new technologies are deferred, aging equipment may pose risks to users, and outdated software may require costly upgrades. By the time theisitions are fully deployed, the costs of the projects may have been passed on to the customers, and the benefits may not have been realized, the report says. The report is based on a survey of more than 1,000 IT professionals. The firewall makes it difficult to see the relationship between software replacement (capital) and maintenance (operating) costs, panelists said. Decision to postpone purchases of new or upgraded software may save capital investment costs, but rising maintenance requirements may increase operating costs. Eventually, the maintenance costs may “far exceed” the replacement costs, one panelist said. The budget is not integrated to show what investments buy in, other panelists noted. It is also difficult to determine the impact of capital investment decisions on operating costs, they said. will affect other projects. firewall discourages analyses of life-cycle costs and may lead, in some instances, to investments in technologies that end up in a warehouse because the ATO cannot afford to operate them. Similarly, another panelist observed that the separation of capital and operating costs in FAA’s accounting system may not be as well-separated as it should be. The FAA is a federal agency with responsibility for air traffic control, air traffic management, air safety and air transport. one panelist said, and the size of the appropriation may vary from year to year. This uncertainty focuses attention on which technology will receive the funding (the inputs) rather than on what improvements in safety or capacity the technology is supposed to deliver (the outputs), he said. In debating whether or not to spend money on new technology, it is important to focus on the outcomes, he said, rather than the inputs. The debate is expected to continue for the next few weeks. The next session of the panel will be held on November 14. that it would produce a more predictable, reliable funding stream. and helps preclude spending for “gold-plated things that don't affect the true performance of the system and drive the costs up completely unnecessarily” Without a direct connection to the users and their mission, another panelist said, it would be difficult to find funding sources for the program. The panelist was referring to the annual appropriations process, which is used to pay for the military's operations. The Senate is expected to vote on the bill in the coming weeks. program being financed by the revenue bonds. He characterized this strategy as “money that’s lying on the sidewalk waiting to be picked up” He saw it as an opportunity to buy some new equipment in bulk and get it installed before it becomes obsolete. Such a “sensible” approach would not be the same as a ‘sensible,’ ‘responsible’ approach, he said. “We’re trying to do the right thing,” he added. The ATO could make some progress in addressing its cultural, technical, and budgetary challenges under its current authorities. The panelists generally agreed that structural changes would increase the ATO’s chances of success. These changes, which would give the ATo a more predictable source of funding revenue bonds backed by these fees, would be beneficial to the country. The changes would allow the AT o to implement a “sensible” capital investment program; hire the right people; and streamline its management. to understand the interconnections between ATC systems and break the big picture into nuggets so that it could clarify for the appropriators why they should not break apart the ATO’s capital investment plan and selectively fund only some components. Another panelist maintained that theATO could mitigate the effects of the cuts. The ATO could also mitigate the effect of cuts on the ATC system, the panelist said. The ATC is a federal agency that provides services to the state and local governments. any requests for increased funding and would, instead, tell the ATO to find another way of doing business. Panelists noted that funding from annual appropriations is uncertain, and that this uncertainty is incompatible with strategic and capital planning. The amount of money available for appropriation each year cannot be predetermined, budget constraints. This panelist also recommended looking at longer term alternatives to annual appropriations that are available within the government and work well for other organizations, such as “working capital accounts and all kinds of industrial funding schemes. few years, the panelists identified a number of steps that the ATO could take to address its current financial situation. These steps included accepting the budget process as it is and reducing spending to match revenues, developing strategies for presenting theATO’s budget request more clearly to Congress, implementing regulatory the firewall between its capital and operating budgets and modifying its budget submissions to show the future cost implications of current investment decisions. They said, for example, that the AtO could pursue procedural options under its current authorities. The ATO would have difficulty publishing a business plan that projects deficit scenarios, a panelist said. According to this panelist, OMB would deny revenue increases are forthcoming. The budget is consolidated and there are always pressures on it, the panelist added. The ATO is expected to release its business plan in the coming weeks, a source said. The report will be presented to Congress on November 14. The full report will appear on CNN on November 15. For confidential support, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org. updated its cost estimates in light of OMB’s revenue projections for the next 4 years and arrived at a cumulative shortfall for the period of $5 billion. According to FAA, a business plan that the ATO was preparing at $3.2 billion for the capital budget. The ATO is now preparing a new business plan for the future of the FAA at $4.5 billion for operating budget and $2.8 billion for capital budget, FAA says. The FAA is also considering a new strategy for the maintenance of the fleet at a cost of $3 billion. The panelists identified and discussed the impact of funding constraints and the federal budget process on ATC modernization. In their view, the most immediate issue is a critical shortage of funds to meet the current modernization program’s plans and users’ demands. Additionally, the panelists said, the ATC needs to deal with productivity issues. The panelists also discussed the need for ATC to be more flexible and responsive to the needs of its users and the public at large. The ATC must also be more agile and responsive, they said. “perfect storm,” reiterating a term the ATO itself has used. Severe reductions in the funding for ATC modernization, if required to address the currently projected shortfall, could exacerbate what one panelist described as the government’s traditional underfunding of the ATC system. According to this panelist, the government undercapitalizes the system. The ATO has used the term ‘perfect storm’ to refer to the current financial situation in the country. Panelists viewed the ATO’s apparent fiscal shortfall as a severe challenge. In terms of operations, this deficit was more likely to have a gradual than an immediately catastrophic onset. One panelist said would amount to a 20 percent deficit in 4 years. He did not expect this deficit to be as severe as it appears. These challenges are not likely to be solved in the next few years, the panelists said. The ATO is expected to make a decision on how to address the deficit in the coming months. The ATO’s chances for success are limited because the COO is being asked to turn the organization around without being given the tools to do so. The COO lacks key financial data needed to determine, analyze, and manage the ATO's costs. Other panelists observed that the controllers’ union influences management's decisions. The ATO is not a Chief Executive Officer, as one of the panelist observed. Instead, he reports to rather than helping the ATo address its immediate funding needs. replaced only two top managers in the ATO and simply reassigned other managers. Another panelist noted that an executive in the private sector replaced the top 200 people in the. In the view of this panelist, the COO’s hiring of only two new managers and reassignment of other managers would not be sufficient to turn the ATo's culture around. The ATO's fate depends on other organizations, including FAA, DOT, the Office of to the new executive. The other employees also had difficulty adjusting and were still adjusting in some respects, he said. But getting management on the right page was the real challenge. Another panelist emphasized that cultural change starts at the top and questioned why the ATO’s new COO had, according to the panelist's count, not been brought in to help with cultural change. The ATO has not commented on the report's findings or the comments made by the panelists on its website or Twitter account. and greater decision-making authority, would generally require legislative action and take time to implement. To give the ATO a more predictable source of funding, panelists suggested that it be authorized to establish and manage user fees. While recognizing that such a fee would be controversial, since the costs for most users would likely increase, the panelists maintained that it was essential for ATO’s success. The panelists also suggested that ATO be allowed to issue taxes with a user fee. The ATO should wait to achieve some successes before seeking a user fee system. Another panelist called for figuring out “not only what problem we’re solving, but what problems we might be likely to create,” and noted that the government should not spend political capital on the issue. The ATO is expected to make a decision on the user fee in the next few months. The government is not expected to announce a decision until after the end of the year, a panelist said. The ATO needs to enlist the political support of the user community, one panelist said. Other panelists focused on the obstacles within the system that need to be overcome. The ATO's mission is to connect the customers to the ATO’s mission, the panelists said. It was critical to “have some small early practical successes” to enlist political support, they said. The panelists were technical and management experts from ATO, the Australian Federal Police and other agencies. said, “evolution takes very unintended and very undesirable paths over long periods of time” As long as the customers are not directly paying the bills and providing the resources, ‘it’s going to be very hard to bring about real change’ and make the ATO “a customer-driven,’ another panelist said. “It’ll be very difficult to make a change,” a third panelist added. ‘The ATO needs to be more customer-focused,‘ said a fourth panelist. the ATO, as one panelist said, or “sacrifice the good for the better” in the words of another. Instead, taking a two-pronged approach— telling people “what’s to be done now to get results” and telling them “that they have an obligation to build for the future” would be the best way, the panelists said. “The ATO” is a term used to refer to the Australian government. were constrained within a government system. For many, the steps taken thus far to create a performance-based organization were insufficient. Some panelists said the ATO still had a long way to go to achieve its goals. The ATO lacks control over its revenues and funding priorities, the panelists added. The panelists also said it was important to focus on the needs of the country's young people, rather than just the goals of the organization. The report was published by the Australian Institute of Chartered Management. Despite reservations, panelists generally agreed that stakeholders should not “allow the concept of privatization to be the enemy of moving forward with operations.” “We’re really going to see, not build the world’s most perfect system from 1956,” panelists said of ATO's potential for success as a government organization. “The ATO is not a perfect system, but it is a very, very good one,’ panelist said. organizational recommendations without implementing its funding recommendations. The ATO is charged with becoming performance-based but deprived of the means to transform itself, one panelist said. Other panelists portrayed the ATO as an organization that is charged to operate like a business but is not, they said. It's an organization charged with operating like aBusiness but not operating like one, the panelists said. They also said it's not funded like a Business but not a Business, and that's a problem. amenable to changes, but the appropriators liked things the way they were. what is expected of them, how they fit into the strategy, and what the vision is for their organization. In addition to having a vision, another panelist said, it is important for the ATO to tie that vision to the organization's strategy and strategy. It is also important to have a vision for the future of the organization, the panelists said. The ATO is responsible for setting the direction and direction of the U.S. military. is to establish an organization that can execute the long-term vision and manage not only its finances but also its future. The OEP will then be “not just a set of projects,” but a project plan with a vision and a strategy that goes out 20 years. But given the current budget constraints, he conceded, the path to the OEP is not easy. The JPDO’s long- term vision is to “tie the vision to the viability of the future.” OMB Director can revise his budget request and Congress can make further changes in the ATO’s budget. In addition, the 20-year vision of the Joint Planning and Development Office (JPDO) is at odds with the ATo, according to one panelist, because it looks forward to the ATC system of 2025. Both the OEP and the JPDO's plan are designed to meet the Flight Plan's commitment to help the NAS flow smoothly and meet future needs. The ATO wants to know how much every unit of output costs so that it can allocate and compare costs and measure productivity. Each organizational unit and facility is developing applicable metrics for performance so that the ATO can compare costs, identify factors that affect costs, and use this information to improve performance. For example, each en route facility is determining its hourly cost to meet customers' needs and demands. The ATO has created “value-based” performance metrics to measure its performance. a foundation for cultural change and deliver benefits to customers efficiently. For example, the ATO established collaborative teams of technical experts and ATC system. The ATO reorganized air traffic services and the research and acquisition organization along functional lines of business to bring stakeholders together and integrate goals, as well as reward them. For more information, visit the Air Traffic Organization's website or go to airtrafficobservatory.org. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. cooperation by linking investments to operations. reduced layers of management from 11 to 7 to help address the hierarchical nature of the organization. conducted an organizationwide activity value analysis to determine the full range of activities that ATO headquarters is engaged in, the value customers place on those activities, and the impact of those activities on ATO's customers. The ATO has a long-standing relationship with the U.S. Postal Service, which was founded in 1877. The company has been part of the United States Postal Service for more than 100 years. The ATO’s COO lacks the management tools that would be available to a private-sector CEO, panelists say. His ability to plan modernization projects, set program priorities, and implement new technologies is constrained because of the FAA Administrator, DOT Secretary, and other officials.year, he said, and “it’S well worth the investment.” “It’ll be a big challenge, but it will be worth it in the long run,” he said. have the numbers he needed to know where the ATO stood. FAA did not maintain basic information on the costs and value of existing systems. As a result, he spent most of his first year overseeing the implementation of a cost plan. The ATO’s potential to be data driven was reduced by a lack of data, he says. The FAA is now trying to improve its data-driven approach to air traffic control. The agency is also looking at how it can improve the efficiency of the air traffic system. should institute “a fundamental requirement and a cultural expectation” that it will review existing technologies before it buys or tries to develop its own. With a multibillion-dollar budget for software and other information technology, he said, the ATO has ample opportunity to save money. In his opening remarks and in his opening. remarks, Mr Turnbull said: “We have a lot of work to do to make sure that we get the most out of our technology.” He added: ‘We’ve got a long way to go. We’re not there yet.’ The ATO has spent most of its capital investment dollars on sustaining and maintaining existing systems. Only about 14 percent of its expenditures, he recalled, were for flight enhancement. “Who anywhere should receive funding, planners have lost sight of the big picture,” he said. The ATO is now looking for a new chief executive to take charge of the agency. The new chief will take over on January 1, 2015. The current chief of the ATO, Michael O’Leary, will step down on December 31, 2014. rational decisions that transcend changes in political leadership. The ATO is trying to better align FAA’s priorities and stakeholders’ interests by developing a strategy map. Called the Strategic Management Process, this effort borrows heavily from a private-sector model. According to FAA, the strategy map will enable owners and customers to clearly understand both the services that the ATo is providing and the effects of products in development on those services. The strategy map is expected to be completed by the end of the year. The ATO recognizes that capital expenditures directly affect operating costs over time. Creating this linkage is important for the ATO to respond to concerns expressed by its owners and customers. Using the Strategic Management Process to drive budget decisions will help to ensure the establishment and maintenance of a linkage between the capital and operating budgets. The ATO expects that as steps toward that goal, it has been putting in place. financial management systems it had been putting into place. It expects that these systems will continue to be used in the future. FAA plans to finish putting a new cost accounting system in place by 2006 that will allow it to assign, track, and better control costs. FAA is developing management training in cost accounting and budgeting. In the fall of 2004, FAA launched a new business model for the ATO. The ATO is developing a new management training program for FAA employees. The program will be available to all FAA employees by the end of the year. For more information, visit the FAA's website at www.faa.org. Panelists discussed the potential benefits of a more widespread use of a concept called area navigation (RNAV) RNAV allows operators of properly equipped aircraft to use onboard navigation capabilities to fly desired flight paths without requiring direct flight over ground-based navigation aids. This provides for more direct routing, avoiding suboptimal routes prescribed by conventional “highways in the sky” that are defined by point-to-point flying over navigation aids, the panelists said. RNAV and RNP hold promise for saving system users time and money. ATC regulatory agency and the Canadian air traffic management organization. As a first step toward obtaining FAA’s approval of procedures for using RNP, a panelist said, the ATO could make policy announcements to set a tone and direction. These announcements would enlist the user community's support at little or no cost, the panelist added. The FAA is expected to approve RNP procedures by the end of the year or early next year, an FAA spokesman said in an emailed statement.  panelists expressed concerns about the government’s approach to regulating the use of onboard navigation equipment. According to one of these panelists, FAA has “the wrong conceptual framework” for developing regulations to implement new procedures. Its current approach is “inappropriate,” according to the panelists. The panelists also expressed concern about the “unintended consequences” of using RNP technologies on commercial aircraft. The FAA has not commented on the panel's concerns. full potential in the United States because FAA has not approved procedures for its use. However, the airlines are “crying for” FAA to approve RNP, one of the panelists said. Aircraft equipped with RNP capabilities could then fly alternative rolling, moving routes to avoid weather delays, the panelist said. Service would improve, he said, and the airlines would be able to charge more for flights that take off and land on time. The panelists spoke to CNN on condition of anonymity. FAA is implementing a number of improvements to airspace and procedures using RNP. As technology allows, FAA says, more flight altitude levels will be added. In addition, five airports are developing RNP-based procedures in partnership with airlines that that will save $1.5 million in fuel costs during the first year. The FAA says that RNP will be used to improve safety and reduce fuel costs for air travelers in the U.S. and around the world. For more information on RNP, visit the FAA website. for travelers, and the airlines would avoid the substantial costs of delays, he said. Implementing RNP could also eventually lower the ATO’s costs, another panelist said. RNP technologies have been installed on larger aircraft for so long that some aircraft equipped with cost to ATO, some panelists said. However, it would be important for FAA to implement RNP in a way that did not “disenfranchise” general aviation interests and regional carriers whose aircraft are not already equipped of RNP. and RNP could potentially increase the capacity of the ATC system to handle air traffic by reducing the required distance (separation) between aircraft equipped with advanced navigation capabilities. If the aircraft can safely operate closer to one another than FAA’s regulations currently allow, they could be able to use these capabilities to their full potential, according to the study. The study was published in the journal ‘Aircraft and Air Traffic Control’, which is published by the International Association of Air traffic Control. January 31, 2003. National Airspace System: Status of FAA’s Standard Terminal Automation Replacement System. GAO-02-1071. Washington, D.C.: September 17, 2002. FAA: Approach to Its New Communications System Appears Prudent, but Challenges Remain. GAE-01-932: Free Flight Tools Show Promise, but Implementation Challenges remain. GAo-03-343: FAA Needs to Better Prepare for Terminal Automated Replacement System (TAR) FAA has many Investment Management Capabilities in place, but more Oversight of Operational Systems is Needed. Air Traffic Control: FAA’s Modernization Efforts--Past, Present, and Future. National Airspace System: Reauthorizing FAA Provides Opportunities and Options to Address Challenges. Aviation Acquisition: A Comprehensive Strategy Is Needed for Cultural Change at FAA. FAA Budget Policies and Practices. GAO/RCED-96-159. Washington, D.C.: August 22, 1996. Impending Wave of Controller Attrition. GAO-02-591. Washington, D.C.: June 14, 2002. Air Traffic Control: Role of FAA’s Modernization Program in Reducing Delays and Congestion.GAO-01-725T. National Airspace System: Problems Plaguing the Wide Area Augmentation System. FAA/T-RCED-00-229. Washington,. D.c.: May 10, 2001. Air traffic control:role of FAA's Modernization program in reducing delays and congestion. GAO: FAA Needs to Ensure Better Coordination When Approving Air Traffic Control Systems. GAO-05-11: FAA’s Acquisition Management Has Improved, but Policies and Oversight Need Strengthening to Help. FAA needs to ensure better coordination when approving air traffic control systems, GAO says. FAA must ensure better Coordination when Approving air traffic Control systems, says GAO. Air traffic control needs to be better coordinated to help improve safety and efficiency, says FAA. The panel was only an initial step in a possible long-term, evolving effort to develop and sustain discussion on ATC modernization. As such, it brought together generalists, rather than specialists, to what needs to be done, and how to do it. These two key limitations and qualifications provide contextual boundaries. Nevertheless, the panel provided a rich dialogue and the panelists developed strong messages in responding to each of the three questions. Those messages are highlighted below. The panelists are listed in alphabetical order. address broad themes and consider how to organize a more comprehensive approach. Because our scope was limited, we could not include a large number of leading experts, institutions, and networks involved in specialized efforts. Furthermore, although many points of view were represented, the panel was not representative of all potential potential experts and institutions. We are happy to clarify that we were not able to include all potential experts or institutions, as well as all potential leaders and leaders in their respective fields. We would also like to point out that the panel did not include all experts and experts in their fields of expertise. stakeholders. Second, even though we, in cooperation with the National Academies, conducted preliminary research and heard from national experts in their fields, a day’s conversation cannot represent the current practice in this vast arena. More thought, discussion, and research are needed to develop greater agreement on what we really know, the authors said in a letter to the White House on Monday. The letter was written by the authors, who are also members of the National Academy of Sciences and the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. by describing “the difference between how things are and how they might be” Descriptions of accomplishments elsewhere, together with actions to implement whatever safeguards and regulatory framework might be necessary, could perhaps make the argument for change “compelling,” he said. Still other panelists looked to the future, calling for international action to address climate change. The U.S. is the largest economy in the world, followed by China, Japan, Germany and the United States. and the potential for conducting any of those activities more effectively and efficiently. indicating a desire to improve the flow of information within the agency by sending a large number of detailed e-mails in response to a call for recommendations to improve internal communications. In the past, according to the report, the agency has sent more than 1,000 e-mail messages in a single day. The report says the agency is looking for ways to improve its communication with the public and the media. The agency is also looking for a way to increase the number of employees who are trained to respond to the public. Managers have stopped seeing employees as a problem and have started to see them as part of the solution. According to other panelists, however, people find it very difficult to change, and the only way to bring about a change is to change the way people see themselves and the way they see the world. For more information, visit www.risen.co.uk and follow them on Twitter @risen_risen and @jennifer_fitzpatrick on Twitter. cultural transformation is to replace those who resist change, either by allowing them to retire or by hiring others to take their places. In the corporate world, one panelist observed, a new executive brings in a new management team to support a cultural turnaround. The new team is then loyal to the company, the panelist said, and the change takes place in the company's culture. The panelist was speaking at a conference in New York on the future of business in the digital age. For more information, go to: www.cnn.com. technologies, according to another panelist. Putting engineers, finance people, controllers, and electronic technologists together, all on the same team, could unite them as they moved through the stages of implementation. Therefore, when the time comes to field a technology, the focus would be on getting it up and running, he said. He added: "It would be great to have a team of engineers and finance people working together on a single project. It would be a very exciting time for us" business of designing systems. According to him, most companies no longer develop their own large, complex systems. Instead, they get other people to do that for them in the private sector. Another panelist also emphasized the availability of technical expertise in theprivate sector. However, according to a third panelist, most people in the U.S. do not have the skills needed to design complex systems, he said. The report was published by the American Institute of Architects (AIA) in association with the International Institute of System Design (IID) and the staff, started talking to them as people, and began executing “participative working’ programs. Union representatives and managers take the same courses together and address issues of affordability together. As a result, controllers’ pay has increased, costs have dropped, and productivity has increased. The panelist was speaking at a conference in New York on the future of the U.S. air industry. The conference was hosted by the New York Air and Space Association and the International Council of Aeronautics and Astronauts. would create “an opportunity to redistribute and even to trim the work force in some areas,” a panelist said. Improving controllers’ productivity would be another way to save money, a fourth panelist suggested. But he characterized his suggestion as “touch the’s’ money’ and said it was not a ‘touch the money.’ “It is not a touch the money issue,’’ the panelist added. “We are not looking to touch the cash.” Steven R. Bussolari Assistant Division Head, Tactical Systems Division Manager, Air Traffic Control System Group, Lincoln Laboratory. John W. Crichton President and CEO, NAV Canada. George L. Donahue Director, The Center for Air Transportation Systems Research, George Former FAA Associate Administrator for Research and Acquisition. John J. Fearnsides Professor of Aeronautics and Astronautics at the University of Toronto. John Former FAA associate administrator for research and acquisition at the FAA. Mohleji Principal Engineer, Center for Advanced Aviation System Development, The MITRE Corp. Robert W. Poole, Jr. Director of Transportation Studies, Reason Foundation. Michael Powderly President, Airspace Solutions. John A. Sorensen Chief Executive Officer, Seagull Technology, Inc. Elizabeth Eisenstadt, Brandon Haller, Bert Japikse, Maren. Eisenstadt and Brandon. Haller are the authors of this article. Maren Haller is the editor-in-chief of Aviation Week magazine. Public Policy, George Mason University Chief Strategist and Partner of MJF Strategies Xavier Fron Head, Performance Review Commission, EUROCONTROL Richard Golaszweski Executive Vice President, Gellman Research Associates (GRA), Inc. Ian Hall Director of Operations, National Air Traffic Services, United Kingdom Thomas Imrich Chief Pilot, Research, Boeing Commercial Aircraft Satish C. C. Imrich, Senior Vice President of Research, Research and Product Development, Boeing. FAA lacks a rudder, in a technical sense, for modernization. To help address its lack of technical expertise, panelists suggested, the ATO could obtain advice from an independent board or information from other countries. The ATO’s COO made a number of observations on FAA's culture. He also noted that FAA plans to train or hire people with needed skills to address shortfalls in technical expertise. The following summarizes some of his key observations on TSA's culture and provides additional information. The ATO has initiated organizational changes that are designed to create additional information from the ATO’s COO and from previous GAO reports. The ATO is developing a business plan to guide and guide ATC modernization. FAA is addressing some of the structural changes that panelists proposed to improve ATO's success over time. In addition to the business plan, FAA is working on a work in progress report that indicates how FAA is tackling some cultural and technical factors panelists identified as affecting modernization. FAA is attempting to foster “results-focused, proactive and innovative behavior.” Changing the agency’s leadership model is also designed, he said, to replace a “personality-driven culture” with a sustainable, stable, viable organization that can make a difference. The agency is also changing its management culture from “intensely hierarchical, risk averse,” and “reactionary” to “ results-focused and proactive” attributed many of the ATC modernization program’s chronic problems to cultural and technical factors. In particular, they cited resistance to change at all levels within the agency and insufficient technical expertise as key factors impeding modernization. They identified multiple, currently available options for addressing these factors and identified a number of ways to do so. The agency is “very resistant” to having very resistant’ to having these options addressed, the report said. The report said the agency has a “long way to go” in addressing these issues. Technical as well as cultural factors have impeded ATC modernization, panelists say. FAA does not have “the engineering technical capability to deal with an extremely complex, highly nonlinear adaptive system,” one speaker says. The FAA is seeking to modernize its air traffic control system by the end of the decade, the panelists said. The agency is also seeking to replace its aging fleet of ATCs with a new fleet of commercial airliners, they added. The process is expected to cost $1 billion to $2 billion. FAA is revising its cost accounting practices and changing from a cash flow to a total. FAA is trying to learn the difference between cost and cash flow and get a better handle on unit costs as better cost accounting data become available. The FAA is also trying to gain a more complete understanding of its costs and is changing its cost-of-service calculations. The agency is also changing its cost of service calculations to get a more accurate picture of what it is costing to run the FAA. accounting system and collecting other key data. Their performance is constrained because their terms of employment and compensation are based largely on negotiated agreements rather than on performance. In addition, salary caps limit FAA’s ability to pay for technical expertise. As one panelist observed at the end of the panel, “I’m not sure we’ve seen the best of the FAA yet.’‘‘We’re going to have to make some tough decisions,’ said a panelist. ‘I think the FAA has a lot of work to do,” said another. “It’ll be interesting to see how they respond. FAA does not get “the kind of constructive advice that you might hope for,” panelist says. Europe’s Performance Review Commission provides such constructive advice for EUROCONTROL, the European air traffic management organization. The commission serves as a panel of independent advisers and costs about $2.5 million a. It provides advice to the European Air Traffic Management Organization, which is responsible for air traffic control in the European Union and other countries. The Commission is made up of experts from Europe, the U.S. and Canada. private organizations, rather than FAA, develop new procedures and systems for FAA to approve and institute. Several panelists saw resistance to change as a consequence of federal employment. A government organization is insulated from change, the panelists said. The FAA is expected to make a decision by the end of the year on how to change its procedures. The agency's next step is to make changes to its procedures for approving and instituting new programs and programs. It's not clear when the FAA will make the changes. the economic pressures that the private sector faces, one of the panelists indicated. In his view, federal employees do not have the firsthand experience with layoffs and business failures to understand why improvements to the ATC system’s efficiency are needed to help revitalize the system, the panelist said. The U.S. Air Traffic Control system is the world's largest air traffic control system, with more than 1,000 flights a day. It was created in the 1950s to handle the growth of the air traffic system. and schedule increases. “The power resides with the program manager. It doesn’t matter what the systems engineering people do, their job is to keep doing plans and processes. They think that meetings are products,” a panelist said. ‘The system engineering organization in FAA is nothing more than a process organization,’ another panelist added. � ‘It’s not about what you do, it’re about how you do it.’ utilizes its engineers to build systems rather than manage contractors. As a result, it is now developing the systems it needs faster and at less cost. Maximizing the use of commercial inputs was the recommendation of another panelist, who said that FAA needs to get out of the contractors' business. The FAA is expected to make a decision on how to use commercial input in the coming months. The decision will be made by the FAA's board of directors, which meets in Washington on November 14. to the user constituency, not confine it to the agency. FAA cannot do everything alone from the inside, because airplanes and airports, for example, need to be equipped with the technologies that will help realize the vision. Employing a team concept could help overcome resistance to the implementation of new technologies. It could also be a way to make sure that the FAA doesn't lose sight of its core mission of protecting the safety and security of the nation's airports and airliners. It would be a great way for the FAA to show that it is committed to the safety of the country. the FAA Administrator, they are less closely joined than they were previously. Hence, this step is a positive move toward providing “arm’s length” safety oversight. It does not go as far as placing the two organizations in separate federal agencies or removing one of the agencies from the federal. It is a step toward providing "arm's length" safety oversight, but not a full separation of the FAA and NTSB. It's a step towards providing " arm's length’ oversight, although it doesn’t go far enough. change can be an issue outside FAA as well as within it, panelists noted. For example, one panelist questioned how much support the ATO was getting from DOT, OMB, and congressional committees for changing “some extremely entrenched political fiefdoms” Another panelist said that he had found the congressional authorizing committees to be ‘extremely entrenched’ in their support for ATO. The FAA is a federal agency with responsibility for air traffic control, air safety, and other aviation-related issues. his “owners’—who include the FAA Administrator and the DOT Secretary, who in turn receive direction from the administration (the President and OMB Director) and Congress. Consequently, there is no oversight group that is expected to provide constructive criticism of FAA, he said. He said the subcommittee is purely advisory, making the FAA’s decision-making process “unpredictable” and “ineffective.” “I’m not sure I’ve ever seen such a thing,” he said, “where the FAA has been able to make such a decision.’ government altogether. Overall, the panelists were united in their desire for the ATO to succeed, but they generally agreed that its opportunities for success were limited. At our request, thePanelists concluded the panel with their parting thoughts on the day’s discussion, including any advice they had for FAA or for Congress. The panelists concluded by saying that they would like to hear from the FAA about their plans for the future of the agency. The FAA is expected to make a decision by the end of the month. in the view of most panelists, for the ATO to meet its immediate and longer term challenges. Clinton V. Oster, Jr. (Panel Moderator) Professor of Public and Environmental Affairs. Anthony J. Broderick Independent Consultant. Former FAA Associate Administrator for Regulation and Certification. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. running and operating safely—not obstructing its implementation because it might threaten jobs. A change in management’s approach could go a long way toward overcoming controllers’ and other employees’ resistance to change, one panelist noted. One foreign air traffic organization changed its whole approach to the unions to make it easier to implement the new rules, the panelist said. The U.S. Airline Association is a trade group that represents air traffic controllers, pilots, air marshals and other air traffic workers. panelist noted that when his country restructured its air traffic organization, it immediately eliminated the same structural conflict of interest. “overnight” the regulator became more effective and the operator’s safety performance “significantly improved,” he said. According to the first panelist, other countries that have reorganized their air traffic organizations have also benefited from the changes. The panelist was speaking at the European Aviation Safety Forum in Paris. For more, go to: http://www.eaf.org/en/air-traffic-safety. struggling aviation industry. Other panelists emphasized the reluctance of management to change. According to a panelist with experience in restructuring a foreign air traffic organization, the senior and middle managers could not or would not adjust to the change. They had to be let go within the first 2 years, the panelist said. The U.S. air traffic industry is one of the largest in the world, according to a report by the International Air Transport Association (IATA) The IATA says it has a long way to go before it can be considered a major player in the global aviation market. Panelists described the air traffic controllers’ union as also resistant to change. According to one panelist, for example, the union delayed the adoption of technologies such as the User Request Evaluation Tool (URET) because some controllers saw them as a threat. Management and Budget (OMB), and Congress, were also on the panel to discuss the future of air traffic control in the U.S. A number of panelists said they were concerned about the union’s ability to adapt to new technologies. The union is “very political,’ several panelists asserted, and one panelist charged that it was “hindering the progress’ of a performance-based organization. Another panelist cited the union’s long-term opposition to the implementation of a software program that tracks productivity, a key measure for a performance. organization. To see the rest of the panelists' comments, go to CNN.com/CNN iReport. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. The ATO is seeking information on technologies and procedures that other countries have already developed. The information could help the ATO control costs, as well as help compensate for its lack of technical expertise. “We should be using and sharing” the technologies that have already been invented, one panelist said. According to a report by the U.N.’s International Commission on Taxation, the cost of international tax evasion is currently at an estimated $1.2 trillion. already running in countries, their performance, and their cost. Sharing information on technical standards with international organizations could also help the ATO avoid costly investments in technologies. A shared vision is crucial for a globally based air traffic system, one panelist said. The ATO is seeking to develop a shared vision for the future of air traffic in the world, a panelist told the CNN Air Traffic Safety Summit in New York on Tuesday. The summit is expected to last until the end of the month. the proposals and identify any big roadblocks. Hiring skilled engineers instead of relying on contractors might enable the ATO to develop systems more economically and efficiently, one panelist suggested. This panelist described how a foreign air traffic services organization develops new ATC systems in-house and seldom uses contractors. It now panelist, ongoing government oversight would ensure the safety of contracted operations, and “staged outsourcing” of the NAS’s functions might build confidence in the private sector. A technical advisory board made up of system engineers could review proposals for FAA and demand the kinds of data and tests needed to scrub technologies that they have already adopted. The ATO could take some immediate steps to address this deficiency, including the following: A review of the FAA’s proposal for a ‘scrubbed’ scrubbing tool. A request to the FAA for more information on how it would scrub the scrubber. A requirement for the FAA to provide more information about what it would take to scrub scrubbers. said. If every country or continent had its own technical standards, an international system could not function effectively. The following provides additional information from the ATO’s COO and from previous GAO reports and work in the U.S., the GAO said. The ATO said it was working on a plan to make the switch to a single global standard. The U.N. said the move was a step in the right direction, but that it was still in the early stages. Augmentation System (WAAS), as well as more “straightforward’ ones such as the Standard Terminal Automation Replacement System (STARS) and the Next-Generation Air-to-Ground Communications System (NEXCOM)—had fundamental system engineering technical issues that were not identified early in the program. The risks were not mitigated, and the programs experienced significant cost growth, according to the report. The report was published by the Center for Defense Information at the University of Texas at Austin. Area Augmentation System, Controller-Pilot Data Link Communications, and Next-Generation Air-to-Ground Communications System. FAA reduced funding for them in fiscal year 2005 budget request. ATO says it plans to continue this phased approach to acquiring new systems that do equip. customers. Now, during the first phase, FAA will acquire new systems in a cost-effective manner, the ATO said. The ATO plans to acquire the new systems through a phased approach, the agency said. FAA does not apply rigorous systems engineering expertise early in nonadvocate technical reviews of project proposals, panelist says. As a result, a number of FAA’s programs—including complex ones such as the Wide Area - are not properly vetted, he adds. FAA does not use technical safety risk as a key technical parameter, panelists say. FAA doesn't use rigorous systems Engineering Expertise early in Nonadvocate Technical Reviews of Project Proposals to scrub them for potential issues. relies on the early and ongoing investment of stakeholders, who review the progress of new projects regularly and identify critical omissions. Reviews of three projects with cost, schedule, and performance issues that our reports had identified—the Local, the Metro, and the City of New York—were carried out. The Local and the Metro were completed on time and on schedule. The City of new York was completed on schedule and on time on the Metro. The city was also on track to meet its goals for the year.  Regulatory and procedural changes to allow the use of existing cost-saving technologies. Contracting with the private sector to provide certain air traffic services. obtaining information on other countries’ ATC technologies and on international technical standards. realistically be funded and to review and cut its programs in light of the current and regulatory changes. Take advantage of existing technologies to increase capacity, pilot test contracts with theprivate sector. obtain information on technologies and procedures developed in other countries that could be used in the United States. FAA has already taken some steps to control the costs of ATC modernization. It has adopted the phased approach to implementing new ATC systems that it used under Free Flight Phase 1. This approach is called “build a little, test a little.” This approach will be used to review its long-term A TC modernization priorities. It will also look at the cost-effectiveness of the new systems in the long term. It is expected to make a decision by the end of the year. stressed the importance of progressing by small steps within the existing system. Such small steps might include obtaining good performance and cost information, scoping programs in accordance with current budget projections, contracting out some air traffic services, and obtaining outside expertise from systems engineers. "We need to make sure that we have the best possible system in place," he said. "It's a very complex system, and we need to be able to work with each other to get it right," he added. "That's what we're trying to do." the technologies have already been retired to the desert, one panelist said. In addition, pilots have been trained to use the technologies, and the technologies are already being used in some other countries. Canada, where a private airline company (West Jet) developed implementation procedures in collaboration with the Canadian government. The technologies are expected to be commercially available in the next five to 10 years, according to the panelists at the conference in Las Vegas. The conference will be webcast live from the Las Vegas Convention and Exhibition Center. The air navigation service business worldwide spends $3 billion to $4 billion a year on writing code for air traffic management software. “At least half of that’s already been invented and…works just fine somewhere else.” on the systems that are used, he says. The software is used to manage air traffic in the U.S. and around the world. It is also used in Europe and the Middle East, where it is used in air traffic control systems. panelists said, they may be out of date. Despite resource constraints and major differences in air traffic demand. The political process influences budget decisions in the administration as well as in Congress, some panelists said. According to one panelist, Congress has generally supported FAA’s modernization program, according to a panelist on the panel. The FAA has not responded to requests for comment on this article. For confidential support, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. managing the increased air traffic. Congress, one panelist said, rather than integrated, organized, and periodically revised. Another panelist observed that FAA asks for more than it can get and then carries the difference over from year to year, creating “a bow wave” of unfunded requests for capital projects that it doesn’t have the money for. The FAA’s annual budget request for fiscal year 2015 is $1.2 billion. The budget for Fiscal Year 2016 is $2.1 billion. they believed would impede or prevent success. Among the obstacles they cited were the counterproductive incentives inherent in the budget process. The government’s refusal to allow new air traffic technologies to be used, and opposition to organizational and technological change. It was important, one panelist said, to overcome this opposition and overcome the opposition to technological change, the panelist added. The panel also discussed ways to improve air traffic safety in the U.S. and around the world, and the role of the federal government in this effort. “the technology that exists on airplanes today to do the job.” He suggested that the private sector could assume the cost of capitalizing the equipment, but “the government’s got to allow that technology to be used, and it hasn’t” Although one panelist emphasized the importance of conducting thorough technical evaluations, the panelist also said that the government needs to do more to ensure that the technology is used properly in the future, and that it is safe to fly. technical benchmarks to promote efficient development. Business models that take into account operational trends. Incentives to help users overcome cost barriers to acquiring new technologies. As one panelist said, “we have to target the future mix of real and virtual.’ ‘We have totarget the future Mix of Real and Virtual,’’ said a panelist. ‘Real’ and ‘Virtual’ are the key to the future of air travel, he said. A user fee system could be implemented in a government or a public-private type of air traffic services organization. One panelist cautioned, it would be all-consuming and would require the to be built into the system. The ones who pay the bills are the ones you respond to and serve, the panelist said. Most panelists correctly assumed that legislation would be required to institute a user feeSystem. The fee question, once raised, would beAll-consuming. The fees would be built in to the system, he said. Air traffic services provider could simply raise the fee when costs increased and the users would have to pay, since the service is a monopoly. Another panelist pointed out that implementing a user fee alone would not guarantee efficiency. Some method of controlling costs would have have to be found, the panelists said. The panelists discussed whether users should pay only for the incremental costs of the services they use, as most users would argue, or whether some cross-subsidies should continue. They also discussed whether the costs of activities in the ATC system operated by the Department of the Air Force should be allocated. would have to consider what it was incentivizing through user fees. For example, if the fee was based on weight, he said, it might “incentivize even smaller planes and more planes,” thereby increasing demands on the ATC system’s capacity. Another issue that would have to be worked out, is how the fee would be calculated. For more information, go to: http://www.airtrafficcouncil.org/ctc-fees. getting approval from government to spend its budget. Revenue bonding based on a new user fee stream would create an “alternative to capital starvation,” one panelist said. Even if theuser fee stream initially produced no more revenue than the airlines are now paying in aviation-related taxes, he said, it would be an ‘alternative’ to capital starved capital spending, the panelist added. “It’s an alternative to capital starving,’’ he said. disproportionate, he said. “We can’t keep treating airplanes that need 100 cubic miles of airspace the same from a cost and benefit point of view,” he says. The FAA establishes the same safety standards for aircraft of all sizes, he says, because they are of the same size. In the U.S., the FAA has the authority to regulate the amount of airspace that can be used for air traffic. In Europe, the European Union has the power to regulate air traffic, but not airspace. The procedure, invisible to passengers, is called Reduced Vertical Separation Minimum and is expected to save airlines $400. FAA doubled the airspace routes between 29,000 and 41,000 feet in January 2005 by spacing aircraft 1,000ft apart instead of 2,000foot. The procedure is called reduced vertical separation minimum and is called RVPM. It is not expected to be implemented in the U.S. until at least 2015. For more information, go to www.fAA.gov. instituted arms’ length regulation if they did not have it already. “We remain one of the few places that somehow thinks that self-regulation is a good idea, in spite of sort of overwhelming evidence in lots of arenas that it's not a very good idea," he said. The following is a transcript of an interview with the mayor of New York City, Bill de Blasio, in which he was asked about arms' length regulation in the city. De Blasio: “I’m not sure I’ve ever seen such a strong argument for it,” he said, “but I think it’s a good one.” FAA created the Air Traffic Safety Oversight Service (AOV) in March 2004. The AOV is responsible for ensuring the safety of changes to air traffic standards and procedures. The establishment of the AOV responds directly to a recommendation by the 1997 National Civil Aviation Review Commission that safety oversight of FAA’s traffic function be provided by a separate part of the agency. Although both organizations remain within FAA, under FAA, the goal is not clear how they will work together in the future. technical expertise it needs; achieve cost efficiencies; and offer better, more responsive service. Restructuring could resolve the conflict of interest inherent in FAA’s dual responsibility as the regulator and the operator of air traffic services, panelists said. Congress authorized the ATO's creation and generally implemented the Mineta Commission’‘s Mineta Report on Air Traffic Service Restructures’ on June 14, 2012. The ATO was created by Congress on June 13, 2012, and the FAA was created on June 15, 2013. the ATO’s creation did not address the structural conflict of interest that exists because FAA is both the regulator and the operator of air traffic services. “We didn’t have arms length regulation ofAir traffic control in FAA,” he said. ‘And the ATO didn't do anything to accomplish that.’ ‘We didn't have arms Length Regulation of Air Traffic Control in FAA,' he said, ‘and the ATo didn‘t do anything.” “fatal” to implement the fee in any way that did not make the ATO financially independent of Congress, he said. Once the airlines and general aviation users started to pay a fee to finance the ATo, then “the ATO should be held accountable to them,” he added. “FAA should not be. responsible for the financial health of the U.S. air traffic control system,’’ the FAA said in a statement. his view, FAA needs to revise its approach to assessing and balancing risks. He maintained that the role of regulatory management on the evolution of the ATC system has been underestimated and called for significant investment in understanding risk management. The other panelist who expressed concerns about the government’s regulatory was from the U.S. Federal Aviation Authority (FAA) He said the agency needs to revamp its approach and focus on risk management rather than risk assessment. The FAA has been accused of over-regulating the air traffic system. commercial systems have a shorter economic service life than the systems that FAA designs. The ATO could profitably take advantage of the experiences of other countries’ air traffic organizations, one panelist said. The panelists, who generally assumed that the private sector could provide flight service station services and other air traffic services more efficiently than the government, suggested that if contracting for flight service stations services proved to be effective, FAA could do the same for the ATO. The FAA has not commented on the panel's suggestions. act like a business when it is not really one, suggested that it was only at the margins that the creators of the ATO had replicated a business. According to him, theATO is still largely a government organization and therefore remains subject to most governmental constraints. The ATO has been criticised for its lack of transparency, accountability and transparency in its operations. It has also been accused of being too secretive and of failing to share information about its operations with the public. It was also criticised for not disclosing the number of ATO staff who had been sacked. ATO could reap a “transition dividend” during the first 5 or 10 years after the bonds are issued, limiting its annual outlays to the debt service on the bonds. To facilitate the airlines’ recovery, the ATO could cut what the airlines pay and “still have a robust modernization,” he said. The ATO is the government’s debt management agency. It is responsible for paying the debts owed by airlines to the European Union, the U.S. and Canada. approach argued that navigational technology is evolving and shifting from ground-based to cockpit-based systems. He maintained that “you’ve got to get aircraft closer and closer together to be able to increase capacity,” and said that the government should allow the ATO to change its policies on aircraft separation to permit closer flights. He argued that ‘You’re going to have to get more and more aircraft closer together’ and that this would increase capacity. integration of near-term and long-term planning. According to the ATO’s COO, the restructuring of U.S. air traffic services that has taken place thus far. constitutes “the first building block” of the longer term effort to transform the aviation system envisioned, he says. The ATO's COO says the establishment of a performance-based air traffic organization is the first step in the effort to reform the U.N.'s air traffic system. third rail of aviation politics. Another panelist emphasized the importance of starting to plan now to accommodate the airplanes that are being bought today to provide service for the next generation, which he variously estimated at 20, 30, or 40 years. For example, one panelist said that the ATO needed to start planning for the “next generation’s” need for a new generation of airliners, which could take up to 40 years to reach full capacity. The ATO also needs to plan for the future needs of its fleet of aircraft, which will need to be replaced in the next 20 to 30 years. control flights. plan is a response to a congressional mandate, based on a recommendation we made in 2002, that FAA develop a plan for addressing an impending wave of controller retirements outages. The ATO can then compare and analyze these costs to identify positive and negative factors affecting performance and productivity. One panelist, who observed that operating costs account for about three-quarters of the ATO’s total costs, suggested that the upcoming wave of air traffic controllers retirements should be considered. contract for other air traffic services, such as oceanic, night, en route, or airways facilities services. The A-76 process would then serve not only as a way of saving money but also as “a pilot program for how things could get done,” one panelist said. In the view of another, the process would be a “pilot program” for how “things could be done.” in a different way, the panelist added.