as at DOE’s Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory and Idaho National Laboratory. We also observed a demonstration of the capabilities of the Interagency Modeling and Atmospheric Assessment Center. In addition, we reviewed reports and documents from these agencies, national laboratories, and research centers that addressed methods and technologies for analysis and environmental remediation of hazardous waste. We concluded with a list of questions and answers that we would like to hear from the public about their experiences with hazardous waste in the U.S. and abroad. an examination of federal, state, local, and private laboratory capabilities to conduct environmental sampling and testing in order to determine the nationwide laboratory capacity. EPA determined that there was a significant capacity and competency gap in efficiently testing for chemical, biological, and radiochemical-nuclear agents. The agency also determined that the U.S. had a shortage of qualified lab technicians to test for the agents in question. The U.N. Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Prevention and Control is responsible for testing the agents. Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, current research has focused on predicting the effects of radiation release in urban settings through simulation, small-scale testing, and theory. EPA’s National Homeland Security Research Center informed us that while there are available methods that have proven successful for cleaning up various contaminated areas, it is important to be aware of the potential for radiation to be released into the air and water in an urban setting. The agency is currently conducting research to determine how best to clean up contaminated areas in urban areas. EPA documentation, the gap in laboratory capacity would result in the lack of timely, reliable, and interpretable data, which would delay national and local response and recovery activities. EPA has documented that it is currently establishing an all-media Environmental Response Laboratory Network, and it is also conducting a demonstration project, according to the documentation. EPA documented that the agency is also working on a prototype laboratory network to test the network's ability to collect and analyze environmental data in the event of a major disaster. and Atmospheric Assessment Center (IMAAC), the predictive capabilities of existing plume models are not at the resolution necessary to produce this added value for urban areas. This official told us while there are data about debris dispersal from building, modeling for this purpose is only theoretical at this point. It is not known if the city will be able to use plume modeling in the future, the official said. The city has not yet decided if it will use plumes to predict the impact of climate change. existing plume models are not entirely applicable to urban areas. EPA added that other types of contamination, such as in the drinking water and wastewater infrastructure, would also involve very complex systems that would be difficult to model. There are some limitations in federal capabilities to complete laboratory validation, the agency said in a statement. It added that there are also concerns about the impact on the environment and health of the people living in the affected areas. The EPA said it is working to address these concerns and will release more information in the future. The current predictive capability of various plume models is not sufficient, and may never be sufficient to reduce the time necessary to fully characterize the extent of contaminated areas. EPA agreed that characterization of areas contaminated with radioactive materials from RDD or IND incidents would be challenging. However, they contend that plume modeling will never replace the need for actual measurements for radioactive contamination. In commenting on a draft of this report, EPA agreed with the assertion that characterization will be challenging because of the time needed to characterize the areas. demolition and weapons testing, there is little research data on the likely dispersal patterns of concrete, asphalt, and glass that would result from use of an RDD or IND. Some federal agency officials question the need to improve the predictive capabilities of these plume models. For example, the DHS questions the need for the RDD to be able to predict the impact of an explosion on a building or structure. The RDD can be used to predict whether a structure will be damaged or destroyed by an explosion. meeting the laboratory evaluation needs for an RDD scenario. In addition, while EPA did not conduct a detailed assessment of the national planning scenario for an IND incident, it determined that such an incident could contaminate 3,000 square miles and require potentially millions of samples for laboratory analysis. According to the EPA, such an event could require the testing of millions of gallons of water, as well as millions of pounds of soil and plant samples. The agency says it has no immediate plans to respond to the report. material and that create more debris requiring disposal—leading to increased costs. There are also limitations in federal capabilities to help address, in a timely manner, the magnitude of cleanup. The U.S. agency has studies under way to determine the efficacy of high-pressure hosing for removing contamination from porous urban surfaces that would result from the terrorists’ use of an RDD using certain radioisotopes. It is also working to determine how best to remove cesium-137 from a building. environmental cleanup have only been applied in localized areas, as an RDD or IND incident has not occurred. Decontamination research is currently under way to gain a better understanding of potential applications of current and experimental methods and technologies for primarily RDD incidents. According to decontamination experts at DOE’s RDD and IND incidents recommends a framework for incident cleanup and recovery using a process called “site-specific optimization” The guidance recommends that this process include potential future land uses, technical feasibility, costs, cost-effectiveness and public accountability. types of contamination, more research is needed to develop standard national guidance for their efficacious application in urban areas. FEMA’s proposed process for determining cleanup standards during the recovery phase for RDD and IND incidents has not been fully exercised, although there was a tabletop discussion among government officials in a June 2009 exercise. EPA has conducted to enhance the capacity and capability of public laboratories. According to a decontamination expert at the Idaho National Laboratory, experience has shown that without guidance and discussion early in the response phase, of contaminated areas and levels of cleanup. of the radioactive waste that would arise from RDD or IND incidents. The issue is not only ownership, but where to put the radioactive debris and how to cover the cost of storage and disposal. In this regard, the United Kingdom has a clearance rule for allowing very low-level radioactive waste to be disposed of in less expensive ways. The National Science and Technology Council’s 2008 report found gaps in the U.S. capabilities to effectively remove and dispose of radioactive debris in the event of an RDD. waste disposal facilities for waste generated by users of radioactive materials in their states. Another issue is paying for waste disposal. In the Superfund program, EPA can bill the responsible party, if known. However, covering the cost of waste disposal would be complicated in the case of RDD or IND. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. For support in the U.S., call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. phases of an RDD incident, as this incident is expected to present a challenge for these coordinators. This guidance addresses possible decontamination approaches for eight types of radionuclides. As previously mentioned, federal agencies’ current approaches to analysis and to analyze and clean up areas contaminated with radioactivity. In Exercise Streetwise, a specialized contractor was fully tested at the venue on its capability to detect andClean up actual radioactive materials. According to a senior official with the Government Decontamination Service,  DOE has invested hundreds of millions of dollars in research, development, and that would be associated with RDD or IND incidents. There are some limitations in the capability of federal agencies to efficiently characterize the full extent of the areas contaminated with radioactive materials in the event of an incident. limitations in federal capabilities to complete some analysis and environmental cleanup activities might slow the recovery from an incident, the authors say. The authors conclude that RDD and IND incidents should be treated with the same level of care as other environmental incidents. residue from an RDD or other radiological incidents can have significant impacts on cleanup costs and restoration timelines. EPA officials informed us that its Office of Research and Development is currently developing a suite of decision support tools for the management of RDDs and other incidents. The agency is also developing tools to help the public better understand the impact of R DDs on the environment and the economy. The report is expected to be released later this year or early next year, EPA officials said. In the aftermath of the terrorist attacks on September 11, 2001, security experts have raised concerns that terrorists may try to smuggle radiological or nuclear materials into the United States. These experts have also raised fears that terrorists could obtain radioactive materials used in the production of an RDD or IND. These concerns have also been raised by the U.S. State Department and the Department of Homeland Security. The U.N. Security Council has also raised concerns over the possibility of terrorists smuggling radiological and nuclear materials. as weapons of terrorism. In contrast, detonating an IND would require a terrorist group to obtain nuclear weapons material. Another form of nuclear terrorism occurred with the dispersal of radioactive materials in the 1980s. The U.S. government says it has no plans to use nuclear weapons as a weapon of war in the near future. The White House says it is working on a plan to reduce the threat of nuclear attacks in the United States to a minimum of one per cent of the population. Chechen separatists placed a canister containing cesium-137 in a Moscow park in the mid- 1990s. Although the device was not detonated and no radioactive material was dispersed, the incident demonstrated that terrorists have the capability and willingness to use radiological materials. Terrorists have detonated a dirty bomb in a city, Chechen separatists have placed aCanister of Cesium in a park in Chechnya. Chechen terrorists have detonated dirty bombs in the past, including a bomb that exploded in the middle of a street. in medicine, research, agriculture, and industry to construct an RDD, or dirty bomb. This radioactive material is encapsulated, or sealed, in metal, such as stainless steel, titanium, or platinum, to prevent its dispersal. Sealed sources are used throughout the U.S. and around the world, including in Europe and the Middle East. In the United States, sealed sources are commonly called a sealed radiological source. They are used to protect against the spread of radioactive material. and structures needed to address a radiological release from a civil or defense nuclear reactor, as well as incidents involving nuclear weapons and special nuclear materials in transit. It is also considered applicable to recovery from RDD and IND incidents. Among other things, it provides guidance on the formation of a nuclear disaster recovery team. It also provides advice on how to deal with the aftermath of an RDD or IND incident, such as the release of radioactive material from a nuclear reactor or a nuclear weapons facility. other countries in equipment designed to, among other things, diagnose and treat illnesses, preserve food, detect flaws in pipeline welds, and determine the moisture content of soil. Depending on their use, sealed sources contain different types of radioactive material, such as strontium- 90, cobalt-60, cesium-137, plutonium-238, and plutonium-239. While no other countries in the world have nuclear weapons, the U.S. has a nuclear weapons program. from some of the cities sought better guidance on monitoring radioactivity levels, acceptable cleanup standards, and management of radioactive waste. Most respondents from cities expressed the need for greater planning interactions with the federal government and more exercises to test recovery plans. Many federal regional office officials were not certain about which environmental cleanup methods and technologies would be the most successful in removing radioactive materials from areas contaminated with radioactive materials. The need for guidance on the application has left emergency management officials in the cities and states confused about which federal agency to turn to for assistance.  GAO staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix IV. In our review, we examined the extent to which federal agencies are planning to fulfill their responsibilities to help cities and states clean up areas contaminated with radiation materials from radiological dispersal. We examined (1) the extent of the federal agencies' plans to help clean up contaminated areas, and (2) how they would pay for the clean-up. The full report can be found at: http://www.gao.org/news/press-releases/2013/01/30/gao-press-release-2013-01-30. because federal agencies have only carried out environmental cleanup of localized areas of radioactive materials. Some limitations exist in federal capabilities to help address the magnitude of the cleanup that would follow these incidents. Some federal agencies, such as DOE and EPA, have substantial experience using various analysis and that can address radioactive contamination. DOD has also played a major role in studying potential applications for innovative technologies for its Superfund sites. As a result of federal agencies’ experience with radioactive materials, there is evidence that the agencies could effectively carry out the analysis and environmental cleanup. radiological, and nuclear materials. This service was established because the national government recognized that it would not be cost-effective for each responsible authority to maintain the level of expertise needed for the analysis and environmental cleanup of affected areas. Given that the release of such material would release such material, the service was set up to help with the cleanup of the affected areas in the event of a nuclear or radiological release. The service is funded by the U.S. Department of Energy and the European Union. and experiences drawn from national and international sources. For example, a Government Decontamination Service official told us that this agency is currently engaged in learning more about how to deal with the disposal of radioactive waste that has no known owner. It might be similar to the radioactive waste stemming from the Chernobyl disaster in the 1990s and early 2000s, the official said. For more information, go to www.cnn.com/2013/01/26/nuclear-waste-disposal/index.html. In this case, the imbibing (absorbing) properties of some porous surfaces such as concrete would actually cause this soluble radioactive isotope to penetrate even further into surfaces. This would make subsequent decontamination more difficult and destructive. A senior EPA official with the Office of Radiation and Indoor Air told us that the permeability of concrete makes it more difficult to decontaminate. The EPA says concrete is a good material to use in a nuclear plant because of its low levels of radiation. incidents. One additional complicating factor would be the mixing and problematic separation of radioactive, biological, and chemical materials in the debris that would stem from such incidents. According to a recent research paper on disposal issues, the proper characterization of the quantity, properties, and level of debris contamination and decontamination should be done before any debris is removed from the site. The proper characterization should include the quantity and properties of the debris, as well as the level of contamination, according to the paper.  DOE’s National Nuclear Security Administration (NNSA) has developed operational plans, orders, and publications on how to respond to a radiological or nuclear incident. NNSA has developed various FRMAC manuals to guide operational, assessment and monitoring activities. In addition, EPA's National Decontamination restrictions on accessing possible disposal facilities for the radioactive debris stemming from such incidents. According to NNSA officials, disposal sites currently can only accept low-level and mixed low- level radioactive waste from its own and DOD facilities under certain circumstances. Currently, there is only one low-level radioactive waste disposal site located in Utah that could be used by most states for radioactive debris disposal. A limited number of states have access to low- level radioactive disposal sites. About access to commercial radioactive waste sites in the event of such an incident.about access toCommercial radioactive waste Sites in the Event of Such an incident in the U.S. about access to such a site in the case of such a incident in a U.N. member state. EPA has published inventories of radiological methods and technology guidance for contaminated sites, surfaces, and media. The cleanup technologies are generally grouped into decontamination technologies depending on the level of desired cleanup. EPA has also published guidance for its On-Scene Coordinators at each regional office to aid in their response to a radiological incident. This guidance covers the full range of rad biological incidents, but its focus is primarily on the early to intermediate stages of a release. The guidance is intended to assist regional offices in planning and executing their response. a contractor might use a decontamination technology during this phase for no other reason than it was used before in an unrelated situation. This situation might lead to selecting environmental cleanup technologies that generate waste types that are more difficult to remove than the original Laboratory. An important consideration in decontamin is the starting level of radioactivity and desired ending level. No technology removes all of the contamination all the time; some technologies are more efficient than others at removing certain kinds of contamination. The current DHS planning guidance for decontamination is as follows: affected area, it did not intend this guidance to be either prescriptive or an operational manual. In 2005, the United Kingdom established a special Government Decontamination Service to address issues associated with contaminated land, buildings, open space, infrastructure, and transportation routes from both deliberate and accidental releases of chemical, biological, and radioactive materials. The U.K. government has not issued a guidance manual on how to clean up contaminated areas of the country. The UK government has said it does not intend to issue guidance on cleaning up contaminated area. within greater London, given the international nature of the event, even though the incident was classified as a hazardous materials event rather then a terrorist incident. According to the recovery planning process, the city selected a contractor from the Government Decontamination Service list of specialized contractors for the remediation work. The work was to be completed by the end of the year, according to the city's recovery plan. The city has yet to announce a date for the completion of the work, but it is expected to be in the next few months. contractors, the service has identified three specialized contractors that have capabilities to address various decontamination scenarios. A specialized contractor is invited to visit the location and receives a briefing on the incident scenario. The Government Decontamination Service then assesses the contractor’s approach and recommendations to identify issues, strengths, and weaknesses. The service develops improvement plans, backed with exercises, to address identified performance gaps. For example, in December 2007, the government tested and evaluated the capabilities of one of its specialized contractors. created out of recognition that it would not be cost- effective for each entity to maintain the level of expertise needed for cleaning up chemical, biological, radiological, and nuclear materials. The Government Decontamination Service has no statutory powers itself, nor does it directly provide analysis and environmental remediation services. Instead, it provides advice and guidance to local governments, and maintains and builds a framework of specialized contractors to conduct these activities. It also advises the national government regarding “you cannot get a realistic picture of recovery needs and issues through only tabletop exercises” and used a model contract developed by this service for this purpose. This model contract contains allowable costs per unit, equipment charges, and charge out rates for the emergency response. Under the contract, the selected specialized contractor agrees to start off with nonaggressive, simple, and less expensive decontamination approaches, and to use nonaggressive and simple approaches to decontaminate the site. The contract also includes allowable costs and charges per unit and equipment charges for the Emergency Response Team, as well as charges for decontaminations. maintains and builds a framework of specialized analysis and environmental cleanup contractors, and advises the national government regarding response capabilities. This service implemented its responsibilities by assisting the City of Westminster respond to the analysis and cleanup needs following the November 2006 polonium poisoning of Alexander Litvinenko. Developed online for response and recovery planning and preparation, and we visited a decontamination contractor that performed environmental remediation activities in the aftermath of the 2006 radioactive poisoning in London. We also reviewed documents provided by these officials and from other sources to obtain a better understanding of this response capability. Alexander Litvinenko, a former officer of the Russian Federal Security Service, was poisoned with a milligram of polonium-210. The dispersal of thePolonium by the perpetrators of the 2006 assassination led to a series of events in London during November and December 2006. The former officer was killed by a dose of the radioactive substance about the size of a grain of salt. The poisoning was believed to have been the work of a Russian intelligence operative. The Russian government has never claimed responsibility for the killing. 12 locations showed signs of polonium, including a restaurant, hotel room, soccer stadium, and an eastbound British Airways plane. British investigators also identified over 1,000 people who might have been in various ways exposed to the pol onium. Health officials tested 738 of them and found that 137 had reportable levels of this substance, although few of these individuals turned out to have levels that warranted medical attention. The decontamination activities at these sites spanned 19 and involved 19 people. The victim's poisoning was detected only after he was hospitalized for a few weeks and tested for symptoms of radiation exposure. Following the poisoning, forensic investigators examined 47 sites across London for traces of the poison. The crime and the victim resulted in widespread contamination across London and even abroad. The victim was found to have suffered from hair loss as a result of the poisoning. The poisoning was discovered after the victim was taken to a hospital for treatment for hair loss and was tested for radiation exposure because of his hair loss. usually envisioned as an RDD incident, the aftermath of the 2006 polonium poisoning incident in London had many of the characteristics of an R DD incident. Because of its experience in dealing with RDD incidents, the UK has been able to better prepare for larger RDD or IND incidents. Appendix III contains a more thorough review of the approach to recovering from RDD and IND incidents, including testing plans in the November 2008 recovery exercise. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. then apply more sophisticated approaches, if necessary, to meet the desired cleanup level. The actual payments for these services were made by the owners of properties, such as a hotel where the perpetrators of the crime had stayed, that were contaminated with polonium. However, the cleaning up of public premises was not part of the agreement. The cleaning up was carried out by a team of experts based at the University of California, Los Angeles. The clean-up was completed by a group of experts led by a former member of the US Geological Survey. Liberty RadEx is set to take place April 26-30, 2010, in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. This exercise is to focus on a few technical recovery issues involving interagency planning session held in Philadelphia on October 28-29, 2009, to prepare for the Liberty RadEx recovery exercise. To determine what is known about the federal government’s capabilities to effectively clean up areas contaminated with radioactive materials from RDD and IND incidents, we want to find out what the EPA can do. forward to the lessons to be learned from the upcoming Liberty RadEx exercise in 2010. Officials believe the exercise should provide significant insights into the issues under discussion. There are also limitations in federal capabilities to help state and local governments address the interim storage and eventual disposal. The exercise will take place in the summer of 2010 in Washington, D.C. and is expected to last for up to three days. It is the first time the U.S. has held such a large-scale exercise. A recovery discussion following an RDD or IND response exercise has typically not occurred because of the time needed to fully address the response objectives of the exercise. The most recent RDD response exercise, based in Albany, New York, set aside more time for this discussion. It is uncertain whether federal capability is sufficient to effectively clean up from RDD and IND incidents. The National Exercise Schedule has listed two planned IND response exercises in 2010 that are to have some recovery components. In addition to this RDD recovery exercise, the National Exercise schedule has listed 2 planned IND responses in 2010. exercises on a regional basis so the cities within the region might better exchange lessons learned. Respondents from most cities (11 of 13) and their states (7 of 10) said that they planned to conduct RDD and IND recovery exercises in the future. Emergency management officials representing almost all of the exercises were based on national planning scenarios. The GAO determined in our April 2009 report (GAO-09-369) that this database is unreliable. We asked each city, state, and federal regional office in our survey to list R DD and recovery exercises that had taken place. scheduling system for federal, state, and local exercises. 94 RDD or IND response exercises planned and carried out by these authorities from May 2003 through September 2009. These exercises were identified as either full-scale, tabletop, workshop, seminar, functional, or a drill. Some locations have conducted several of them over the years, and some locations have done several over the course of a few months or even a few weeks. The exercises were carried out in a variety of formats, including tabletop, tabletop and workshop. place in their jurisdiction, as well as any plans for future exercises to check the accuracy of the federal exercise database. In addition, we attended the first full-scale recovery tabletop exercise— Empire09—based on an RDD incident scenario in Albany, New York that was conducted on June 16-17, 2009. We also attended a full-sized RDD exercise in the state of New Jersey in June 2009. In all, the exercise involved more than 1,000 participants. It took place in the city of Albany and the town of Schenectady. 2008. This exercise, involving several hundred participants, provided a unique opportunity to examine and test the recovery planning process within the urgency of a compressed time frame. The exercise, which took place 6 weeks after the response exercise, had participants address three scenarios: rural contamination of crops and livestock, contamination of the urban transit infrastructure, and disruption of the water supply. On day one of the 2-day recovery exercise, participants addressed the contamination of livestock and crops and the disruption of water supplies. with the cleanup from this incident and from other actions the United Kingdom has taken to prepare for an RDD or IND attack. We met with officials from this country to obtain a better understanding of their approach to recovery preparedness. These officials told us that the attention to recovery conclusions based on our audit objectives. Table 1 provides a brief summary of four RDD exercises, since May 2003, which contained recovery objectives including a planned exercise for April 2010. The United Kingdom provides an example of another country’s efforts to prepare to recover from a terrorist attack. In November 2008, Exercise Green Star tested government capabilities to recover from a terrorist attack based on RDD scenarios. This was the first time that complex recovery issues had been considered in a national-level exercise. In this exercise, several hundred participants were wholly focused on recovery.in figure 1. In figure 1, in the first few minutes of the exercise, the participants were told that they had only a few hours to live. In the second and third minutes, they were told they had just a few minutes to live, and that they would be able to go back to their homes. Waste and debris from a variety of different events, including radiological incidents. Concerns about limitations in these federal capabilities were expressed by many city, state, and federal regional office emergency management officials. Respondents representing most of the cities (9 of 13), states (7 of 10), concerned about current federal capabilities to handle multiple and simultaneous RDD incidents across the country. The National Science and Technology Council’s 2008 report also found that cities and states would need to rely heavily on a strong federal response to a radiological incident. areas contaminated with radioactive materials as well as some that specifically discussed their potential use for RDD or IND incidents. We included questions about the potential use of these approaches in our semistructured phone survey of federal, state, and city emergency management officials. We conducted a content analysis of these questions to identify patterns in the responses, that is, what types of responses were most relevant to the respondents. To identify suggestions from government emergency management. officials for improving federal preparedness to help cities and states recover from RDD and IND incidents, we included relevant questions. 13 cities considered to be at high or medium risk to such attacks and their states, and all federal FEMA and EPA regional offices. reviewed information on the number and type of RDD and IND response and recovery exercises that have been conducted from May 2003 through September 2009. Reviewed information about the type of exercises conducted between May 2003 and September 2009, and the number of people involved in each exercise, as well as how many people were involved in the exercise and how long it took to complete it. support function annexes and nuclear and radiological incident annexes, as well as other planning documents. In addition, after speaking with emergency management officials in San Francisco and comparable state officials near Sacramento, California, we developed a semistructured telephone survey instrument—pretested in Denver, Colorado. We wanted to obtain the perspectives of city officials in order to get a better idea of what the city was thinking and what it wanted to do in the event of an emergency. We also wanted to learn more about the city's emergency planning process. GAO provided DHS, DOE, and EPA with a draft of this report for their review and comment. FEMA regional offices expressed concerns about the capabilities of federal agencies. DHS and FEMA concurred with the recommendations in the report. For example, respondents from agencies and their contractors to conduct effective and efficient analysis and environmental cleanup activities associated with RDD and IND incidents. DOE, through NNSA, agreed to the recommendations and provided a draft report to DHS and EPA for them to review and review. radioactive materials from RDD and IND incidents. We reviewed pertinent federal law, presidential directives, and other executive guidance. We interviewed cognizant officials from the Department of Homeland Security (DHS), Department of Energy (DOE), Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), Federal Emergency Management Administration (FEMA), and Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) We conducted a survey of reviewed pertinent guidance on available methods and technologies. We spoke with subject matter experts at the National Nuclear Security Administration, EPA, and FEMA, as well as national laboratories. after RDD or IND incidents, in coordination with affected state and local governments. The June 2008 nuclear and radiological incident annex describes federal responsibilities and provides some operational guidance for pertinent response activities. In addition, we are providing information on actions taken in the United Kingdom to prepare for recovering from RDD and IND incidents. To determine the extent to which federal agencies are planning to fulfill their responsibilities to help cities and states clean up areas contaminated with radioactive materials, visit www.dhs.gov/nuclear-and-radiological-incidents. cities and states in our survey offered some opinions on the need for intelligence information on RDD and IND threats. They generally said that sharing information with law enforcement agencies is necessary for appropriate planning for RDD or IND incidents. Law enforcement fusion centers were a step in the right direction, the cities and states said. For confidential support call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. For support on suicide matters call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch or click here. Few city respondents (3 of 13) indicated that their recovery plans included preparations for an RDD incident. Completing the analysis and environmental cleanup of areas contaminated with radioactive materials would be among the first steps in the recovery process after the initial response to save lives. According to EPA in the United Kingdom, Recovering from RDD or IND incidents would likely be difficult and lengthy. A faster recovery—meaning people can return to their normal lives - would be a better outcome for the public. This country’s attention to recovery needs is reflected in promulgating emergency response and recovery legislation, establishing a government decontamination service. The UK Nuclear Recovery Plan Template considers recovery to be more than simply the replacement of what has been destroyed and the rehabilitation of those affected. This guidance and associated monitoring templates would have potential application for recovery from RDD or IND incidents. It is a complex process, but the aim is to ensure the safety of the public and those affected by radiation incidents. all analysis and environmental cleanup activities associated with recovering from an RDD or IND incidents of the magnitude described in the national planning scenarios. Most of these officials reported that they believe they could adequately address a smaller RDD incident, such as one that is confined to a city block or inside a building. Despite this anticipated reliance on the federal government, we obtained mixed responses as to whether these RDD and IND recovery activities should be primarily a component. The lack of recovery planning for R DD and IND incidents may be a problem. return sooner to their homes and businesses and get back to the routines of everyday life would help lessen the consequences of RDD and IND incidents. In fact, being fully prepared to recover from such an incident may also serve as a deterrent to those who would do us harm. However, being ready to recover after an RDD or IND incident is not a guarantee that you will be able to get back on your feet in the following days or weeks. If you are concerned that you or a family member may be at risk, contact the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. strategy would provide guidance to federal, state, and local agencies in revising their operational plans for recovery activities. Currently, the limited federal planning guidance related to the recovery from RDD and IND incidents can be found in a number of documents. This is important because, according to one city official, “recovery is what it is all about.” In developing such a recovery strategy, respondents from the cities, like those from their states, want the federal government to consult with them. a recovery strategy. The federal government has placed a higher priority on developing a strategy to respond to domestic incidents. Few of these plans specifically addressed RDD and IND recovery activities, particularly for the analysis and environmental cleanup. We found limited discussion of recovery planning for these incidents in various annexes to the National Response Framework, such as its emergency response plans. For example, the response strategy, captured in the 2008 National Response framework, their own recovery strategies. We reviewed existing planning documents for domestic incidents to determine the extent to which they addressed recovery issues. to prepare for recovery from RDD and IND incidents are similar to many of the suggestions for improvement in federal preparedness that we obtained through our survey. For example, we found that the United Kingdom reported of suggestions were most prevalent. We also reviewed past GAO reports and other documents that addressed areas for improved preparedness. In addition, to broaden our review of potential areas for improvement, we included federal involvement in planning and preparing for the recovery from IND and RDD incidents in our report. infrastructure failure, were the most significant risks facing their jurisdictions. Federal agencies and local jurisdictions have used existing federal guidance as a basis for planning RDD and IND response exercises and, to a much lesser extent, recovery exercises to test the adequacy of their plans and level of preparedness. According to the U.S. National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), RDDs and INDs can be used to assess the readiness of an area to respond to an emergency. convert the new guidance into operational guidance. DOD has established operational plans for consequence management following terrorist incidents, including RDD and IND attacks. Without federal guidance for coordinating federal, state, and local planning for recovery from RDD or IND incidents, cities and states lack a framework for developing a plan for recovering from an RDD attack or an IND attack. In addition, DOD has set up a toolkit to help states and cities develop plans for recovery after an IND or RDD incident. The toolkit is available on the DOD website. state and local plans for recovery from RDD or IND incidents, as called for by presidential directive. According to a senior FEMA official, the agency has delayed issuing this guidance pending the reevaluation of its planning approach by the new administration. FEMA is already aware that its planning system does not fully recognize the involvement of state and local governments. The agency is developing regional support plans—including for RDD and IND incidents—through its regional offices, which will reflect state andLocal government roles and responsibilities. of existing approaches for RDD or IND incidents. Most FEMA regional office respondents (7 of 9) indicated that it would be beneficial to synchronize existing guidance from multiple and disparate sources to ensure that they are complementary and not competing. While it was more limited in scope than what is in this report, FEMA is exploring the possibility of using this information in the future to improve the response to RDD and IND incidents in the U.S. It is also possible to use this information to improve response times in other parts of the world. days, involved a number of methods and technologies, and cost more than $200,000. The estimated total cost of managing this incident, including law enforcement investigation, testing individuals, sampling materials, and cleanup, was $4 million. FEMA has not completed planning to help cities and states recover from RDD or IND. The agency has not yet completed planning for how to help states and cities recover from the two disasters, which occurred in 2011 and 2012. The U.S. Geological Survey is investigating the cause of the flooding. RDD and IND incidents, particularly with the environmental cleanup of areas that would be contaminated with radioactive materials from such incidents. Respondents from nearly all the cities and states expressed the need for a national disaster recovery strategy to address gaps and overlaps in current federal guidance. To date, FEMA has not developed a national recovery strategy, as required by law, which would state, and federal emergency management officials we surveyed for improving federal preparedness to recover from RDD andIND incidents. To better prepare federal agencies to coordinate with state and local governments on the analysis and environmental cleanup, we recommend the National Disaster Recovery Strategy. that the Secretary of Homeland Security direct the Federal Emergency Management Agency Administrator to prepare a national disaster recovery strategy. That strategy would clarify federal responsibilities for assisting state and local governments with the analysis and environmental cleanup of areas contaminated with radioactive materials in the event of RDD or IND. That plan would clarify the role of the federal government in assisting local governments in cleanup of contaminated areas. The plan would also clarify the federal role in analyzing and cleaning contaminated areas in the case of radioactive iodine or radioactive iodine poisoning. A national disaster recovery strategy was needed to address overlaps and gaps in current government responsibilities. Almost all of them stressed the need to reach out and involve state and local governments in developing this recovery strategy. The majority of the EPA regional office (7 of 10) and FEMA regional office. (5 of 9) respondents indicated that a national recovery strategy is needed to deal with RDD and IND incidents, generally concurring with the suggestions of the city and state respondents. They indicated that they would need to work with the federal government to develop such a strategy. incidents as evidenced by not (1) developing a national disaster recovery strategy as required by law and (2) issuing specific guidance to coordinate federal, state, and city planning to recover from RDD or IND incidents. The Post-Katrina Emergency Management Reform Act of 2006 requires FEMA to develop, coordinate, and maintain developing and executing recovery plans. EPA indicated that as no single federal department or agency has the sole requisite technical capacity to respond to the scope of RDD and IND incidents, it is expected that numerous federal agencies would need to work together. Sources of contamination considered in the handbooks include nuclear accidents, radiological dispersion devices, and satellite accidents. The handbooks are divided into several independent sections comprising supporting scientific and technical information, an analysis of the factors influencing recovery, and compendia handbooks for use at national, regional, and local levels. The current handbooks, updated from the 2008 version, include management options for application in the prerelease, emergency and longer-term phases of an incident. For more information, visit the official website. off-site emergency management plans for release of radioactive materials in the event of a nuclear power plant accident. According to this official, while the radiation regulations did not include directives to prepare for recovery from an accident, the plans were in place to test preparedness to respond to radiological releases. The plans also included exercises to test the preparedness of the nation's response to a nuclear accident, according to the official. It was not clear if the plans would be used in the case of an accident in the future. defense nuclear reactor accident, as well as from incidents involving nuclear weapons or special nuclear materials in transit. This guidance is based on examples from existing local government recovery plans and experiences. While not specific to malicious use of radiological and nuclear materials, according to a senior government official with the U.S. Department of Energy. The guidance is not specifically for use of nuclear weapons, but for use with other types of nuclear materials such as radiological materials and other materials in the air or on the ground. The radiation regulations were developed in response to a European Union directive following the 1986 Chernobyl, Ukraine, nuclear power plant accident. These regulations require preparation of on- and off- and contingency plans.well as guidance issued pursuant to the Civil Contingencies Act. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. affected areas. Updated the recovery handbooks for radiation incidents in 2008 and 2009. The handbooks can be applied as part of the decision-aiding process to develop a recovery strategy following an incident, for training purposes, and during emergency exercises. An example of a datasheet for one of the management options—high pressure hosing—contained in the UK Recovery Handbooks for Radiation Incidents: 2009, is provided in the handbooks' appendix to the radiation incident handbooks: High Pressure Hosing: 2009. The United Kingdom has established a framework for addressing the release of radiological materials. The 2009 version of the UK Recovery Handbooks for Radiological Incidents is considered relevant to radiological releases from the nuclear and nonnuclear industry sectors. The handbooks, first published in 2005 by the UK, are considered relevant for both accidental and intentional releases of radioactive material. The lessons identified was the need to exercise the shift from the response phase to the recovery phase.manage and recover from hardship. For confidential support, call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here. the United Kingdom in our scope. This country has actual experience with recovery from a radiological incident in an urban area. We interviewed selected central and regional government officials responsible for the project. The U.K. was suggested to us by EPA officials as a country that is one of the leaders in recovery planning. The United States was also suggested to be a country of interest in the project because of its experience with radiological incidents in urban areas. It was suggested that the U.S. be included in the scope of the project as a result of this experience. The UK Nuclear Recovery Plan Template provides a generic recovery strategy for them. This document provides generic guidance for a recovery strategy and structures needed to address a radiological release from a civil or military facility. The UK Nuclear Emergency Planning Liaison group published the template in March 2009. It is based on the National Recovery Guidance and Recovery Plan Guidance Template. The government has conducted this risk assessment since 2005. Issued specific nuclear recovery planning guidance in 2009. This guidance, the UK Nuclear recovery plan template, provides a Generic Recovery Strategy. arrangements, and recovery costs. This advisory group would transition into a broader Strategic Recovery Coordinating Group during the recovery phase. The guidance requires that all high-risk cities in the United Kingdom prepare recovery plans. Finally, according to United Kingdom officials, the 2006 polonium incident in London showed the value of having a strong anti-polonium program. The UK government says it is working with the U.S. to develop a national anti-Polonium programme. The U.K. government is also working with other countries to develop such a program. buildings and infrastructure. As the United States moves forward in recovery preparation, some insights might be gained from the actions already taken by the United Kingdom to increase its preparedness to recover from acts of nuclear and radiological terrorism. Many of which are similar to those suggested by the city, such as increasing the number of nuclear power plants in the U.S. and increasing the amount of nuclear material in the nation's water supply, for example. The U.K. has also taken steps to increase the number and quantity of nuclear weapons in the country, including the creation of a nuclear weapons stockpile. The United Kingdom reported taking system, and preparing specific nuclear recovery planning guidance. The emphasis on recovery activities in the United Kingdom has been linked to decades of experience with the conflict in Northern Ireland, widespread contamination from the Chernobyl nuclear power plant accident. The UK has a national history of resilience—that is, the ability to manage and recover from hardship, the study found. The research was published in the Journal of Nuclear Engineering and Science, published by the University of Cambridge, Cambridge University, UK. The handbooks were first published in 2005 in response to the Chernobyl nuclear power plant accident. The current handbooks include management options for contaminated food production systems, drinking water, and inhabited areas following the release of radioactive materials into the environment. The handbooks are intended to aid decision makers in developing recovery strategies for contaminated foods and drinking water after the accident. For more information on the handbooks, visit www.chernobylhandbooks.org.uk or www.nukehandbookonline.com. United Kingdom’s Health Protection Agency, were developed in response to the need for further recovery guidance following the Chernobyl nuclear power plant accident. The development of these handbooks was sponsored by six government departments and agencies representing national and local governments. According to a senior official from the Health Protection. Agency, the handbooks were developed to help the public in the event of a future nuclear disaster. The handbooks are available in English, French, German, Italian and Spanish. They can be downloaded from the UK Health Protection website for £4.99. Only half of the respondents indicated that they were getting sufficient intelligence information from law enforcement sources. The EPA and FEMA regional office emergency management officials that responded to our survey also offered a number of suggestions on ways to improve federal preparedness to recover.to recovery shortened with more effective decontamination, mitigation, and rapid recovery operations, according to the survey. The survey was conducted by FEMA and EPA regional offices across the U.S. and included responses from city and state emergency managers, as well as federal officials. to DHS guidance, preparedness is the foundation of a successful national incident management system. The cycle of preparedness for prevention, protection, response, and recovery missions ends with adequate exercising, evaluation, and improvement. Our search of FEMA’s National Exercise Schedule—a FEMA-led exercise schedule for the U.S. military and other government agencies—revealed that the exercise schedule is in fact a national exercise schedule. The exercise schedule can be found at FEMA.gov/exerciseschedule. planning was still important despite the magnitude of such events, but none of them had prepared such plans. Respondents from all states in our survey indicated that they had prepared emergency response plans for domestic incidents. Most of them (8 of 10) indicated that these plans included a recovery plan for a domestic disaster, and most of them indicated that it included an emergency response plan for domestic disasters. In the U.S., only one in 10 states had such a plan, according to the survey. a period of time. FEMA’s National Exercise Division told us that only three of them actually included a recovery component that exercised activities associated with environmental cleanup. Many response and a few recovery exercises were conducted over the last 6 years that do not appear in FEMA's National Exercise Schedule. We previously reported that information in the National Exercise schedule database was unreliable. Nevertheless, for the past 6 years, FEMA has conducted a number of response and recovery exercises that don’t appear in the database. in a single mission, such as through FRMAC. FEMA has not issued specific guidance describing how federal capabilities would be integrated into and support the recovery effort. Nevertheless, EPA stated that our survey results underscore the importance having clear communication and notification among federal agencies. If not addressed, could hamper recovery efforts, according to EPA's survey results. If you or a family member have been affected by natural disasters, contact the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. survey, except FEMA region 8. We tabulated the yes and no responses to each pertinent question from the city, state, and federal surveys. We conducted a content analysis of the explanatory statements accompanying many of the questions. FEMA’s National Exercise Schedule database was used to identify the location and types of exercises. We also conducted a Content Analysis of the Explanatory Statements accompanying Many of the Questions. The content analysis was based on the responses to the questions and the answers to the explanations. 10 EPA and FEMA regions. The cities included Atlanta, Boston, Chicago, Dallas, Denver, Detroit, Houston, Los Angeles, New York, Philadelphia, San Francisco, Seattle, and St. Louis. While Washington, D.C., is considered a high-risk city, we excluded it from our survey because it is unlike other cities in its reliance on the federal government. We excluded it because it's unlike other Cities in Its reliance on The Federal Government. We also excluded it for its high reliance on FEMA and EPA. We surveyed all 10 EPA and FEMA regional offices in order to obtain a federal field perspective on this issue. We also visited EPA regional offices  in San Francisco and Denver, and the FEMA regional office in Oakland. All of the regional offices responded to our questions about the need for a federal response to the crisis in Puerto Rico. We will share the results of our survey with you at the bottom of the page. For confidential support call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. our survey, we decided to drop them. We replaced Atlanta and the state of Georgia with Miami and Florida, which are in the same federal region. We decided to retain Boston despite receiving no response from Massachusetts. We ended up with 10 states in our survey, which included 10 different cities in the city of Boston, Boston, New York, Washington, Philadelphia, Chicago, Los Angeles, San Francisco, San Diego and Los Angeles. The city of Atlanta was dropped from the list of cities that received the most votes. Emergency management officials from almost all 13 cities and most of their 10 states responded to our survey. Atlanta and the states of Georgia and Massachusetts did not respond to the survey. After repeated attempts to include this city and the two states in the survey, we are happy to include them in the next round of polls. To vote on whether to include these cities and their states in next week's poll, go to CNN.com/soulmatestories. For more information on the CNN/Soledad O'Brien Poll, click here. City and state emergency management officials give low priority to preparing for natural disasters. Most city respondents indicated that natural disasters, such as severe weather and severe weather, are not a priority for them. The majority of city respondents also indicated that they do not prepare for other types of risks facing their jurisdictions. The survey was conducted by the non-profit group Emergency Preparedness International (EPCI) in partnership with the University of California, San Diego. For more information on EPCI, go to: www.ecpci.org. and state emergency management officials on government responsibilities and plans to fulfill them. We originally selected 13 high- and medium-risk cities and their 11 states to cover the mostly likely target cities for a terrorist attack. We wanted to ensure that we had at least 1 city in each of the cities for each state. We also wanted to make sure there was at least one city in the state of each state for each of its citizens. We are happy to clarify that this was not the case. We were looking for cities that were likely to be target cities. federal responsibility. Almost half of the respondents from the cities (6 of 13), but most of those from states (8 of 10), indicated that these activities should be primarily a federal responsibility. The others stressed the need for shared responsibilities with the federal government. However, when respondents were asked in the U.S., most of them said they wanted to share responsibility with the state and local governments. The majority of those surveyed were from the states, but most from cities were also from states. several cities told us that they were concerned about how rapidly the federal government could provide this assistance. Respondents from most states expressed the same expectations of the federalGovernment. For example, one state was particularly concerned about the federalgovernment's ability to provide assistance to its citizens. For more, visit CNN.com/soulmatestories and follow us on Twitter @CNNStories and @cnnstories. For confidential support on suicide matters call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org. This register is designed to complement community risk registers that have been published by local emergency planners since passage of the 2004 civil protection legislation. Community risk registers address specific risks identified by representatives from local emergency services and public, private, and voluntary organizations. Local resilience forums are required to develop and maintain these registers that include a description of potential outcomes, likelihoods, impacts, and ratings for various risk categories and subcategories of events. The term “resilience” is the ability of organizations, like individuals, to withstand or recover easily and quickly from hardships. national risk register in 2008. This register provides information on the risks facing the country, including malicious attacks such as with an RDD. This threat information was previously held confidential by the government. The government reported that the release of this information is intended to encourage public debate on security register, which is based on a classified assessment. It discusses the likelihood and potential impacts of a range of risks, including attacks using chemical, biological, radiological, and nuclear materials. This national risk register contains information that was previouslyheld confidential within government but was published to encourage the public debate. The national government does not expect communities to directly track these risks, but rather to improve their own preparedness based on information from the national risk assessment. In 2008, the government published a national risk report. The report is a classified document. It is not expected that communities will be able to directly monitor these risks. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S., call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. The 2004 Civil Contingencies Act established a statutory framework of roles and responsibilities for local responders to address the effects of the most serious emergencies facing the country. Guidance issued pursuant to this legislation established an integrated emergency management system, not unlike that in the United States, comprising six related biological, radiological, and nuclear incidents.such accidents, they established a Nuclear Emergency Planning Liaison Group, which formed a Recovery Subgroup to begin addressing this planning need. The act was enacted following a government consultation exercise that concluded that previous legislation provided an inadequate framework for civil protection against twenty-first century risks, including terrorism. several annexes to the National Response Framework that address, in part, federal agency responsibilities and assets to help state and local governments recover from these incidents. For example, a December 2004 emergency support function annex covering long-term community recovery and mitigation, led by FEMA, provides a framework for federal support to localities. While this annex addresses FEMA’s responsibilities to coordinate the transition from response to recovery in field operations, it does not provide details on recovery planning for RDD and IND incidents. there might be some confusion among city and state emergency management officials regarding federal agency responsibilities to provide assistance to them under these circumstances. In our view, if not addressed, this confusion could hamper the timely recovery from these incidents and demonstrates the need for development and implementation of a federal emergency assistance plan. If you or a family member have been affected by a natural disaster, contact the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. This guidance describes the generic framework for multiagency response and recovery for all levels of government. The activities: anticipation, assessment, prevention, preparation, response, and recovery. This guidance covers the principles, practical considerations, operational doctrine, and examples of good practice for these activities. The government charged this working group with, among other things, producing national recovery guidance for local responders, identifying gaps in the country’s recovery capability with recommendations to address them, and contributing to the ongoing review of the 2005 nonstatutory guidance for emergency response. provided a unique opportunity to develop remediation policies within a compressed time frame, resulting in the development of a sound framework for recovery. The United Kingdom has developed a comprehensive program to ensure an effective response to a range of disruptive emergencies that might affect the country. The country uses a variety of tools and techniques to ensure a successful response to such emergencies. The UK also uses a number of other tools to ensure that the country is prepared for such emergencies in the event that they occur. The U.K. also uses an array of tools to help people cope with the aftermath of such an emergency. was a responsibility of the local government. The national government has established ways to help cover the costs of such incidents. This includes insurance coverage for damages resulting from acts of terrorism. For large commercial concerns, the insurance industry offers terrorist insurance that is underwritten by the government. For smaller businesses, the government provides insurance coverage. For more information, go to: http://www.nhs.uk/news/features/terrorism-insurance-for-small-business-and-individuals. Terrorist insurance is offered for an additional 20 percent surcharge on an existing policy. Other funding is available for local governments if such an event would overwhelm their financial resources, such as applying for grants from the national government or European Union. In regard to its framework of specialized companies, terrorist insurance is also offered for a additional 20 per cent surcharge. For more information on terrorist insurance, visit www.terroristinsurance.org or call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255. than that contained in the 2005 guidance for emergency response and recovery activities. One such event was the July 2005 subway bombing in London by a terrorist group that killed 52 people. This incident, in conjunction with other events in 2005, such as the Buncefield Fire and severe flooding, prompted the guidance to be issued. The guidance was issued in response to the 2005 London subway bombing by a terror group that died 52 people, and prompted the government to issue a guidance to respond to similar events. public debate on security and to help organizations, individuals, families, and communities prepare for encountering threats. The government reports that while there have been very few examples of attacks such as the 1995 release of Sarin gas in a Tokyo subway, it still recognizes the need to prepare and plan. It also recognizes that there is still a need for people to be aware of and prepare for potential threats to their safety and well-being, and to be able to respond to them in a timely manner. The handbooks can also be applied for training purposes and during emergency exercises. Conducted a full-scale RDD recovery exercise in are divided into several independent sections comprising supporting scientific and technical information. An analysis of the factors influencing recovery, compendia of comprehensive, state-of-the-art datasheets for around 100 management options, guidance on planning in advance, a decision-aiding framework, and several worked examples. The handbooks are available in hardback and paperback. a Recovery Advisory Group and Science and Technology Advisory Cell early in the response phase. A Strategic Coordinating Group, which manages this phase of the process, would receive input from a Recovery advisory group and a Science and technology Advisory Cell. On transition to the recovery phase of an incident, the Strategic Coordinate Group would be replaced by a Strategic Recovery Coordinating group. The Strategic Recovery Group would include experts to advise on health and welfare, environment and infrastructure, and monitoring response and recovery activities. The group would be charged with identifying immediate and high-level strategic objectives for recovery. wider mechanisms for obtaining scientific advice during an incident. A scientific advisory group was put in place to expedite the recovery process by helping to manage scientific input into the decision-making process. An after-action report was prepared following this exercise to capture lessons learned. One observation was that this exercise was that it was the most successful exercise to date in terms of the number of people who were rescued and the amount of time it took to get them back to their homes and back on their feet. does not include guidance on long-term recovery activities. FEMA coordinator for the development of a national disaster recovery strategy told us that while the previous administration had drafted a “white paper” addressing this strategy, the new administration has decided to rethink the entire approach. The FEMA coordinator also told CNN that the U.S. has decided not to build a dam in the Gulf of Mexico as a result of Hurricane Katrina. The U.N. has also decided against building a dam on the East Coast in the wake of Hurricane Sandy. FEMA is developing a national disaster recovery strategy. A FEMA official could not provide a time frame for its completion. In developing this strategy, FEMA plans to seek out opinions of nonfederal stakeholders. Once completed, the official said that the recovery will be completed by the end of the year or early next year, depending on the severity of the disaster. The strategy will be developed in consultation with federal and state and local agencies. It is expected to cost $1 billion to $2 billion to develop. a national disaster recovery strategy. Among other things, the strategy is to clearly define the roles, programs, authorities, and responsibilities of each agency that may provide assistance to the recovery from a major disaster. In addition, the National Strategy for Homeland Security also called on the federal government to prepare for a major natural disaster. The strategy is also called for the creation of a National Disaster Preparedness and Response Council. The council will help develop a national plan for disaster preparedness, response and recovery. guidance emphasizes that response and recovery are not discrete activities and do not occur sequentially. Recovery should be an integral part of response from the very beginning, as actions taken at all times can influence longer-term outcomes for communities. Government recognized that no single approach could meet the needs of every community. Established a Government Decontamination Service in 2005. This organization was that these activities are not separate activities that occursequentially. Instead, this guidance contends that recovery considerations should take place early in the response phase, as initial decisions can affect the long-term outcome. national recovery guidance in 2007. This guidance reinforces and updates the early emergency response and recovery guidance. It establishes, among other things, a recovery planning process during the response phase so that the potential impacts of early advice and actions are explored and understood for the future recovery of the area. The government in 2006 to form a National Recovery Working Group to address the need for additional recovery guidance for multiple risk scenarios. This working group was comprised of a wide range of government departments and agencies, as well as other stakeholders who had been involved in the recovery phase recovery activities. recovery strategy through working and focus groups, perhaps organized on a regional basis. Respondents representing most cities (10 of 13) and states (7 of 10) also provided specifics on the type of planning guidance necessary, including integration and clarification of responsibilities among federal, state, and local governments. For example, respondents said that the best way to plan for the recovery of a city's infrastructure is through a series of regional focus groups. For more information, go to www.cnn.com/impact. for defined affected areas. The templates would be referred to throughout the recovery to ensure that the work of the Strategic Recovery Coordinating Group is focused and on track. In addition to the person named above, individuals who made important contributions to this report were Dr. Timothy Persons (Chief Scientist), and Dr. Timothy Persons, the Chief Scientist of the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS). The report was compiled by the USGS and published by the University of Washington in Washington, DC. of the urban transit infrastructure, and disruption of the water supply. The lessons learned from this exercise were incorporated into the United Kingdom’s recovery strategy. One key lesson is the benefit of exercising the handover of government leadership during the response phase to leadership of the recovery phase. Established a National Recovery Fund to help the UK recover from natural disasters and other emergencies in the future. Established a National Response Fund to assist the UK in the event of a future natural disaster or disaster in the UK. online guidance covers 14 generic issues, such as recovery structures and processes, training and exercises, and a lessons learned process. The guidance is reviewed every 3 months and updated as necessary. For example, the National Recovery Guidance addresses the need for training recovery personnel on essential roles, responsibilities, and procedures to help them cope with the crisis. For more information on the National recovery guidance, visit www.nationalrecoveryguidance.org or go to: http://www.nrc.gov.uk/. The National Recovery Working Group found that many organizations had already conducted small-scale recovery exercises and had applied lessons learned from them. One of the group's recommendations was to design and conduct recovery exercises. The group's report also noted that recovery training and exercises lag behind those for response, as well as the need to design, conduct and test competencies. The report was published by the National Recovery working group on November 14. For more information, go to: http://www.recoveryworkinggroup.org/resources/resources-and-training-recreations. social and developmental process rather than just a remediation process. The manner in which recovery processes are undertaken is thus critical to their success and, therefore, best achieved when the affected community is able to exercise a high degree of self-determination. As such, this document provides that during the initial stages of the recovery process, it is important that the community is involved in as much of the decision-making as possible. It is also important to ensure that the recovery is as much a developmental process as a remedial process. Agency, the European Union also supported the development of a series of generic recovery handbooks for use by other countries based on the structure, format, and content of the handbook developed for the United Kingdom. This official told us that member countries of the European EU are currently customizing their handbooks to suit the needs of their countries. The handbooks are expected to be available by the end of the year, the official said. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. days (June 16-17, 2009) for federal, state, and local agencies to discuss operational recovery issues. One unresolved operational recovery issue discussed during this exercise pertained to the transition of the leadership of FRMAC from the initial analysis of the contaminated area, led by DOE, to the later cleanup phase. This led to a discussion of how FRMAC would handle the transition from initial analysis to cleanup phase of the site. The issue was discussed during a meeting of the Joint Chiefs of Staff in Washington, DC. There are unresolved operational issues regarding the level and quality of the monitoring data necessary for EPA to accept the leadership of FRMAC from DOE. According to EPA officials, while this transitional issue has been discussed in exercises dating back to the development of the Federal, there are still issues to be resolved before EPA accepts FRMAC's leadership. There are still operational issues about the level of monitoring data needed to accept FRMAC’s leadership from DOE, according to EPA. There is also an unresolved operational issue about the quality of data needed for the leadership to be accepted. annex covering hazardous materials, led by EPA. It provides the framework for federal support in response to an actual or potential discharge and release of hazardous materials following a major disaster or emergency. EPA officials informed us that this annex will give them a significant federal role in leading cleanup efforts. The annex will be in place until the end of the year, when it will be rolled out in a phased manner, EPA officials said. For more information, visit EPA.gov/hazardous-materials. as the technical lead for recovery activities, but may request support from other federal agencies. According to this annex, the federal government, upon request of state and local governments, can assist in cleanup and recovery activities. The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and EPA are among the agencies that could provide assistance in the event of a disaster like the one in the Gulf of Mexico, the annex says. For more information, visit the EPA website or the EPA's official blog, EPA on the Gulf.gov. testing of methods and technologies for cleaning up and decommissioning contaminated structures and soils. In addition, since the passage of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act (CERCLA), which established the Superfund program. EPA has undertaken significant efforts to study, develop, and use technologies to clean up Superfund sites and other contaminated sites. The Cold War legacy of Superfund is still felt today in many areas of the U.S. and Europe. The Superfund Program is the result of the CERCLA and other laws. recovery planning. United Kingdom officials gained an appreciation for the need to have an established cleanup plan. The plan would include a process for determining cleanup levels, sufficient laboratory capacity to analyze a large quantity of samples for radiation, and procedures for handling the radioactive waste. These objectives would be accompanied by targets and milestones that the community would use as a basis to track recovery progress, for example, with the aid of various predesigned goals and timetables. It would also include actions, such as determining remediation levels and when to stop remediation, managing radiation-contaminated waste, and managing compensation arrangements and recovery costs. intergovernmental coordination, such as setting environmental cleanup priorities and levels, as well as managing radioactive waste staging and disposal. Appendix II contains a brief summary of three national-level exercises, since May 2003, which contained a recovery component, along with the exercise objectives for the planned April 2010 RDD exercise, which is scheduled to take place in April 2010. It also contains a summary of the objectives and goals for the April 2010 exercise, as part of the planned RDD exercises, which are scheduled for April 2010 and April 2011. exercise, participants looked at immediate cleanup issues, including resource priorities and management responsibilities. On day two, participants considered the longer-term issues of environmental contamination, monitoring strategies, and financial considerations. The use of a real radioactive isotope within the exercise scenario ensured that participants were able to investigate their own and other contamination issues in a realistic way. For more information, or to sign up for the next round of the exercise, visit: http://www.cnn.com/2011/01/29/science/science-exercise-cleanup-and-monitoring/index. chemical and physical technologies. During the initial response phase to an incident, responders might rely on fairly simple cleanup approaches, such as washing down exposed people and surfaces. The latter recovery phase might require no additional action or use of complex technologies, says the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) In the U.S., the NIST says the most common type of response is to remove debris from the scene and then clean it up. In Europe, the NSP says the main response phase is to clean up the debris and debris in the surrounding area. and inhabited areas, including identifying options for the restoration and cleanup of the physical infrastructure and natural environment. The guidance suggests that this subgroup consider forming task groups to, among other things, address waste management and disposal, criteria to determine when remediation can cease, evaluate feasibility, and recommend remediation options. It is also suggested that the subgroup address the issue of waste management, disposal, and criteria for determining when it is safe to remove waste from the site and dispose of it in other ways. Coordinating Group would be supported by specific subgroups. These subgroups would include ones for finance and legal, communications, business and economic recovery, health and welfare, environment and infrastructure, and monitoring. For example, the subgroup on environment and. infrastructure would identify viable options for remediation of food production systems, drinking water, for example, to improve water quality in the area. The subgroup would also look at ways to improve the quality of the water supply in the region. 2009, containing additional operational guidelines to respond to an RDD incident. EPA has also worked with other federal agencies to examine its own 1992 protective action guides to address shortcomings and to incorporate more recent guidance. However, according to EPA officials, much work remains to be done on the RDD issue. The agency is also working with other agencies to address other issues surrounding RDDs in the U.S. and around the world. The RDD program is funded by the federal government and is administered by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) Draft guidance intended to outline the structure of, and responsibilities for the conduct of the optimization process as they pertain to EPA’s involvement in RDD or IND incidents is under review by the new Administrator. EPA added that it looks like it looks as though the draft guidance will be released in the near future. The draft guidance is expected to be released by the end of the year or early next year, according to the EPA. It is not clear when the final version of the report will be published. in August 2008, DHS issued stop-gap guidance outside of FEMA’s planning guidance framework to provide some immediate direction to federal, state, and local emergency response officials in developing their own operational plans and response protocols for protection of emergency workers after RDD or IND incidents. In regard to recovery, EPA issued guidance to state and local officials on how to recover from RDD and IND incidents, and how to prepare for the aftermath of the incident. EPA also issued guidance for state and federal officials on what to do after an IND or RDD incident. officials informed us that FEMA and other federal agencies worked together on this guidance in an attempt to clarify the processes for providing federal cleanup assistance following such an incident. These officials told us that DHS’s guidance was intended to cover the existing operational guidelines for implementing the protective action. The guidance was not intended to replace the existing guidelines, but to clarify them, officials said. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. guides and other response actions, and to encourage their use in developing specific response protocols. In responding to a draft of this report, EPA informed us that DOE had convened an interagency workgroup to address gaps in DHS’s guidance and had issued a preliminary report, for comment by September 30, to be released to the public by the end of the month. For confidential support, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. For support in the U.S., call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch or click here. IMAAC director told us that the current state-of-the-art and plume modeling approach is sufficient for its primary purpose in directing the protective actions of first responders. NNSA officials informed us they are working with FEMA on a multiyear program to improve federal capabilities to model the release of material. The program is expected to be completed by the end of the year or early next year, the NNSA said. The U.S. National Security Agency is responsible for the nation's nuclear stockpile. plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date. At that time, we will send copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees as well as to the Secretaries of Homeland Security and Energy. The report will also be sent to the Administrators of NNSA and EPA; and other interested parties. It will not be released to the general public until after the report has been released to all the appropriate parties. The final version of the report will be released after the 30-day deadline. also be available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staffs have any questions about this report, please contact me at (202) 512-3841. Contact points for our Offices of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of the report. The full report can be found at: http:// www.gaO.gov/news/press-releases/2013/07/08/gao-press-release-2013-07-08.html. system and how it might apply to the United States. Two officials from the United Kingdom who we interviewed during our site visit reviewed a draft of the information contained in appendix III for content and accuracy. We conducted this performance audit from October 2008 to January 2010 in accordance with the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services' standards for performance audits. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. with generally accepted government auditing standards. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We are committed to providing the public with the most accurate and complete information possible. We will continue to provide updates on the progress of our audit as we learn more about the project. We apologize for any inconvenience caused by the delay in releasing the results of the audit. For confidential support on suicide matters call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. generally agreed with our report findings and provided technical comments. EPA did not agree or disagree with the report findings, but offered technical comments, which we incorporated as appropriate. As agreed with your offices, unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier, we will not release the findings of the report to the public until after it has been released to the media and the public has had a chance to review it. We are happy to share the results of the investigation with the public at a later date. and more numerous solid and hazardous waste landfill sites without specific regulatory approval or exemption. In addition, the United Kingdom and the U.S. have agreed to increase the exchange of information and personnel regarding the research, development, testing, evaluation, and development of technical standards and operations to address chemical, hazardous waste and waste disposal issues. The UK and the United States have agreed that they will increase the Exchange of Information and Personnel regarding the Research, Development, Testing, Evaluation, and Development of Technical Standards and Operations. Ned Woodward (Assistant Director), Nancy Crothers, James Espinoza, Tracey King, Thomas Laetz, Jay Smale, Vasiliki Theodoropoulos, and Keo Vongvanith are on the board of directors. The board is made up of seven members: the directors, the executive directors, and the chief operating officers. For more information on the Board of Directors, visit the board's website at: http://www.cnn.com/cnn/2013/01/29/politics/top-stories/topstories/stories/kennel-cnn-kenneline-kenny-lennon.html#storylink=cpy.