the basis of substantial evidence regarding unreasonable risk. In October 1991, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit agreed with the chemical companies, concluding that EPA had failed to muster substantial evidence to justify its asbestos ban. The court concluded that EPA did not present sufficient evidence to justifying the ban on asbestos because it did not consider all necessary evidence and failed to show that the control action it chose was the least burdensome regulation required to adequately protect human health or the environment. EPA had not calculated the risk levels for intermediate levels of regulation because it believed there was no asbestos exposure level for which the risk of injury or death was zero. As articulated by the court, the proper course of action for EPA, after an initial showing of product danger, would have been to take action to limit asbestos exposure to the level it believed was safe. The court ruled that the EPA should have taken action to reduce asbestos exposure levels to levels that were safe for the general public to live with, rather than to limit them to those that it thought were safe. that it had no known safe exposure level. EPA’s 1989 rule under TSCA section 6 prohibited the future manufacture, importation, processing, and distribution of asbestos in almost all products. Some manufacturers of asbestos products filed suit against EPA arguing, in part, that the rule was not promulgated on toxic chemicals under section 6 since the court rejected its asbestos rule in 1991. A California statute enacted in 2007 prohibits the manufacture, sale, or distribution of. asbestos in the state. EPA’s 1989 regulation broadly banning asbestos was largely vacated by a federal appeals court decision. In contrast to the United States, the European Union, as well as a number of other countries, has banned all, or almost all, asbestos and asbestos-containing products. Based on its review of over 100 studies of the health risks of asbestos, EPA determined that asbestos is a potential carcinogen at all levels of exposure. The European Union has banned the use of asbestos in almost all of its products. must balance the costs of its regulations against their benefits. After completing the 1989 asbestos rule, EPA has completed only one regulation to ban or limit the production or use of an existing chemical (for hexavalent chromium in 1990) EPA has not completed any actions to ban and limit any existing chemicals or products. The agency has completed no actions to limit the use or production of any new chemicals or substances. It has completed one action to restrict the production and use of existing chemicals and substances. Asbestos is a known human carcinogen that can cause lung cancer and other diseases if inhaled. Asbestos has been used widely in products such as fireproofing, thermal insulation, and friction products, including brake linings. EPA invested 10 years in asbestos research and testing to determine if it was safe to use in the United States. The EPA says it has found no evidence that asbestos can be used in the U.S. to prevent lung cancer or other diseases. For more information, visit the EPA's website. EPA’s ability to make publicly available the information that it collects under TSCA is limited. Chemical companies may claim some of the information they provide to EPA under T SCA as confidential business information. The general public may also find information provided under T sca useful. EPA is access to confidential TscA information would allow them to examine information on chemical properties and processes that they currently do not possess. This could enable them to better control the risks of potentially harmful chemicals.alternatives or technologies. would enhance the effectiveness of TSCA. REACH, the legislation through which the European Union has recently revised its chemical control policy, requires chemical companies to develop more information on the effects of chemicals on human health. The Congress should consider providing EPA additional authorities under T SCA to improve its ability to make more chemical information publicly available, the authors say. The authors recommend amending TSCa to authorize EPA to share with the states and foreign governments the confidential business information it holds. The report was published in June 2005. When EPA began reviewing chemicals in 1979, over 21,000 new chemicals were added to the inventory. To assess risks, EPA examines a chemical’s toxicity or potential adverse effects and the amount of human and environmental exposures. TSCA authorizes EPA to review existing chemicals, but it generally provides no specific requirement, time frame, or methodology for doing so. In addition, under REACH, chemical companies must obtain authorization to continue to use a chemical of very high concern, such as DDT. Under REACH, chemical companies provide information on chemicals’ properties and health and environmental effects for chemicals produced over specified volumes. TSCA places the burden on EPA to demonstrate that a chemical’s risk to human health and the environment is lower than REACH. REACH also provides regulators the general authority to require chemical companies to provide additional test data and other information when necessary to evaluate a chemical's risk to the environment. In contrast, T SCA requires the company to provide more detailed information about the chemical's effects on human health. community groups may have a specific interest in information on the risks of chemicals that are produced or used in nearby facilities. For example, neighborhood organizations can use such information to engage in dialogue with chemical companies about reducing chemical risks, preventing accidents, and limiting chemical exposures. While both TSCA and the Environmental Defense Fund are funded by the federal government, they are not required to disclose the source of their funding. For confidential support call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. about 200 chemicals. Because EPA has used authority to issue rules to require testing so sparingly, it has not continued to maintain information on the cost of implementing these rules. Given the difficulties involved in requiring testing, EPA officials do not believe that TSCA provides an effective means for testing a large number of existing chemicals. They believe that EPA could review substantially more chemicals in less time if they had the authority to do so. The cost of issuing such a rule can cost hundreds of thousands of dollars. TSCA could be amended to require companies to test their chemicals and submit the results to EPA with their premanufacture notices. Currently, such a step is required only if EPA makes the necessary no similar requirement for existing chemicals. Because of the large number of existing chemicals, EPA would need the flexibility to identify which chemicals should be given priority. TSCA. could be amend to require individual chemical companies or the industry as a whole to compile and submit chemical data, such as that included in EPA’s High Production Volume (HPV) to become high production chemicals because the specific chemicals used in commerce are constantly changing, as are their production volumes. EPA officials told us that it is time-consuming, costly, and inefficient for the agency to use TSCA’s two-step process of (1) issuing rules under T SCA (which can take months) and (2) issuing new rules under the new rules. The process can take as long as a year, EPA officials said, depending on the type of chemicals involved. industry to notify EPA at least 90 days before producing or importing a new chemical. TSCA also authorizes EPA to promulgate rules to require manufacturers to perform tests data on health and environmental effects. EPA estimates that most premanufacture notices do not include test data of any type, requiring them to test all new chemicals submitted for EPA’s review. The chemical review provisions could be strengthened by requiring the systematic review of existing chemicals, the authors say. The act contains a firm requirement for reviewing new chemicals, but the act contains anticipated production volume, uses, exposure levels, and release estimates outlined in these notices generally do not have to be amended once manufacturing begins. The potential risk of injury to human health or the environment may increase when chemical companies increase production levels or expand the uses of a chemical. TSCA addresses expanded uses of chemicals by potential risks increase, based on, for example, production or environmental release levels. According to some chemical companies, the cost of initial testing could be reduced by amending T SCA to require EPA to review new chemicals before they are marketed. adopt the California formaldehyde regulation. EPA recently issued an advance notice of proposed rulemaking suggesting several regulatory options the agency could pursue. Some stakeholders have recommended that EPA pursue legislation to control formaldehyde. Potential changes to TSCA include reducing the amount of formaldehyde that can be in the air. The agency would face legal hurdles in regulating formaldehyde under TSC a section 6 of the Toxic Substances Control Act. The proposal would strengthen EPA’s ability to regulate harmful chemicals under T SCA. certain toys and child care articles after January 1, 2009, if the products contain concentrations of phthalates exceeding 0.1 percent. In 2008, Congress took similar action. California has also enacted limits on formaldehyde in pressed wood. In response to a petition asking EPA to use section 6 of TSCA to limit phthalate levels, the EPA has said it will consider the petition in its review of the issue. The EPA is also considering a proposal to limit the amount of formaldehyde that can be added to pressed wood products. can prohibit or limit its production, processing, distribution, use, and disposal or take other action, such as requiring warning labels on the substance. TSCA authorizes EPA to release chemical information obtained by the agency under the act. EPA must also develop substantial evidence in the rulemaking record in order to withstand judicial review. Under T SCA, a court reviewing a TSC a rule “shall hold unlawful and set aside…if the court finds that’s unlawful” TSCA offers EPA a range of control options when regulating existing chemicals. Since Congress passed TSCA nearly 33 years ago, EPA has issued regulations under the act to ban or limit or restrict the production or use of only five existing chemicals or chemical classes. Significantly, in 1991, EPA issued regulations to ban the use of some of the most harmful chemicals in the U.S., including DDT, DDT and Agent Orange. The EPA is expected to issue a final decision on the issue by the end of the year. Challenge Program, for example, as a condition of manufacture or import above some specified volume. TSCA authorizes EPA to issue regulations that may, among other things, ban existing toxic chemicals or place limits on their production or use. But the statutory requirements EPA must meet to do so present a challenge for the agency, the EPA says. The agency says it will continue to work with Congress to address the problem of toxic chemicals in the U.S. and around the world. The EPA says it is committed to working with Congress on the issue. TSCA authorizes EPA to review chemicals already in commerce (existing chemicals) and chemicals yet to enter commerce (new chemicals) EPA lists chemicals in commerce in the TSCA inventory. Of the over 83,000 chemicals currently in the inventory, about 62,000 were already inCommerce.restrictions on those already in Commerce. EPA lists the chemicals in Commerce in its inventory. The inventory includes chemicals that are not yet in commerce but are expected to be in the near future. For more information, go to www.tsca.gov. been to consider each regulatory option listed in TSCA, beginning with the least burdensome, and the costs and benefits of each option. The court further criticized EPA’s ban of products for which no substitutes were currently available stating that, in such cases, EPA “bears a tough burden” to demonstrate that a ban is the less burdensome alternative. In addition, the court stated that in evaluating what risks are unreasonable, EPA must consider the costs of any proposed actions. legal threshold that has proven to be difficult for EPA. In order to regulate an existing chemical under section 6 of TSCA, EPA must find that there is a reasonable basis to conclude that the chemical presents or will present an unreasonable risk of injury to health. We have previously recommended that the Congress amend TSCa to reduce the evidentiary burden that EPA must meet. Alternatively, the European Union’s recently enacted chemical laws could be used as a model for the U.S. the rule is not supported by substantial evidence in the rulemaking record. As several courts have noted, the substantial evidence standard is more rigorous than the arbitrary and capricious standard normally applied to rulemaking under the Administrative Procedure Act. Further, according to EPA officials, the economic costs of regulating a pollutant are too high to justify the regulation of a water treatment facility. The EPA says the rule is needed to protect the health of the nation’s water supply and that the water treatment industry is too large to regulate. and REACH have provisions to protect information claimed by chemical companies as confidential. REACH requires greater public disclosure of certain information, such as basic chemical properties. For example, REACH includes a provision for public information will be published on the chemical agency’s Web site. In previous reports, we recommended that REACH should be implemented in the U.S. and other countries, including Russia, France, Germany, Italy, Spain and the Netherlands, as well as other countries and international organizations. The EU has recently revised its chemical control policy through legislation known as Registration, Evaluation and Authorization of Chemicals (REACH) REACH went into effect in June 2007, but full implementation of all the provisions of REACH will be phased in over an 11-year period. REACH represents a regulatory model that differs from the TSCA framework in key ways. For example, chemical companies have the responsibility to demonstrate that the chemicals they place in the market, distribute, or use do not adversely affect human health or safety. period. Authority exists to establish restrictions for any chemical that poses unacceptable risks. Restrictions could include banning uses in certain products, banning uses by consumers, or even completely banning the chemical. Under REACH, authority exists to require authorization for the use of chemicals identified as being of very high concern. These restrictions could include bans on certain products and bans on consumers using the chemical in certain ways. The ban could also include a complete ban on the chemical or a ban on its use by consumers. September 1994 report, we recommended that the Congress consider limiting the length of time for which information may be claimed as confidential without resubstantiation of the need for confidentiality. Mr. Chairman, this concludes my prepared statement. I would be happy to respond to any questions that you or Members of the Congress may have about this report. I am happy to answer any questions you or members of Congress have about the report. Thank you for your interest in the report and I look forward to hearing from you in the future. Key contributors to this testimony were David Bennett, Antoinette Capaccio, Nancy Crothers, Christine Fishkin, Richard Johnson, and Ed Kratzer. For further information about this testimony, please contact John Stephenson at (202) 512-3841 or stephensonj@gao.gov. GAO-09-271. High-Risk Series: An Update. Washington, D.C.: January 22, 2009. Chemical Regulation: In the Interest of Consumers. EPA generally must protect such information against public disclosure unless such disclosure is necessary to protect against an unreasonable risk of injury to health or the environment. Like the United States, the European Union has laws and regulations governing access to basic chemical information, including brief profiles of hazardous properties and authorized uses. The European Union’s approach to public’S access to information combines a variety of ways that the interests of the public's right to know is balanced with the need to keep certain information confidential. As such, nonconfidential information can be claimed as confidential business information. required under the act to protect trade secrets and privileged or confidential commercial or financial information against unauthorized disclosures. This information generally cannot be shared with others, including state health and environmental officials and foreign governments. However, some state officials believe this information would be useful for informing and some may be willing to share it with the public. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. EPA has not performed any recent studies of the appropriateness of confidentiality claims. A 1992 EPA study indicated that problems with inappropriate claims were extensive. EPA challenges about 14 such claims each year and that the chemical companies withdraw nearly all of the claims challenged. Officials who have various responsibilities for protecting public health and the environment from the dangers posed by chemicals believe that having confidential information about chemicals is a good idea, according to the EPA. The EPA has no plans to change the way it manages its environmental risk programs. Study examined extent to which companies made confidential business information claims. EPA may suspect that some chemical companies’ confidentiality claims are unwarranted. Agency does not have data on the number of inappropriate claims. About 95 percent of premanufacture notices contain some information that chemical companies claim as confidential, according to EPA. The agency doesn't have the resources that would be needed to investigate and, as appropriate, challenge claims to be confidential, the study found. The study was published in the journal Chemical Processing. in the United States. The published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from GAO. However, because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material, permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S., call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. TSCA to issue rules requiring chemical companies to conduct tests on existing chemicals has been difficult to use because the agency must first make certain findings before it can require testing. TSCA requires EPA to find that current data is insufficient; testing is necessary. Another option would be to provide EPA with greater authority to require testing targeted to those areas in which EPA’s analysis models do not do a good job of predicting the effects of a chemical on human health and the environment, the authors say. In 2005 report, we recommended that the Congress consider giving EPA the authority to require chemical manufacturers and processors to develop test data based on substantial production volume and the necessity for testing. We continue to believe that providing EPA with more authority to obtain test data from companies would be a good move for the EPA. Officials also said that EPA’s authority under in June 2005 report could be expanded to include additional rules requiring companies to perform specific tests necessary to ensure the safety of the chemicals tested.or years to develop) to obtain exposure data. cost of testing, requirements for testing could be based on production volume. For example, in Canada and the European Union, testing requirements for low-volume chemicals are less extensive and complex than for those for high- volume chemicals. Congress could give EPA, in addition to its current authorities under section 4 of the EPA Act, new authorities for testing low- and high-volume chemical products, such as vinyl chloride monomers and vinyl chloride ethers (VCMs) The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services is considering a proposal that would require the EPA to conduct more testing on low- volume chemical products. risks of the roughly 80,000 industrial chemicals in use. EPA has begun to rely on voluntary programs for data, such as the High Production Volume Challenge program. However, these programs may not provide EPA with complete data, according to the EPA. The agency is also looking for ways to reduce the number of chemicals in the U.S. that pose a risk to the health of humans and the environment, the EPA says. For more information, visit EPA.gov/chemicals. EPA officials told us that finalizing rules can take from 2 to 10 years and require the expenditure of substantial resources. Given the time and resources required, the agency has issued rules requiring testing for only a small number of chemicals. The agency will consider the comments it receives, and promulgate a final rule ordering chemical testing in the next few months, officials said. The rules will require testing for a range of chemicals, but not all of them will need to be tested at the same time, they said. authorizing EPA to promulgate a rule specifying that a particular use of a chemical would be a significant new use. However, EPA has infrequently issued such rules, which require manufacturers, importers, and processors of the chemical for the new use to notify EPA at least 90 days before beginning manufacturing. The new rule would require manufacturers to notify the EPA 90 days prior to beginning manufacturing of the new chemical. It would also require the EPA to issue a notice to the chemical's users that the chemical was being used in a new way. chemical companies.) Under such an option, EPA could establish a minimal set of tests for new chemicals to be submitted at the time a chemical company submits a premanufacture notice for the chemical. Additional and more complex and costly testing could be required as the new chemical’s EPA, about half of the premanufactured notices the agency receives from chemical companies are for new chemical that, for various reasons, never enter the marketplace. Thus, requiring companies to conduct tests and submit the resulting test data only for chemicals that are actually marketed would be substantially less expensive than the current system. in a timely manner. There are currently over 200 high-production- volume chemicals for which chemical companies have not voluntarily agreed to provide the minimal test data. Chemical companies do not have an incentive to conduct these tests because they may take over a year to complete, and some tests may cost hundreds of thousands of dollars. Because EPA generally does not have sufficient data on these chemicals, the agency is not able to act on these concerns. The agency is also concerned that some of these chemicals may pose a health or safety risk to humans. voluntarily provide test data and health and safety studies in a complete and timely manner. requiring the testing of existing chemicals of concern is the only practical way to ensure that the agency obtains the needed information. Furthermore, many additional chemicals are likely to be of concern to the public, the EPA says. The agency says the testing is necessary to ensure the safety of the nation's water supply. The testing is also necessary to protect public health, according to the EPA. The EPA says the tests are necessary because the water supply is at risk. findings and promulgates a testing rule. A major drawback to testing is its cost to chemical companies, possibly resulting in a reduced willingness to perform chemical research and innovation. To ameliorate such costs, or to delay them until the new chemicals are produced in large enough quantity to offset the costs, testing rules can be introduced to reduce the cost of research and development for chemical companies. For more information, visit the U.S. National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) website. chemical companies are not required to develop and submit toxicity information to EPA on existing chemicals. This structure places the burden on EPA to demonstrate a need for data on a chemical’s toxicity rather than on a company to demonstrate that a chemical is safe. As a result, EPA does not routinely assess the adequately predict toxicity. For example, EPA could be authorized to require such testing if it finds that it cannot be confident of the results of its analysis (e.g., when it does not have sufficient toxicity data on chemicals with molecular structures similar to those of the new chemicals submitted by is or may be significant or substantial human exposure to the chemical or (b) the chemical enters the environment in substantial quantities. EPA must also determine there are insufficient data to reasonably determine the effects on health or the environment and that testing is necessary to develop such data. When reviewing a new chemical, EPA uses models to compare new chemicals with chemicals with similar molecular structures for which test data on health and environmental effects are available. EPA bases its exposure estimates for new chemicals on information contained in premanufacture notices. chemical may present an unreasonable risk or (2) that the chemical is or will be produced in substantial quantities and that there is or may be substantial human or environmental exposure to the chemical. Once EPA has made the required findings, the agency can issue a proposed rule for public environment. EPA officials believe that demonstrating an unreasonablerisk is a more stringent requirement than demonstrating, for example, a significant risk, and that a finding of unreasonable risk requires an extensive cost-benefit analysis. EPA is required to choose the least burdensome requirement that will be adequately protective. determine the number that are inappropriate. EPA focuses on investigating primarily those claims that it believes may be both inappropriate and among the most potentially important. The EPA official responsible for determining the number of inappropriate claims will not be identified until after the investigation is complete, the agency says. The investigation will focus on claims relating to health and safety studies performed by the chemical companies involving chemicals currently used in commerce, the EPA says. It will also look at claims related to the use of chemicals currently in commerce. that chemical companies provide to EPA, subject to regulations to be established by EPA in consultation with the chemical industry and other interested parties. The regulations would set forth the procedures to be followed by all recipients of the information in order to protect the information from unauthorized disclosures. In our case, the information was provided by chemical companies, not by the federal government. We are happy to make clear that the information provided by the chemical companies was provided in accordance with EPA regulations, not in violation of EPA regulations. This report is a work of the U.S. government and is not subject to copyright protection. The report was published by the Government Accountability Office (GAO) on August 17, 2007. For more information on the report, visit the GAO’s website or go to: http://www.gao.gov/chemicals/chemical-regulations/chemistry-regulation-report.html. For additional information about the Chemical Regulation Act, visit: http:www.geo.org/chemically-regulatory-act. The Toxic Substances Control Act was enacted in 1976 to provide EPA with the authority, upon making certain determinations, to collect information about the hazards posed by chemical substances. EPA can take action to control unreasonable risks by either preventing dangerous chemicals from making their way into use or placing them on the market. The EPA has the authority to make decisions about the use of chemicals in the U.S. on a case-by-case basis. For more information on the EPA's chemical safety program, visit www.epa.gov. Authorization will be granted if a manufacturer can demonstrate that the risks from a use of the chemical can be adequately controlled. A key aspect of REACH is that it places the burden as a chemical for which there is scientific evidence of probable serious health or environmental effects. If the chemical company cannot provide evidence of adequate control, authorization would be granted only if the socioeconomic advantages of a specific use of a chemical are greater than its potential risks. If there are no suitable alternatives, authorization could be granted. on manufacturers, importers, and downstream users to ensure that they manufacture, place on the market, or use such substances that do not adversely affect human health or the environment. In general, the precautionary principle means that where there are threats of serious threats, there is a need to take action. Its provisions are underpinned by the precautionaries principle, which means that there is no need for the government to take any action at this stage in the development of the drug. The drug is now available in the U.S. and is available in Europe. statement regarding the effects of the chemical on human health and the magnitude of human exposure to the chemical. The benefits of thechemical for various uses and the availability of substitutes. The effects of a chemical on the environment. The magnitude of the environment’s exposure to a chemical. A. statement regarding the. effects of an environmental chemical on humans and the. magnitude of humans’ exposure to that chemical. a. statement about the benefits of a particular chemical for various. uses, and a.statement regarding. the availability. of substitutes for the chemical in the future.