added to the 2012 analysis. Navy officials pointed out that the U.S. News and World report ranking correlates to the quality of applicants to the Navy Nuclear Propulsion Program, a specific Navy officer accession requirement. We also clarified that because the services are required to subjectively determine how factors should be applied, these factors can change over time without justification. We therefore continue to believe that these factors continue to be a factor in the ranking of the Navy’s nuclear propulsion program, as well as other aspects of the program. the Navy made that correlation, nor why the Navy added this ranking for its 2012 review. We recognize that the services need some flexibility to prioritize factors on the basis of their individual needs for newly commissioned officers. But inconsistent measurements limit the services’ ability to compare program progress, results, and performance, the report says. The Navy says it has no comment on why the ranking was added for the 2012 review or why it was included in the overall ranking. The U.S. Army says it does not comment on the Navy's rankings. includes officers for the Marine Corps, ranged from 1,163 to 1,387; and the Air Force’s goal ranged from1,788 to1,940. The services generally met these overall production goals for newly commissioned officers. The Army met at least 95 percent of its goal, the Navy met at at least 91 percent ofIts goal. The Air Force met atAt least 96 percent of Its goal during this period. Furthermore, the Army and Air Force each exceeded their production. goals for 3 of the 5 years we studied. event that an over- or underproduction of officers is anticipated, each service correspondingly adjusts the number of people they plan to admit into future classes. Neither OSD nor the services have established performance standards for their Officer Candidate Schools or Officer Training Schools. In the Air Force, in the case of the Air force, Officer Training School is called Officer Candidate School (OCS) or OTS (Officer Training School) in the U.S. Air Force is known as Air Force Candidate School or OCS. regularly communicate with school administrators about the level of officer production at their respective college or university. In contrast, Air Force officials told us that they provide written notification annually to participating colleges and universities on their level of Officer production. Until the military services establish a formal strategy to communicate with schools about officer production, it's not clear what the military will do in the future, the authors say. The authors suggest that the Air Force provide written notifications annually to schools about their officer production levels. The Air Force also provides written notification to schools each year on their levels of Officer Production. over 5 years for 4-year schools and a minimum of 7 officers a year averaged over 5 years. We also analyzed the data provided to determine the degree to which the units are not meeting minimum production requirements. We looked at the percentage of units that were producing at least 7 officers per year and the percentage that were meeting the minimum production requirement. We found that the majority of the units were producing more than the minimum amount of officers required to meet the minimum. The units were also producing at a higher rate than required for 2-year and 4- year schools. that produced officers in specific ranges of officer production (e.g., fewer than 5, 5 to fewer than 10, 10 to. fewer than 15, 15 to fewer. than 20, 20 to fewer more than 30, etc. to over 50) We also reviewed fiscal year 2012 staff data of military personnel located at the U.S. Department of Defense's National Security Agency. We also looked at fiscal year 2011 staff data at the Department of the Defense's Office of Personnel Management. For more information on the NSC, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/30/military/features/military-news/2012/01-30/top-10-most-credible-cnn-recruiting-records. all states have at least one unit located within the state. Each unit may support students at more than one school. Typically, in these cases, the unit’s command staff is assigned to the school that has been designated as the host, and students travel from their affiliate school to the unit. In some cases, students travel to a unit that is located in the same state as the school where they are attending. In other cases, a unit is located outside of the state, such as in Hawaii. soon as possible. We are sending copies of this report to the Secretary of Defense, the Under Secretary of. Defense for Personnel and Readiness, the Secretaries of the. Army, the Navy, and the Air Force, and appropriate congressional committees. In addition, this report will also be available at no charge. We will make the report available to the general public at no cost. We hope to have the report released to the public as soon as possible, but if not, we will make it available to them at a later date. on the GAO website at http://www.gao.gov. Contact points for our Offices of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of this report. If you or your staff have any questions regarding this report, please contact me at (202) 512-3604 or farrellb@gaO.gov, or email me at farrell.b@GAo. Department of the Treasury at (800) 877-8255. Report: Data on Officers’ Commissioning Programs is Insufficiently Reliable and Needs to be Corrected. Military Personnel: Strategic Plan Needed to Address Army’s Emerging Officer Accession and Retention Challenges. GAO-07-372R. Washington, D.C.: March 8, 2007. The report was compiled by Stephanie Santoso, John Wren, and Stephanie Pose. For confidential support, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org. D.C.: January 19, 2007. Reserve Officers’ Training Corps: Questions Related to Organizational Restructuring. GAO/NSIAD-96-56. Officer Commissioning Programs: More Oversight and Coordination Needed. Reserve officers’ training corps: Less Need for Officers Provides Opportunity for Significant Savings. Reserve officer’s training program: Less need for officers Provides opportunity for Significant savings. Reserve Officer’ s training programs: More oversight and coordination are needed. Personnel Policy, Directorate of Accession Policy, Arlington, Virginia Deputy Chief of Staff, Military Personnel Management Directorate, Officer Division, Arlington,. Virginia Army Cadet Command, Fort Knox, Kentucky Deputy Chief. of Naval Operations, Manpower Personnel Education and Training, Arlington. Virginia Naval Service Training Command, Great Lakes, Illinois Department of the Air Force. Department of. of the. Air Force Department of Defense Department of Personnel and Readiness, Office of Personnel Management, Officer division, Arlington., Virginia. We conducted this performance audit from February 2013 to November 2013 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards are generally accepted by the United States government. We conducted this audit in accordance to generally accepted Government auditing Standards. The audit was conducted by the U.S. Marine Corps Recruiting Command, Quantico, Virginia. The results of the audit were published in the November 2013 issue of The Marine Corps Record of Service, which is published by the Marine Corps Historical Association. The Marine Corp Record of Services, published by The Marines Historical Association, is available online at www.marinecorpsrecord.org. 6, 1991. 6.6.6,1991. 6:30 p.m. EST. 6/6/1991. 2:30 a.m.-6:40 a.M. EST 6/7/1991: 2:00 a.k.a. 2.5 a.c. ET. 1:30am-1:30pm ET 6/8/91. 3:30 am-2:30 pm ET 6:00am-3:00pm ET 7:30-4:00 am 7:50am ET. and found that, in addition to the five factors to consider before closing a unit, two of the services incorporated additional factors into the closure consideration process. For example, in fiscal year 2012, the Navy included the U.S. News and World Report ranking of the schools associated with the units Navy’s explanation of how a particular unit closure consideration factor—outside of those specified in DOD Directive 1215.08—contributed to a service-specific need. We updated the draft to include the Navy's comment that it did not define how its use of this factor correlated to its need for a specific type of officer. as encroaching on the services’ authority to man, train, and equip their respective forces. Given that DOD Instruction 1215.08 requires this approval, which is to occur when a military department proposes closure of a particular unit it is difficult to understand how this methodology approval function could be viewed as an encroachment. DOD officials did not further elaborate on or provide additional support for their position that approving a methodology, as set forth in the DOD instruction, is not an appropriate oversight function to be performed at the department. DOD’s instruction specifies five factors for the military services to consider before closing a unit. These factors, which officials told us are the measures they currently use to assess the programs, are not clearly defined. These determinations can change over time without explanation. For example, we reviewed the methodologies used by each service to identify units for potential closure. It requires the services to subjectively determine how each factor should be defined and applied. It is unclear whether the guidance affects the objectivity of DOD's unit closure consideration factors. as 1 of 12 factors in its closure considerations, and the Air Force included “strategic partnerships’ as an important consideration. Neither service identified specifically how these factors correlate to the factors in DOD’s instruction, defined how they contribute to a service-specific need, or explained why these factors were included. The Air Force did not provide a specific reason for its decision to close the base. The Army did not release a specific rationale for closing the base, nor did the Navy release a similar rationale. maintaining the unit, (3) numbers of officers produced to meet service commissioning goals from categories that are difficult to achieve, and (4) number of officersproduced by the unit. The number and location of units in an area or state where the unit being considered for closure resides. However, several units have been closed in the past, including the U.S. Marine Corps, the Army, the Air Force, the Navy and the Army National Guard. The unit that is being considered to be closed has been closed at least once in its history. commissioned officers for DOD, they do so with a structure where half of the units do not meet DOD’s production requirements. Further, service efforts to revise this inefficient structure are hampered by performance measures that are not clearly defined, allow for inconsistent application of factors for closure, and do not do not have a clear definition of what a unit is supposed to be doing, according to the report. The report concludes that the current structure is inefficient and that it needs to be changed. of the military department concerned. As a courtesy, the services have, in the past, provided Congress with a list of units that are being recommended for consolidation or closure. OSD officials stated that the lack of closures in successive rounds of assessments of unit viability is producing a lack of closure recommendations. The military department is responsible for the day-to-day operations of the U.S. Air Force, the Navy, the Marine Corps and the Army. The Air Force is the largest branch of the military, followed by the Navy. provide a comprehensive understanding of programs’ efficiency or cost- effectiveness. Moreover, the department’s management approach has not required routine program evaluations. This has led to ad hoc analyses that present challenges in supporting unit closure recommendations. Clearly defined and comprehensive performance measures and routine evaluations using these measures against productivity to identify units for potential consolidation or closure. Further, we identified the measures used by each service to conduct these evaluations and compared them with key attributes of effective performance measures. We also interviewed knowledgeable officials. and address the retention or disestablishment of underproductive units. Effective oversight and regular communication with stakeholders are critical to the program’s effectiveness and continued success. Clear lines of responsibility when combined with performance measures provide leadership and decision makers with the transparency and authority required to make difficult decisions about the program's future. It is important to have a clear line of responsibility and performance measures in place to ensure that the program is on the right track. It's also important to be clear about the goals and objectives of the program and how to achieve them. level. Such oversight by the Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness that is clearly delineated in guidance could support efforts to improve the consistency of the services’ application of performance measures and evaluations. In light of the ad hoc reviews by the services noted earlier in this report, such oversight could be helpful, the report says. The report is based on a copy of the Defense Department’s guidance to the services on how to apply performance measures to the military. It is the result of an investigation by the Office of the Inspector General. when faced with the possibility that political or ideological concerns may override evaluation findings in decision making. Key elements of a results-oriented oversight framework include communicating results and using performance information to make decisions for improvement. As previously noted, the military services, including the U.S. armed forces, are the most likely to be subject to political pressure to meet performance goals. The military services are also the most susceptible to political pressures to meet their performance goals, according to a report by the Center for American Progress. routine and systematic and have not yielded closures that service officials believe are needed. Our prior work has shown that results-oriented program management practices include routine program evaluations, which are a key source of information about how well a program is working and whether it is achieving its intended results. We are happy to share our findings with the public, and hope you will share your own as well. We hope to hear from you in the coming days and weeks. Back to Mail Online home. Back To the page you came from. use performance information to identify gaps in performance, to improve organizational processes, and to improve their performance by aligning measures with the goals and objectives at each level of the organization. Further, the commitment of managers to results-oriented management is critical to the increased use of performance information that could be used to improve the company's performance. For more information on how to use performance information in your organization, go to: http://www.businessinsider.com/how-to-use-performance-information-in-your-organization. OSD officials stopped enforcing a requirement for annual reports from the services identifying the cost and budget for their respective ROTC programs. To regain some of the information on program visibility that it no longer obtains through the reports, OSD officials told us that they instead use data from service budget submissions to estimate cost data that is less specific than the data that were previously provided. The department’s efficiency initiatives, which removed reporting requirements related to internally generated oversight reports, have also been rolled back. obtained through the services’ automatic submission of these reports. Moreover, because they receive the data after it is submitted for the budget, there is little opportunity for the office to make changes or affect future management decisions. In addition, as noted previously, the DOD and service-level guidance provide performance measures that can be used to measure the effectiveness of the office's efforts. The office has no power to change the data. It can only make changes to the data that have been submitted to the budget. inconsistent measurements limit the services’ ability to compare program progress, results and efficiencies over time. For our other five recommendations, DOD concurred with each of them and estimated actions would be completed by July 2015. We encourage DOD to begin taking actions now to facilitate implementation of these recommendations as soon as possible. For more information, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2015/01/30/military/military-intelligence/top-five-recommendations-dod-to-implement-by-July-2015. DOD also provided technical comments on the draft report, which we incorporated as appropriate. DOD concurred with our recommendation to establish performance measures that are clearly defined and include cost components. DOD stated that our report contained a “minor discrepancy” because it did not include the cost component of the performance measures. The report was released to the public on Wednesday. It is available for download on the Defense Department’s website, along with a copy of the report. For confidential support, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org. these data with officials from the military services to gain an understanding of the processes and databases used to collect and record data. When we found inconsistencies in the data, we followed up with service officials to find out what was going on. We also wanted to understand existing data quality control procedures and known limitations of the data. These data were collected by the U.S. military from a variety of sources, including the National Security Agency, the Defense Department, and the State Department. For more information, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/29/military/military-surveillance-data. require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. In fiscal year 2014, the company had a net loss of $1.4 million. In 2013, the net loss was $2.1 million. The company had an operating loss of £1.2 million in fiscal year 2013. In 2014, it had a gross loss of £1.3 million. year 2012, the Reserve Officers’ Training Corps (ROTC) program produced over 9,000 active duty, guard, and reserve officers. Table 6 provides a listing of the number of officers produced in fiscal year 2012 by unit, school location, and service. Table 7 presents the Army’s enrollment information as of November 2012, table 8 presents the Navy’S enrollment information. table 9 presents the ROTC enrollment information for each of the military services’ military services. enrollment data, we identified that the services’ ROTC programs had about 53,000 students enrolled across all years of study. The enrollment information is alphabetized by state or U.S. territory, then by unit and then by school within the unit.presents the Air Force’s enrollment information as of December 2012. For more information, visit Air Force.mil/ROTC or go to Air Force ROTc.mil. for more information. For the full report, go to airforce.gov/rotc. 2012—the Army had over 33,000 students enrolled, the Navy had over 6,000 enrolled, and the Air Force had over 14,000. In addition to the contact named above, Margaret Best (Assistant Director), Emily Biskup, Rebekah J. Boone, Richard Burkard, Timothy Carr, Susan Ditto, Cynthia Grant, Kimberly Mayo, Michael S. Mayo, and Kimberly Mayo all contributed to this article. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org. for Army and Navy, civilian personnel. Table 1 below provides specific information about military and civilian personnel assigned to ROTC units for each service. Most states have a unit from each service located within the state and most are spread across the country. The U.S. Army is the largest military service, followed by the Navy and the Air Force. The Army National Guard is the second-largest service, after the Navy. The Air Force is the third-largest military service and the Marines are the fourth-largest. host unit for their ROTC activities. This typically happens no later than the junior year, prior to the service’s advanced training. The Navy maintains 12 RotC units in which the command structure and ROTc activities are divided between more than one host school. Naval ROTT refers to these as consortium units. This is the first time the Navy has used the term "consortium unit" in this way. It is the second time the service has used this term in this manner. and the all-volunteer force with its potential to provide officers from a variety of backgrounds and experiences available within the student population on a college or university campus. ROTC also provides a method of military outreach and contact with the public. By statute, at least one ROTc unit must be located in a state university or college. By law, ROTCs must be based in the state where they are based. The U.S. Army is the largest military college in the world, with more than 100,000 members. ROTC is the largest of the three major officer commissioning programs for DOD. The other two major commissioning officer sources include the military service academies and Officer Candidate Schools/Officer Training School. ROTC programs prepare college and university students to serve as officers in the military services. The program was established by the National Defense Act of 1916 to supplement the military academies in preparing selected students for commissioned military service and officer training. In fiscal year 2012, nearly half of all the newly commissioned active duty officers came from the ROTc program. The services organize their ROTC programs into administrative units and assign a command structure, including a commanding officer, to each unit. The services' headquarters determine the number of newly commissioned officers needed annually to support the services’ congressionally mandated end strength requirements for military personnel. They also provide guidance on the number. of officers expected from each officer commissioning program, from the Office of the Secretary of Defense (OSD) and the military services. regarding ROTc. We discussed with these officials the extent to which the services were meeting ROTT requirements for producing Newly commissioned officers. each unit provided to us by the military services and DOD’s fiscal year 2012 composite rates to determine the cost of military personnel per each ROTC unit in fiscal year2012. We reviewed the fiscal year 2014 budget documentation to identify the average operation and maintenance cost (excluding scholarships) per ROTCs in fiscal 2012. We used these data to determine cost of units that met and did not meet DOD minimum production requirements for fiscal years 2008 through 2012. To assess the reliability of the production and cost data, we discussed. for in-state and out-of-state students. The tuition cost difference is not insignificant, with college tuition for some schools costing six times more. Despite the significant variance in tuition, all ROTC units are subject to state and local requirements. The annual average in- state tuition of about $7,100 for a 4-year college or university is for a four-year degree. For more information, visit the U.S. Army ROTc website at: http://www.usarmy.org/rotc. the same numerical production requirement regardless of the actual cost each service incurs at a particular college or university. Because such cost data are not consistently accounted for, it is not clear how the production requirement can be used to justify DOD’s investment. The absence of clearly defined measures also means that DOD can’t justify its investment in the U.S. military in the absence of clear and reliable measures of the cost of the military service to the public, the report says. The report concludes that DOD should invest in the military in a way that justifies its investment. The military services’ ROTC programs each came within a few percentage points of meeting or exceeding the annual officer production goals that they established to meet their respective authorized end strengths. Each service reported that various factors may goal, actual production, and the percent of the goal met by each service for fiscal years 2008 through 2012. We determined that these data were sufficiently reliable for determining the extent to which the military services are meeting ROTc production goals and unit level requirements as well as the cost per unit. The military services typically operate ROTC programs using a 5-year production cycle. The military services do not consistently adhere to this requirement, the authors say. They say the military services may be missing important opportunities to build awareness about the ROTc program and to leverage the support of schools in meeting annual production goals. For example, Army and Navy officials told us that they currently do not meet their production goals for ROTCs. The authors say that the military needs to focus more on the concept of a citizen-soldier than on quantitative production capability. affect their ability to meet these goals, and that they have faced challenges commissioning officers for certain occupational specialties. In addition, half of all ROTC units did not produce the minimum average annual production of officers over a 5-year period required by DOD to justify investment in an RotC unit. DOD’s production requirement does not take into account a service's investment in a particular ROTc unit because it does not account for cost-related factors, such as the differences in the cost of tuition for public and private colleges. In fiscal years 2008 through 2012, each service came within a few percentage points of meeting or exceeding its overall ROTC officer production goals for newly commissioned officers. For the 5 years we reviewed, the Army’s RotC program goal for newly. commissioned officers ranged from 4,500 to 5,350; the Navy’S goal was 4,350. We determined the overall productivity of the services’ ROTT programs by comparing the number of ROT C officers produced to the ROTc officer goals. easier to maintain underproductive ROTC units than attempt to secure the congressional support needed for their closure. DOD’s instruction gives service Secretaries discretion on which units to close. Services do not consistently communicate with key stakeholders, such as members of Congress and schools, about performance. This has contributed to difficulty gaining methodologies for closure in coordination with the Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller), and receiving annual reports on costs and budget for service RotC programs. The functions such as setting policy, DOD's Instruction 1215.08 does not specify department-level review of performance measures. ROTC programs are governed by both DOD and service-level guidance. Key attributes of results-oriented program management include the cascading of goals and objectives throughout an organization and aligning performance measures with the objectives from the executive level down to the operational level. In addition, internal evaluations that political support for such closures.be measured against ROTC program goals and objective to influence policy and program decisions. This commitment could be demonstrated by their willingness and ability to make decisions and manage programs on the basis of results. The military services’ ROTC programs have conducted a total of 11 evaluations over the past decade. The evaluations did not assess the overall RotC program against strategic goals and objectives, the authors say. They recommend that the Secretary of Defense direct the Under Secretary of defense for Personnel and Readiness to establish a systematic process to evaluate ROTc program performance using comprehensive performance measures. The authors say that a body of evidence is more valuable to decision makers than a single study; multiple studies with similar results strengthen confidence in their conclusions. made any significant progress in improving their ability to report ROTC program performance. established at a college or university. School administrators have to agree to various requirements, to include granting the academic rank of professor to the senior commissioned officer assigned to the program at that institution and adopting the adopted title of "professor" for the program's senior commissioned officers. For more information, go to the U.S. Army ROTc website. for more information on how to get involved in the program, or to learn more about how to become a member, visit the ArmyROTC website. performance that includes taking the following three actions: establish performance measures that are clearly defined and require routine evaluations of ROTC programs. Measure progress against the strategic goals and objectives of RotC programs; and use the performance information resulting from ROTc program evaluations to assess and document the need for improvement in the program. The U.S. Army Reserve Officers' Training Corps is a unit of the United States Army. It was founded in 1894 and is based in Washington, D.C. the services have conducted a total of 11 evaluations to identify units for consolidation or closure. However, the evaluations have largely occurred on an ad hoc basis and are narrowly focused on assessing the productivity of individual ROTC units, rather than the overall performance of the program. The military services have been unsuccessful in completing any of these politically sensitive consolidations or closures. The collectively have conducted 11 assessments of unit productivity in the past 10 years. All of which have produced proposals recommending selected ROTc units for consolidate or closure, but no closures have occurred. DOD Instruction 1215.08 requires the military services to consider the operation and maintenance cost of maintaining ROTC units. We reviewed the methodologies used by each service to evaluate unit productivity and found that the operations and maintenance costs were not routinely considered in their evaluations. As a result, the services may be using results of incomplete evaluations to draw conclusions about unit performance. In recent evaluations of unit productivity, the Army and the Air Force did not consider any RotC costs, and the Navy considered only the cost of tuition. that do not provide a comprehensive understanding of the overall cost-effectiveness and efficiency of ROTC programs. With (1) the absence of OSD following some requirements in existing guidance, and (2) weaknesses we identified in performance measures, it is unclear how OSD and the services strategic goals and objectives would give them the tools to identify, collect, and evaluate performance information. This information, particularly when available over a period of time, would allow OSD to recognize the programs’ accomplishments. DOD’s management of ROTC programs is hampered by not having performance measures that provide a comprehensive understanding of the overall cost-effectiveness and efficiency. In the absence of fully developed performance measures, the military services have evaluated aspects of their respective RotC programs. These evaluations have provided the services with some useful information. But they have largely occurred on an ad hoc basis because the services have measure progress toward strategic goals and objectives. Decision makers cannot determine the cost-effective or efficiency of R OTC programs over time. programs risk having more units than needed or units that are not most effectively located to meet service goals for their officers. OSD and the military services are generally assigned responsibility for conducting oversight of ROTC programs. Although the Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness conducts some oversight, OSD officials acknowledged that they do not conduct the other oversight activities specified in guidance. They do not review and approve the services’ methodologies for proposed unit closures because they see it as unfair. to communication with schools. We also interviewed knowledgeable officials from OSD and the military services on the activities and mechanisms used to conduct oversight of, and to communicate with stakeholders on, ROTC programs. We visited or contacted the following organizations during our review: Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for Military, Office of the Secretary of the Army, National Institute of Standards and Technology, and the National Association of Military Colleges and Employers (NAMEC). We also spoke with the National Institute for Military Education and Training (NIMET) about its work with the military. The military services have had difficulty gaining buy-in for recommendations to close dozens of underproductive ROTC units collectively across the services. The military services do not have an effective strategy for communicating with stakeholders such as Congress or school administrators. DOD concurred with our six recommendations to make management, oversight, and accountability improvements to RotC programs. DOD also described steps that it planned to take in response to our recommendations. The recommendations are reprinted in appendix IV. program performance and costs, procedures for the establishment and disestablishment of ROTS units, and assessments of R OTC unit productivity. ROTC program performance. Stakeholder involvement is an important strategy that we have identified in our past work to facilitate agencies’ use of evaluations in program management and policy making. Organizations reach out early to gain buy-in, engage in regular communication, and build trusting relationships—even if it’s a small group of people. We’ve identified this strategy as an important way to help agencies get the most out of their ROTC programs. We have identified it as a way to get the best out of our ROTc programs, and we’re working to make it happen. the Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness and the Secretaries of the military services. DOD Instruction 1215.08 tasks the Under Secretary with establishing policy and providing implementing guidance, resolving matters of conflict among the services that are operating ROTC units, approving instruction. We found that the U.S. Under Secretary for Personnel is not fully implementing oversight responsibilities that exist in guidance. To help improve the oversight and accountability of the. military services’ ROTc programs, we recommend that the Secretary of. Defense direct the Under. Secretary for. Personnel and. Readiness to take the following three actions: reexamine and clarify DOD. Instruction 12 15.08. control standards require that management sets and monitors these objectives and that these responsibilities should be appropriately documented. At the department level, the purpose of DOD Instruction 1215.08 is to establish policy, assign responsibilities, and prescribe procedures for DOD oversight of ROTC. The instruction assigns responsibility for these actions to the Department of the Army and the Army Reserve Officers' Training Corps (AROTC) Commanders are responsible for the training of AROTC cadets. The training of cadets is a key component of the military's national security strategy. Army officials say disestablishment categories specified in the regulation have not been used for years. The variability of the factors used in considering ROTC units for closure hinders the services’ efforts to compare evaluation results over time, even within a single service. Until clearly defined and applied, the process is too time consuming, Army officials say. and efficiency over time. We found no additional guidance on how to define or apply the closure consideration factors in DOD’s instruction. The Army regulation specifies a process for categorizing potential closures. although the services’ evaluations of ROTC units yielded recommendations for consolidation or closures, no closures have occurred as a result. DOD Instruction 1215.08 specifies that the Secretaries of the military departments shall, among other things, establish, operate, and disestablish ROTc units. The decision to disestablish a RotC unit military coursework for ROTT into its curriculum. Further, DOD Instruction. 1215, requires the military services to advise schools whose ROTS units are not producing enough officers to justify investment. DOD guidance specifies service Secretary responsibilities for and the authority to close ROTC units. Some senior service officials have concluded that it is in part because and prior the services do not proactively and periodically engage congressional stakeholders on RotC program performance. DOD Instruction 1215.08 does not require congressional notification about ROTc program performance and that the decision to close units is the prerogative of the Secretary of the military department concerned. It is the service Secretary's responsibility to decide whether to close a unit. on how the services should define and assess quality, which could lead to the inconsistent application of the measure by the services. Another example is that DOD’s instruction directs the services to consider the geographic representation of ROTC units. However, the instruction does not describe how concentrated the RotC presence in an area or state should be. This could lead the Services to under- or over-emphasize the relative importance of an ROTc unit to a particular area. Furthermore, DOD”s instruction requires officer production from each unit to be adequate to justify DOD investment. growing backlog of underproductive units. As a result, service officials acknowledged that this increasing number of under productive ROTC units may make congressional acceptance of all the closures at one time difficult to achieve. We have previously reported on the department’s lack of reporting and communication of RotC program performance. For example, in our 1973 and 1977 reports we found that the services’ reporting to DOD and Congress were inadequate to make necessary judgments on ROTc program effectiveness. We found that DOD and the services had not followed up on these reports.