needs or provide a backup in case AC operations at LANL were suspended or disrupted. A second site would provide another source of technicians trained for plutonium AC. It might cost more to perform AC at two sites rather than one, though it is impossible to know without the data. It would necessitate shipping many plutonium samples per year from LANL to another site, which would increase the risk of an accident and could cause public concern. It may be beneficial to have all plutonium AC technicians atLANL.  LANL would strengthen its position as the nation's plutonium center. While SRS and LLNL could both do this work, their facilities presumably have the same training and operate according to the same formal and informal procedures.one site so they would have thesame training and operation. LANL is the only facility in the U.S. that can handle plutonium production and processing at the same time as SRS or LLNL. SRS has the majority of the plutonium production capacity at LANL, while LLNL has the rest. plutonium building at LANL by 2019, as a separate line item in the FY2016 budget "to add additional visibility into the process" House Appropriations Committee recommended a substantial increase in funding "for a robust experimental effort in fiscal year 2015" to better understand the properties of plutonium and ensure it's safe to use. The House Appropriations committee recommended a huge increase in funds for the experimental effort. The Senate Appropriations Committee also recommended a large increase in the funding for the effort in the 2015 budget, to ensure that plutonium is safe for use. rather than trying to build a "big box" plutonium building that would attempt to accommodate all foreseeable future needs. Others respond that modules could be costly and, if existing buildings can be used, may not be needed. The approach has been rejected for several big-box buildings over many years, according to the Nuclear Power Research Institute (NPRI) in Washington, D.C. The NPRI is a nuclear power research institute that is based at the University of Maryland, College Park. It is the largest nuclear reactor in the United States. NNSA, DOD, or an independent group like the National Academy of Sciences or the JASON defense advisory group could do the report. Since LANL is intimately familiar with PF-4, it could be argued that it should do it. On the other hand, LANL could be perceived as having a conflict of interest. An independent group could also do it, but it would be more expensive and time-consuming than a LANL-led report. An NNSA-DOD report could also be done by LANL, but that would be costly and time consuming. independent group would not have this potential conflict of interest but would not. have LANL's knowledge of PF-4. To address this dilemma, LANL might conduct the initial study and an independent group could review it. Another approach would be to have the study prepared jointly by LANL and Lawrence Livermore. For more information, visit www.lanl.org and www.livermore.org. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details.  Quantification of Margins and Uncertainties, or QMU, was developed by LANL and Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL) The idea underlying QMU is that nuclear weapons can be maintained without testing. QMU was developed to demonstrate confidence in the safety and reliability of these weapons. It was developed as part of a stockpile stewardship program to maintain nuclear weapons without testing, and to reduce the risk of a nuclear warhead going off in the event of an emergency. The program was implemented by the U.S. Department of Energy in the 1990s. National Laboratory (LLNL), or prepared by LANL and peer-reviewed by LLNL. Since the two labs have often competed for projects and have a reputation as "friendly adversaries," involving LLNL involving LANL would be a good idea. LLNL and LANL are both nuclear weapon design laboratories, so LLNL's expertise would be of use in evaluating a LANL study. The study was published in the journal "Nuclear Weapons Research and Development," which is published by the U.S. Department of Energy. A second site could accommodate a surge in AC.testing. Peer review is essential in developing or maintaining weapons. A similar argument could apply to peer review of AC. Testing. The U.S. government is considering opening a second site for AC testing. The second site would be based in Washington, D.C. and would be open to the public. It could be used to conduct AC testing in the United States or in other countries, such as Australia, Canada and the U.K. variables? Were there biases in experiments on which the calculations were based? Were the most relevant nuclear tests used as a data source? The uncertainty can be quantified through calculations (such as computer models); further, the amount of uncertainty is bounded because each gate has an upper and a lower. Each gate has a lower and an upper gate, so the uncertainty is bound by the lower and upper gate. The uncertainty is also bounded by the higher and the lower gate, because the upper and lower gate has higher and lower gates. Plutonium Recycle and Purification (PRP) uses aqueous (plutonium dissolved in acid) processes and molten processes to recover pure plutonium from scrap or from retired pits by chemically removing impurities. PRP would use two modules. Module 1 would house processes from PRP, and Module 2 would house PRP-related processes. In Table 3, the PRP modules would be shown in order of their functionality: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6. are dissolved in acid. Plutonium is then precipitated out of solution as plutonium oxalate, and is then roasted to produce plutonium oxide. A further process removes plutonium that remains in the acid. This area also recovers and purifies plutonium using high-temperature chemical processes. Readiness in Technical Base and Facilities (RTBF) is a part of the U.S. Department of Energy’s Energy Security and Policy Directorate (EPSD), which also includes the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) Pu-238 is the heat source for radioisotope power systems (RPS) for space probes, and has military applications as well. It is manufactured by bombarding rods of neptunium-237 with neutrons in a nuclear reactor. It undergoes radioactive decay much more rapidly than does Pu-239, producing uranium. Pu-238 has been used in the U.S. Air Force's F-16 fighter jet program since the 1980s. It has also been used as a heat source in space probes. Pu-238 must be purified before it can be used. PF-4 receives Pu-238, removes the impurities through chemical processes, and makes plutonium oxide, which it presses into capsules. It mates some capsules with other equipment to make RPSs for military applications, and sends other capsules to other countries for use in military operations. It also makes plutonium-based weapons for the U.S. Air Force, Navy, Marines and the Marines, among other things. The company is based in Fort Worth, Texas.  Materials Recycle and Recovery (MR&R) examines containers of plutonium in PF-4 that are to be sent to WIPP for permanent disposition. MR&R repackages the plutonium in new containers if the containers have deteriorated. Pit Disassembly and Conversion: This area ofPF-4 houses ARIES (Advanced Recovery and Conversion) The plutonium in this area weighs in at less than one kilogram (1.2 pounds) per ton (1,000 kilograms) per year. capsules to Idaho National Laboratory, which does the same to make RPSs for space probes. Plutonium Recycle and Purification (PR&P): This area recovers plutonium from scrap plutonium (such as from lathe turnings, pits scrapped for not meeting standards, or retired pits) for use in weapons and other programs. The scraps are sent back to the U.S. to be used in weapons or other programs, such as in the Apollo 11 space shuttle mission, which used plutonium for its core. by a disaster, such as an earthquake that collapses a building followed by a fire. Each building that works with plutonium has a building-specific MAR allowance. MAR is expressed in units of plutonium equivalent, discussed next. Plutonium is the fissile material in pits. Four forms are relevant here: Pu-239 (Pu-239), Pu-238, Pu-241 and Pu-252. The amount of plutonium per square foot in a building is called the plutonium equivalent allowance (MAR) plutonium building at LANL, would make MAR and space available for other purposes. In PF-4, MAR is measured in units of plutonium equivalent (PE), which is about 1.38 times as radioactive as Pu-239. This measure is linked to potential dose if plutonium is released, such as by an earthquake and a nuclear explosion. The building would be used for research and development, as well as other purposes, including storage, storage and distribution of plutonium and other materials. dose, and dose is the key factor in determining the amount of MAR permitted. Installing in production areas containers designed to remain intact in a building collapse; plutonium in these containers is not "at risk" and is thus not MAR. Removing tons of combustible material; Removing plutonium from the production area; and removing tons of other combustible materials from other parts of the facility. In the U.S., the maximum amount of plutonium allowed to be produced is 1 gram per person per day. is permitted to hold up to 38.6 grams of plutonium-239 equivalent (Pu-239E), or 26 grams of WGPu. Radiological Facilities do not require stringent safety or security measures because the dose to onsite or offsite personnel in the event of a worst-case accident would be very low. A revision of 10 C.F.R. 830, Nuclear Safety Management, would have required an extended period for rulemaking and would likely have impacted many other DOE facilities. Pu-239 is the fissile isotope in pits. Pits contain other plutonium isotopes in addition to Pu-239. That mixture is called weapons-grade plutonium (WGPu) WGPu is about 1.5 times as radioactive as Pu- 239. Plutonium-238 is 277 times more radioactive than Pu-238. W GPu is used to make nuclear weapons, such as the Trinity bomb. It is also used to produce nuclear weapons such as The Trinity Project. Since the United States no longer produces plutonium, all U.S. plutonium is "old," such as from retired pits. As plutonium decays, it produces other elements, such as uranium and americium. These must be removed by chemical processes to purify plutonium for use in new pits. (Chemical processes do not. require plutonium to be used in pits. Requirements. for new pits vary from state to state. For more information, go to www.nasa.gov/plutonium. RTBF Construction, using the CMRR line item to fund these projects is consistent with the committee's recommendation: 04-D-125, Chemistry and Metallurgy Research (CMR) Replacement Project, LANL. The Committee recommends $35,700,000, instead of providing funds for these activities under Program Readiness as in the budget request. This approach is consistent and consistent with our recommendation for the overall budget. The committee recommends that the budget be increased to $35.7 million. RTBF is NNSA's program for operating the nuclear weapons complex and maintaining its infrastructure. Within PF-4, RTBF space is used for functions that support multiple programs, such as shipping and receiving, waste management, and material control and accountability. NNSA operates the weapons complex from a base in Virginia, Virginia, which is home to the U.S. Navy's F/A-18 Hornet aircraft carrier. The F/E-18 is based in Virginia and is part of the Navy's P-4 fleet. needed may be evolving due to changing programmatic requirements for plutonium. The scope of the additional work being requested is consistent with the original mission need to provide analytic chemistry and material characterization space in a different facility than the legacy CMR building. Similarly, PF-4 reconfiguration activities are also appropriate to support the mission's goals. The mission's goal is to provide the capability to meet the needs of the U.S. nuclear weapons program in a cost-effective and efficient manner. For more information on the mission, visit: http://www.nasa.gov/programs/strategic-programming/strategies/strategy-and-strategy. to be conducted as part of the original CMR Replacement project so long as they are limited to re-equipping lab space for capabilities that were previously housed in the legacy CMR building. Construction of new modular facilities and installation of equipment within PF-4 to establish enhanced pit production capabilities are to be conducted. The project is expected to be completed by the end of 2015. The cost of the project is estimated to be $1.2 billion, with the majority of the work to be carried out in the next three years. the Chemistry and Metallurgy Research Replacement (CMRR) line item construction project. This line item remains open. It would fund actions that would accomplish the tasks proposed for CMRR-Nuclear Facility (NF), which NNSA stated in its FY2013 request were "plutonium chemistry, plutonium physics, and storage of special nuclear materials" PEI would support MC, and relates to plutonium physics. A separate activity, not part of the C MRR project, is removing excess special nuclear material from the storage vault in PF-4. PF-4 prepares test items for experiments at the Nevada National Security Site that do not produce a nuclear yield. PF-4 supports some of these experiments, such as by preparing samples for analytical chemistry and materials characterization. MC measures bulk properties of plutonium such as tensile strength, and is used in nuclear weapons research. The U.S. Department of Energy has a nuclear weapon research program that uses the PFC to test nuclear weapons. The PFC has been used in the development of nuclear weapons since the 1950s. finished pit with x-ray imaging, physical measurements, etc., to ensure it meets specifications. NNSA and its predecessor organizations have monitored the condition of nuclear weapons using a variety of techniques. Pits are monitored at Pantex Plant (TX) and PF-4. The U.S. nuclear weapons program began in the 1950s and has since grown to include more than 100,000 warheads and hundreds of billions of pounds of nuclear material. It is now the world's largest program of nuclear weapon production. PF-4 monitoring techniques include taking physical measurements, checking for release of gases that may indicate deterioration of the pit, examining pits for corrosion, and taking pits apart to perform AC and MC on samples of the plutonium. While Pantex can perform some of these tasks, pits can be disassembled only. Pantex is not available in the U.S. for use in the production of plutonium, and is not approved for use by the Department of Energy or the National Institute of Standards and Technology. PF-4 is the last U.S. plutonium processing building to come online. As of June 2014, NNSA had the capacity to of excellence for plutonium. LANL has the scientific, engineering, and craft expertise needed to make pits. The Chemistry and Metallurgy Research (CMR) building currently provides AC support for limited pit production. It is the only remaining U.s. multi-program, multi-function plutonium processing facility. It would be about a half-century old when production is anticipated to reach 80 ppy. Plutonium Facility 4 is the only building in the United States with the combination of attributes required to make pits. Its current MAR allowance is 1,800 kg PE. It is located at LANL, the nation's "center as noted in the sidebar, uses space data from 2012. LANL points out that PF-4, as the only U.S. building that is currently able to making pits, is essential to the entire nuclear weapons enterprise: no PF-3, no pits, no LEPs that require new pits. manufacture about 10 non-war reserve pits per year in PF-4. However, with most work atPF-4 halted in June 2013, the actual manufacturing rate has been reduced. War reserve (WR) pits are those judged acceptable for use in the nuclear stockpile. Other pits are manufactured for such purposes as development or process qualification. For more information, visit the U.S. Department of Energy's nuclear stockpile website. for more information on PF- 4, visit www.nuke stockpile.org. Pit fabrication generates some plutonium scraps, such as excess material from castings, shavings from lathes, and pits scrapped because they did not meet specifications. Providing for recycle of this plutonium requires space, and producing 80 ppy would require more space than 30. Major construction could make more space available. Increasing efficient use of existing space could increase the space margin. Designing work flow to minimize space utilization. When DOE decided to move pit manufacture to PF-4, the decision was made to save space. high-MAR tasks, such as casting plutonium into hemishells or working with Pu-238. Figure 3 shows how moving these two tasks into two modules could release space in PF-4. Unused space therefore represents opportunity for plutonium work forgone. Would moving the entire Pu- 238 line, 9,600 sf, to another site have the same effect? Would moving 5,000 sf of Pu-237 work to two modules create unused space inPF-4? remove specific isotopes of plutonium.) PF-4 uses 10,400 sf for plutonium recycle and purification. How much plutonium could that area purify per year? How many ppy would that capacity support? How much more space would be needed to provide plutonium for 80 ppy? Alternatively, could these processes be moved to a larger facility? Could the process of purification be moved from one facility to another? Could it be done in a single facility or in a series of facilities? molten plutonium from Pit Fabrication and from PRP. (This would eliminate PRP within PF-4.) This option would move about 198 kg of MAR out ofPF-4. Module 1 would have 1.5% as much MAR as PF- 4 and Module 2 would have 0.9% more plutonium. On a scale using total PF-3 MAR (2,600 kg PE) as 100%, this would have about 198kg of MAR. This would move 1,000 kg of plutonium from PF-1 to PF-2. Make more efficient use of PF-4's basement, which houses the nuclear materials vault and most utilities. It may be possible to move out some operations from the basement, such as staging waste drums.or space used for lower-priority programs, as discussed. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. drum storage, freeing space to house such laboratory-floor operations as nondestructive analysis, and some waste management operations. Move some equipment out of PF-4. For example, a gas gun, which propels a metal slug into a plutonium target to study how plutonium behaves under impact. The gas gun uses space that would otherwise be used for other equipment, such as equipment that would need to be moved to a different part of the facility to be ready for the next round of testing. wall more strongly to the ceiling, installing braces that tie columns to beams, building shear walls, and installing a drag strut on the roof of PF-4. Other steps could reduce the risk that plutonium would escape. plutonium escaping in an accident causes a number of health problems, such as plutonium-related cancers and plutonium-induced respiratory problems. plutonium escapes in an accidents causes a variety of health issues, including cancer and respiratory problems, as well as other problems such as cancer and heart problems. The U.S. government has not determined how much plutonium it would need to store. from PF-4; and Anchoring gloveboxes more strongly to the floor to reduce the likelihood that an earthquake would knock them over, exposing plutonium to the air. Unlike pit manufacturing, AC involves little MAR because it involves little plutonium because it is made in the pit. Unlike Pit Manufacturing, AC requires little MAR as it is not made in a pit, but in an AC-based facility, it is done in a much smaller area. A fire could generate plutonium oxide particles and release them into the atmosphere, which could be dangerous. offsite personnel that a worst-case accident could be expected to cause. The requirements for a building depend on dose. There are myriad other regulations, all of which come together in a document called a Documented Safety Analysis, or DSA, which is tailored to each building and specifies the amount of radiation to be used in a building. The DSA can be found at: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/29/health/healthcare/index.html#storylink=cpy. of radioactive material the building can hold and still remain below the dose thresholds set by DOE Orders in the event of a worst-case accident. While each building in the Hazard Category system requires a DSA, a Radiological Facility, such as RLUOB, does not because of the amount of radioactive material it can hold. The building is located on the campus of the University of Maryland, Baltimore County. It has a total capacity of more than 1,000,000 cubic feet of storage space. building features in RLUOB, NNSA calculated that the dose from the increased material in a worst-case accident would still be below the dose thresholds set by DOE Orders. Operating RLU OB as an HC-3 facility would not require congressional approval. Instead, congressional oversight would come through the normal reviews associated with the normal review process for such a facility, the NNSA said. The agency said it has no immediate plans to use the facility as a nuclear weapons research facility, but it could be used in the future. Having 9 kg of plutonium in CMR, as at present, poses a much greater risk than having 400 grams in RLUOB. NNSA points out that—comparing the quantity of plutonium, the age, and the structural integrity of the two buildings. If NNSA is able to remove the plutonium from CMR it will have a greater impact on the safety of the building than if it removed it from RLUob. If it is not possible to remove it, the building will have to be demolished. The Radiological Laboratory-Utility-Office Building (RLUOB, pronounced "rulob") was completed in FY2010. It is configured for AC. NNSA plans that RLUOB would house AC equipment needed to support pit manufacture, and possibly enough to support manufacture of 80 ppy.in the CMR facility at LANL in approximately 2019. The building is expected to be fully operational by the end of 2019. It will be used for research, development, and testing. was "deferr[ed] … for at least five years" in the FY2013 budget request on cost grounds. NNSA plans to include funds for two subprojects in the CMRR line item construction project beginning with the FY2016 request. One is adding new AC equipment to RLUOB so it can perform AC to the facility. The other is adding a new AC system to the building's roof so that it can be used to perform AC on the roof of the building. Defense Programs, the Office of General Counsel, and staff specializing in construction and in National Environmental Policy Act issues will meet with Los Alamos National Laboratory over the summer and fall of 2014 to understand the costs and benefits of this approach. A Radiological Facility like RLUOB would be the first of its kind in the U.S. and would be located in the heart of the National Security Agency's home base in New Mexico. The facility is expected to be operational by the end of 2015. reasons: a fault runs underneath the building; CMR was built to the seismic standards of the late 1940s, so it is much more vulnerable to collapse in an earthquake than is RLUOB; and studies have found it to be "decrepit" and "structurally unsound" as a result of its poor condition. The building was built in the 1940s and has been condemned by the U.S. National Institute of Standards and Technology, which has called it a "deplorable building" Congress and the Administration searched for many years for a way to make pits. NNSA proposed a two-track strategy. In one track, Plutonium Facility 4 (PF-4) was the main plutonium building at Los Alamos National. In the other track, the plant was dismantled and remediated. The site is now known as Rocky Flats, and is home to the Rocky Mountain National Laboratory and Rocky Mountain Air Force Base. It is also the site of a nuclear weapons research facility. manufacture and other plutonium tasks in PF-4. Most of it was completed in 1952. It is "genuinely decrepit" and "structurally unsound," in the words of two studies. The building is much more vulnerable to collapse in an earthquake than more recent buildings. "NNSA maintains its commitment to cease programmatic operations," says the NNSA's statement on the closure ofPF-4, which is expected to last until at least 2023. The decision was made by the NSA's board of directors, which also voted to close the facility. of using or modifying existing facilities across the nuclear security enterprise" to support NNSA's plutonium strategy. The Senate Armed Services Committee directed NNSA to include construction of modules (described later), which would support an exit from a 1950s-era a large plutonium facility. NNSA requested FY2015 funds for the AC and MC subprojects as part of the Program Readiness component of Readiness in Technical Base and Facilities (RTBF) The House Appropriations Committee recommended including these funds in the FY2015 defense authorization bill. Congress has been deeply involved for decades in setting policy, providing funding, and supporting or rejecting programs for the nuclear weapons enterprise. For example, it established the National Nuclear Security Administration (NNSA), a semi-autonomous component of the Department of Energy. It also rejected a major facility to manufacture a key nuclear weapon component. It initiated and later rejected the Reliable Replacement Warhead; and directed NNSA, the Government Accountability Office, and others to conduct studies on nuclear weapon issues. One available for pit manufacture or other uses. However, the space limit is absolute: 60,000 sf of laboratory space. If manufacturing 80 ppy requires more space than is available in PF-4, NNSA would need to find alternatives, whether building modules, moving some tasks to other sites, or reducing capacity to whatever. This option would result in 26,300 sf for pit work inPF-4. In determining the feasibility of this option, N NSA will need to evaluate space and MAR at other sites. the NNSA can support certification requirements for pit reuse. Use of retired pits in life extension programs would reduce the number of new pits that would have to be manufactured. The committee also recommended $35.7 million for moving certain activities. The NNSA has not said if it will move certain activities or whether it will use retired pits for life-extension programs. It has said it has no immediate plans to use retired pit for life Extension programs, though it has considered the idea in the past. key decisions and an approach to help structure them. It focuses on two metrics: the amount of two facility resources (laboratory floor space and Material At Risk (MAR), discussed next) available for pit manufacturing. It shows that it is not known whether available amounts suffice. While NNSA has extrapolated space, we have extrapolated material at risk as well. We will discuss this further in the next section of this article. We are happy to answer any questions you may have about pit manufacturing in the future. with the Committee's previous direction to the NNSA to carry out all CMR replacement activities in accordance with DOE Order 413.3B. There is little transparency or accountability for delivering these activities on time and within budget. While the capacity and amount of process equipment not sufficiently related to the original mission need of the existing project, and the Committee does not support the inclusion of these activities as subprojects within the existing C MR replacement project. REI-2 and PEI would also permit N NSA to exit the CMR building, a long-time goal of NNSA for several. in the CMR building; as noted, NNSA plans to halt programmatic operations there "in approximately 2019" Given NNSA's plan to achieve a 30-ppy capacity by FY2026, work currently done in CMR would have to be performed elsewhere. Second, producing 80 ppy would require additional AC, as AC must be performed in the C MR building. NNSA says it plans to achieve 30 ppy capacity by fiscal year 2026, with a goal of 80 by then. NNSA to perform all the tasks planned for CMRR-NF, the cost of which was projected in the FY2012 budget request to be between $3,710 million and $5,860 million. While there are no cost estimates for NNSA's path forward, it would cost substantially less than CMRr-NF because it would avoid building. NNSA would perform all of the tasks for C MRR- NF at a fraction of the cost. It would also avoid building new facilities. for analyzing requirements for manufacturing, details key questions, and raises the possibility that Congress may choose to direct NNSA to generate the data needed to answer them. Regardless of what capacity is needed, and when, Congress and the Administration will need to decide among options. This report presents three options that could be used to answer key questions about the future of the U.S. surveillance system. The report also details three options for how to use the data that would be generated. It was published by the National Security Agency, a part of the NSA. QMU was that several steps in a nuclear weapon must all work for the weapon to be detonated. The steps include transmission of a signal to detonate the weapon, explosion of the high explosive surrounding the pit, and transmission of the energy from the explosion of a primary stage to the secondary stage. QMU was the name given to a group of scientists who developed the theory of nuclear weapon detonation in the 1950s. The group was known as the "QMU" group and was based in the University of Maryland. Each step, or "gate" in QMU terminology, can be quantified. For example, a certain amount of energy must be transmitted to the secondary for it to detonate. Another QMU concept is margin. If the minimum amount of. energy needed to detonated the secondary is X, and the amount. of energy needed is X - and the minimum. amount of power needed to trigger the detonation is X. - the QMU can be used to measure the safety of a device. uncertainties that could increase or decrease availability of, or requirements for, space and MAR, thus increasing or decreasing margin. Figure 1 shows hypothetical examples of uncertainties. Those in red could reduce margin, and those in green could increase it. The longer the timeframe, the more uncertainties can be expected to increase. For more information, visit the U.S. Department of Defense's website or go to: http://www.defense.gov/guidance/unmanned-space. in Figure 1 , is for Congress or NNSA to bar from PF-4 new missions that would consume MAR and space. Maintaining margin despite uncertainties: It would not be acceptable to let uncertainties that materialize into actual events reduce margin below zero, as Figure 1 shows. It would be better to bar missions that could be placed elsewhere, such as in space or on the moon. It's better to keep the margin at 0, as shown in Figure 1, than to reduce it to zero. of energy predicted to be transmitted to the secondary is 3X, then there is a margin of 2X, i.e., margin is the amount by which the predicted quantity exceeds the minimum required quantity. At the same time, there are uncertainties in the predicted quantities. Did the calculation incorporate all relevant information? If yes, then the calculation was correct. If not, then it was not correct and the calculation had to be redrawn. If it had been correct, the calculation would have been incorrect and the correction would have to be made. limit. If margin exceeds uncertainty for a particular gate, then there can be confidence that the weapon will "pass through" that gate satisfactorily. The degree of confidence at each gate is expressed as the margin of confidence for that gate. For example, if margin exceeds the margin for all gates, there is confidence that a weapon will work. For a weapon to work, the margin must be greater than the confidence that it will pass through all gates. For more information, visit the U.S. National Rifle Association's website. for downselecting pit manufacturing options. After defining options meriting consideration, the first question is, Which options are feasible? It would be simple to compare data on the required MAR and space, once they become available, against the amount ofMAR and space released by each option to see which options are more likely to be feasible. For more information on pit manufacturing, visit pitmanufacturing.com. for more information about pit manufacturing. for other options, including pit design and construction, see pitmanufacture.co.uk. shows; such changes may make currently-feasible options infeasible, and vice versa. Congress would need data on MAR margin, space margin, and cost for various pit manufacturing options in order to best determine which options are feasible and affordable. The following questions highlight how these data could support decisionmaking. Questions such as "What is the cost of a pit in the future?" and "What are the benefits of having a pit?" could be used to help Congress make a decision. provide a positive margin. Non-feasible options would not merit further consideration. The next step would be to estimate the cost of the feasible options and decide which are affordable. These data are needed to eliminate unaffordable options, which is important before planning begins. High cost has caused the demise of many of these options, he says. The cost of this project is estimated to be in excess of $1.5 billion, he adds. It's time to start planning for the future. from this baseline. Next, the report takes a dynamic approach, noting that uncertainties could affect margin and how they might be offset. Finally, it considers analytical chemistry requirements. This approach leads to three decisions Congress may choose to consider: Decision 1: For pit manufacturing, is there currently enough margin for can be done to provide it? Decision 2: What steps can be taken to maintain these margins over decades in the face of uncertainties? Decision 3: Is there a way for Congress to ensure that the U.S. has enough space and margin for MAR in the future? margin divided by uncertainty; the higher the number, the greater the confidence. Margin is the amount by which (1) space available for pit manufacturing exceeds (2) space required to manufacture 80 ppy. While the effects of these uncertainties on pit manufacturing can be calculated once they materialize, the likelihood that they will come into being, and even the type of uncertainties in QMU, cannot be predicted or bounded, let alone quantified. Another means of maintaining margin, not shown. that could force a halt to pit manufacturing. One way to maintain enough margin to support a specified pit manufacturing capacity is to develop multiple means to counterbalance uncertainties that would reduce margin. Some means could be implemented promptly; others could be developed, held in a reserve fund to be used in the future for such contingencies as pit manufacturing is threatened. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. previous WR build of W88 pits was completed in FY2011. NNSA anticipates manufacturing a few pits a year in the near future to prepare to manufacture WR pits. The schedule for ramping up pit production is uncertain. A Department of Defense (DOD) official stated in 2013 that "there is no pit production of potentially up to 80 pits per year starting as early as FY 2030" In 2014, an NNSA document changed the date for achieving a 30-ppy capacity to "by 2026" daylight between the Department of Energy and the Defense on the need for both a near-term pit manufacturing capacity of 10 to 20 and then 30 by 2021, and then in the longer term for a capacity of 50 to 80 per year. Also in 2013, a National.daylight agreement was reached between the. Department of Defense and the Department. of Energy on the. need for a near term pit manufacturingcapacity of 10-20, then 30, then 50 by 2021 and then 80 by 2021. and to demonstrate for at least 90 days during 2027 the ability to manufacture WR pits at a rate of 80 per year. Some favor a capacity of greater than 80 ppy, while others argue that a lower number would suffice. That debate is beyond the scope of this report, and is not covered in this report. It is hoped that the report will shed some light on the future of the WR pit industry in the United States. It will also shed light on some of the issues surrounding the development of the next generation of WR pits in the future. in June 2014 was zero for pits of any type; work is resuming at the end of June 2014. Further, the capacity to manufacture WR pits was zero: since there was no requirement to manufactureWR pits, some processes needed to certify pits as WR had been suspended after the shutdown. Some processes needed for WR pits to be certified as WR were also suspended, but work is now resuming. The pit shop was shut down on June 1, 2014, and will reopen on June 30, 2014. Some argue that the capacity to manufacture new pits may be needed to extend the service life of certain existing weapons. During the Cold War, the Department of Energy's Rocky Flats Plant produced between 1,000 and 2,000 pits per year. The plutonium for each pit required AC. Because currently-anticipated rates do not approach that level, the nuclear weapons complex has a considerable amount of excess plutonium. The U.S. has a stockpile of more than 1.5 billion pounds of plutonium. Rocky Flats was shut down on June 6, 1989. FBI and EPA agents raided the site to investigate suspected environmental crimes. DOE first suspended pit production at Rocky Flats later that year. Later, the site was closed down again by the EPA and DOE. The site is still used to produce oil and natural gas for the U.S. Gulf Coast and Gulf Coast regions of the United States, as well as for oil production in the Gulf Coast region of South America and the Caribbean. The current pit fabrication line was intended as a pilot plant; its capacity is about 10 ppy. It is being Integrated Extraction System), which converts excess pits to plutonium oxide (a powder) and places it in special containers for long-term storage. Pit Fabrication involves casting "hemishells" (half-pits) of plutonium, machining them to remove excess material, welding two together to form a pit, and inspecting the pit. Discussions on the pit manufacturing process will continue in the future. A pit is a hollow plutonium shell that is imploded with conventional explosives to create a nuclear explosion that triggers the rest of the weapon. U.S. policy is not to build new-design nuclear weapons regarding analytical chemistry, which supports pit manufacturing. Several tasks, terms, and buildings are central to the subsequent report. For background, see CRS Report R43406, U.s. Nuclear Weapon "Pit" Production Options for Congress. For more information on the report, visit the CRS website. Report R43406, U.S. Nuclear Weapon "Pit" Production Options for Congress. None came to fruition. For example, in the FY2006 budget cycle, Congress eliminated funding for the Modern Pit Facility, which was to have a capacity between 125 and 450 ppy. In its FY2013 budget request the Administration "deferred" the facility's construction. In the FY2014 budget request, Congress "def deferred" the project's construction for another two years, until the next budget cycle. Maintaining confidence in nuclear weapons may help provide lessons for decisionmaking on pits. In 1992, the United States began a moratorium on nuclear testing that continues to the present. This section describes that approach, then modifies it to make it applicable to pits. The U.S. has a history of testing nuclear weapons that dates back to the 1950s and 1960s. The United States has also tested nuclear weapons since the 1960s and 1970s, but has never used them for nuclear weapons. Analytical chemistry (AC) is essential for pit manufacturing, but this report considers it separately. AC analyzes plutonium samples taken from each pit at various stages in its fabrication. AC determines the isotopic composition of the plutonium and it uses tiny samples, such as a few milligrams of plutonium dissolved in a small amount of acid. But AC involves much more space per unit than does pit fabrication because each laboratory instrument is housed in a glovebox or hood that might occupy a lot of space. Analytical Chemistry (AC) analyzes plutonium samples taken from each pit at various stages in its manufacture. AC measures the isotopic composition of the plutonium and the amount of alloying. This appendix explains the tasks included in the diagrams of PF-4 and, in so doing, explains whatPF-4 does. Other sites? See the appendix for more information on how to use the diagrams in your own research or for help with reading comprehension and vocabulary. The appendix is also available on the Amazon Kindle store. On the other hand, AC to analyze process problems requires fast turnaround to minimize the time the process is shut down. At issue: how much AC is likely to be time-sensitive? How much plutonium would pit fabrication need? Increasing the amount of plutonium would require adding electrorefining furnaces, increasing space. Increasing the number of pit furnaces would also require adding more space in the pit. It would be a time-intensive process, but it could be worth it in the long run. materials and impurities a sample contains. AC typically uses samples on the order of milligrams. Before a pit type can be accepted into the stockpile, it must be certified as acceptable for war reserve use. This involves validating weapons codes, among other things. Validation, in turn, draws on experimental material. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. magnetic susceptibility, grain structure, and surface characteristics. Such properties must be determined in order to certify pit design, maintain process control, address process anomalies, and examine the condition of newly-manufactured pits and pits from the stockpile. MC typically uses samples on the order of a fraction of a gram to determine the properties of a pit or pit material. The material is then used to certify the design of the pit and the pit design. The pit is then tested for radioactivity, magnetic susceptibility and grain structure. Laboratory (LANL) (NM), would house a pilot plant to develop pit production processes and manufacture a small number of pits. It took until 2007 for LANL to make its first "war reserve" pits, i.e., those certified for use in the stockpile. In that year, LANL made 11 such pits, the first of its kind in the U.S. arsenal. LANL's first pit was made in 1968, and it was used in the Vietnam War. The process line was intended as a pilot plant to develop, quickly, techniques for resuming production. It was not intended as the nation's pit production site; other proposed facilities, such as the Modern Pit Facility, were to fill that role. LANL is currently redesigning the existing pit fabrication space in the process line's current location. The process line is expected to be fully operational by the end of the year. It will be the first pit facility of its kind in the U.S. and the second in the world. laboratory floor space is where AC, pit fabrication, and other work is done. Space is expressed in units of square feet (sf) "Material At Risk" (MAR) is "the amount of radioactive materials … available to be acted on by a given physical stress" It is material that could be released. It is not the amount of material that would be released if the stress were to be released, but the amount that is at risk of being released if it is not acted on. This capacity resides at several buildings in the complex, including Building 332 at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL), F/H Laboratory and Building 773-A at SRS. Each of these facilities would apparently have enough floor space and MAR suitable for AC. This capacity resides in buildings at LLNL, SRS, and the Radiological Laboratory-Utility-Office Building (RLUOB) at LANL. It is not clear if this capacity would be available for AC in the future. dozen square feet of space. Many analyses must be performed for each individual pit, and the number of instruments and their housing increase in tandem with manufacturing capacity. Increasing manufacturing capacity would require more equipment, more space, and more MAR for AC. Finding enough space for AC should be simpler than for pit manufacture because more options are readily available to meet requirements for AC than for Pit manufacture. Producing 80 ppy would require increasing AC capacity. This requirement comes from two sources. First, at LANL, most pit-related AC is performed on multiple samples for each pit. Pit fabrication has been the greatest user of AC. Pit fabrication requires extensive AC for every pit. AC supports other pit manufacturing tasks, and non-pit tasks as well. The building at Los Alamos National Laboratory (LANL) that currently performs the most pit fabrication tasks is called the Pit Fabrication Building. The pit fabrication building is known as the "Pit Fabricator Building" and is located at LANL. The Pit Fabricator is a building atLANL that performs the majority of pit fabrication work. AC to support pit manufacture and many other plutonium tasks is in poor shape and not seismically robust. DOE wants to halt work there by 2019, so one or more other facilities will be needed. Laboratory floor space , or "space," is needed to support research and development in the lab. Laboratory buildings have space for corridors, offices, etc., but not "space" for research or development. For more information, visit the Department of Energy's plutonium research center at the Savannah River Research Center in Georgia. Figure 2 shows the 2012 allocation of space in PF-4 by program. The gray area, 4,700 square feet (sf), is available for immediate repurposing. White areas represent non-laboratory staffing the new facility, and so on—of the move.to " MAR Options forPF-4 ," below, and is not repeated there. A fourth option to release space would be to build one or more modules for lower-MAR activities now housed in the building. earthquake might collapse or otherwise compromise the building, forcing a reduction in PF-4 MAR from 2,600 kg PE to 1,800 kg PE. LANL is undertaking several projects that would increase the MAR permitted inPF-4. Various projects to increase seismic robustness have been underway for years; see the section for more information on these projects. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. for 24.5% of the 1,800 kg PE; pit fabrication, for 16.4%; and other tasks, for lesser amounts. The gray space, 21.5%, represents the PF-4 MAR allowance unused on February 27, 2013. As noted, this analysis assumes that seismic upgrades increase PF-3 MAR to 2,600 kg PE. For more information, or to request a copy of the report, visit the U.S. Navy's official website, or visit the Navy’s official website. much additional space would be needed in PF-4 for supporting infrastructure, such as packaging, shipping, receiving, waste management, and temporary storage, as well as the material control and accountability needed to send hundreds if not thousands of AC samples annually to LLNL or SRS if those sites are used. Would additional space be needed for packaging, Shipping, Receiving, Waste Management, and Temporary storage? Would extra space be necessary for packaging and shipping, and for temporary storage? would additional space for packaging be needed to store and transport AC samples?  LANL is conducting projects to bolster the seismic robustness of PF-4. This may increase PF- 4's MAR allowance from 1,800 to 2,600 kg PE (or more or less) If 2, 600 kg PE is.for 80 ppy, would it be less costly to perform the remaining AC at LLNL or at SRS? LANL would like to know if it would be cheaper to do the AC in SRS or LLNL. For more information, visit LANL's website.  LANL is planning to increase PF-4's capacity to 30 ppy. The space needed for 80 ppy would not increase linearly with capacity. LANL expects these modules would be comparable in cost to Hazard Category-2 modules. However, such a study is likely to find that less space is needed to make 90 ppy, LANL says. The current 12,000 sf inPF-4 available for pit fabrication is enough to fabricate 30 p py once certain upgrades have been completed. The MAR limit is somewhat flexible, as various measures can increase it. Similarly, space within PF-4 may be shifted from one purpose to another. LANL is undertaking such projects, e.g., decontaminating some rooms inPF-4 that are no longer in use and "repurposing" them to make them useable. The MAR limit can be increased by up to 10% per year, depending on various measures. The limit can also be increased to 15% if the MAR is increased by 10%. Space and MAR requirements for manufacturing 80 ppy have never been calculated rigorously, though they could be. Congress would likely want to know if there is enough space margin and MAR margin for 80 p py. Available space and MAR are known, as of certain dates, as this report shows. But extrapolations set an upper bound and would overstate requirements. It would be difficult for Congress to decide how to obtain the space and. MAR for manufacturing80 ppy without knowing whether there will be sufficient MAR and space margins for 80. ppy. Programs occupy in PF-4. Would moving this MAR into a 5,000-sf module make enough MAR and space available inPF-4 for manufacture of 80 ppy? Moving all Pu-238 work to INL or SRS would release a little more MAR but another 4,600 sf, as compared to a module. Would one module release enough MAR to permit manufacture of 20 ppy in a pit? This assumes that the immediately-repurposable space in the module is available for pit manufacture.  module might free up enough MAR but not enough space for 80 ppy, or that moving Pu-238 programs to another site would suffice. LANL maintains that each successive module should cost less than the one before it, as lessons learned should drive down costs. But without data for space and MAR needed to manufacture 80 p Py, not enough MAR, could additional projects raise the MAR allowance enough to accommodate manufacture of 80 Ppy? LANL: It is possible. On the other hand, it is possible that it is not. Manufacturing 80 ppy would require more space and MAR than are currently available for that task in PF-4. Updated seismic modeling results raised concerns that an which options, if any, would provide enough margin. It might turn out that once seismic improvements are made, PF 4 would have enough space andMAR margin for80 ppy. Or that moving Pu-238 programs to a as the following can only be answered with data on how much MAR and space suffice for pit manufacturing and supporting AC for 80 p py. make more space or MAR available and to reduce space orMAR requirements, thereby increasing margin. This detailed analysis would be needed to determine whether enough MAR allowance and space could be made available space and MAR in PF-4. If not, what can be done to provide it? Decision 2: Once enough margin for space and margin for MAR are provided for pit manufacturing, what steps can be taken to maintain these margins over decades? Decision 3: For AC, 5,000 for Option 2. As with space, it may be possible to increase MAR margin without major construction. by which (3) MAR available for pit manufacturing exceeds (4) MAR required to manufacture 80 ppy. (The two margins are independent.) Thus, solving for margin requires four numbers. Figures 1-7 show items (1) and (3), under various scenarios. Regarding items (2) and. (4), LANL has examined space and MAR needed for pit. manufacturing, and points out that various non-construction options would also increase space and. MAR margins. The data, however, cannot indicate how much MAR and space various options would make available. available. Note that while margin must always be greater than zero, the amount of available space and MAR needed to maintain margin could expand or contract. For example, MAR insufficient for 80 ppy might suffice for 40 ppy. Various options can be used to meet the needs of a large number of customers. For more information, or to order a copy of the book, visit: http://www.bookshop.com/bookshop/shop-shop/Shop-Shop/ Shop-Shop.html. pit manufacturing and combined with the pit fabrication MAR, then 57.0% of the MAR in PF-4 would be available for pit work. (While the amount of MAR used by other tasks remains the same, the percentage of MAR they use is lower than in Table 1 because each task accounts 4 shows this option) Under Option 2, pit fabrication would be allocated 72.4% of. the 2,600 kg PE of MAR inPF-4. This option requires half as many modules as Option 1. amount of MAR to the same scale as Table 1 and assumes that programs other than pit manufacturing use the MAR they used on February 27, 2013, for the foreseeable future. It shows that if the newly-available 800 kg PE of MAR and the unallocated MAR are both allocated to pit manufacturing programs, the amount of MAR would increase by 1,000 kg per year. It also shows how much of the newly available 800 kg of MAR could be used for pit manufacturing, and how much would need to be allocated to other programs. there is already sufficient space and MAR in PF-4. LANL (and perhaps other sites) has computer models and other resources needed to perform these calculations. AC also has space andMAR requirements but, as discussed in " Options for Analytical Chemistry ," margins are not at issue because the nuclear reactor is not in use at the time of the calculations. There is no need to use MAR in AC because there is no nuclear reactor in use in the U.S. at this time. MAR allowance to conduct the AC needed to support manufacture of 80 ppy. PF-4 might perform some additional AC for higher-MAR work, such as sample preparation. R&D may reduce MAR requirements. Figure 7 shows these options and how they could be used to reduce the MAR allowance for plutonium production in the U.S. and elsewhere. Figure 8 shows how these options might be used in other countries. Figure 9 shows how they would be used elsewhere in the world and around the world. " Increasing MAR Margin Without Major Construction ." They proceed on an open-ended basis guided by results of continuing analyses. This analysis assumes a MAR allowance of 2,600 kg PE and, provide enough space. As with space, there are options to provide more MAR. The total MAR allowance for PF-4 on February 27, 2013, was 1,800 kg PE. If adding 800 kg of MAR is not sufficient to support 80 ppy, at least three other options would release moreMAR. is only a small fraction of PF-4's radioactive material by weight, it is so radioactive that it is allocated 40% of the program's MAR allowance. Nor is MAR spread evenly within a program space, as discussed below. Option 1, shown below, is the most likely option to be used in the event of an emergency. It is the only option that would allow the program to continue without the use of radioactive material. It was used on February 27, 2013, though it did not use that much on that day. 2 would have 6.5% as much. MAR available in PF-4 for pit manufacturing would increase to 62.5%. Option 2 would move the Pu-238 MAR contained in 5,000 sf ofPF-4 to one module, releasing 52% of the space. Option 3 (not shown) would move all Pu- 238 work to INL or SRS. This would free up all the MAR, vs. 91% for Option 2 and, more importantly, free up 9,600 sf. how much would it have to be raised to do so? Could that be done, and if so what would the project entail? MAR is not evenly distributed across space. As noted, 91% of Pu-238 MAR was at one point concentrated in 5,000 sf of the 9,600 sf that Pu- 238 is made up of. How much would that cost and how would it be funded? How would that be financed? How could it be scaled up? How much money would it take to do it? than Pu-239. It is used to power space probes and has some military applications, but is not used in pits. 40% of the MAR allowance in PF-4 is allocated to Pu-238. If yes, would that be the case if pit casting were moved to the module, or if Pu- 238 were moved in the opposite direction. PF- 4 is the only place in the U.S. that performs high-MAR, high-security work. It would also be used for pit manufacture. Another option (not shown) would be to build one module for Pu-238 work or pit casting. This option would release some 5,000 sf in PF-4 in addition to the 4,700 sf available for repurposing. A third option would move Pu- 238 work from LANL. Two sites, Savannah River Site (SRS) (SC) and Idaho National Laboratory (INL) have stated that they have, or could modify, buildings to do this work. move from 70 to 80 ppy, would it be worth spending the added money? Would it be less costly to move Pu-238 or hemishell casting to a module? Would you prefer to use INL, SRS, or a newly-built module? In deciding how to proceed on pit pit, consider these questions and more in deciding whether or not to spend the extra money on a pit pit. For more information on the pit pit project, visit pitpit.org or go to pitp pit.org. upgraded to reach a capacity of 30 ppy; further upgrades would be needed to reach 80. Pit manufacturing also involves such supporting tasks as purifying plutonium for use in pits; certification to ensure that finished pits meet required standards; material control and accountability; waste management; and analytical chemistry. This report to fabricate 80 ppy in a preliminary fashion, but has not performed a detailed analysis of the full pit manufacturing process, including plutonium supply, waste management, AC, external support activities, and fabrication. If the path becomes clearer, it would become more important to determine if 80 is the right number. highest number since 1989. The second track involved a facility with the capacity to make pits on an industrial scale, on the order of 100 or more ppy. Several facilities were proposed, as described in "A Sisyphean History: Failed Efforts to Construct a Building to Restore Pit Production," in CRS. In CRS, the project was described as "a failure to build a building to restore Pit Production" in the book "A Failure to Build a Building To Restore Pit production" Pit fabrication occupies 12,000 sf. One option involves building one or more " modules," reinforced-concrete structures that would be buried near PF-4 and connected to it by a tunnel. LANL maintains that a key advantage of modules is that they would permit expansion of capacity on an as-needed basis. (Space for some other tasks, such as Plutonium Recycle and Purification, would also support pit manufacturing.) 26,700 sf of pit fabrication space plus other space made available for pit manufacturing would make up the total. As of 2012, 4,700 sf was available for immediate repurposing in PF-4. Is that space, plus the 12,000 sf for pit fabrication, plus space for other pit-related tasks, enough to manufacture 80 ppy? If there is enough space and MAR margin inPF-4, it might be possible to manufacture up to 30 ppy instead of 10. Develop equipment and processes for faster work flow so fewer pieces of equipment to manufacture a specified number of pits, reducing floor space. be needed to manufacture 80 ppy; lay out production lines in PF-4 to accommodate that equipment while retaining space needed for other tasks; determine what tasks, if any, could be moved from PF- 4 if necessary to accommodate the lines; and calculate what MAR would result from this production line configuration. If the MAR allowance inPF-4 is not sufficient to accommodate manufacture of80 ppy, by. If there is a need to move any pit fabrication work (such as hemishell casting), Pu-238 work, or any other high-MAR work out of PF-2, whether to modules or to another site. or something else? What operating tempo is planned? Would manufacturing use 1 shift per day/5 days a week, 2 shifts per day, or operate 24/7? The answer is related to capacity. If the capacity sought is 80 ppy using 3 shifts each day, a higher surge capacity would be needed. For example, if the goal is to make 100 ppy a day, the goal would be to make at least 70 ppy per day. For a higher capacity, the target is to do at least 80 pPy per day using three shifts a day. would be difficult at best. The answer is also related to cost and equipment. Using two shifts per day, it might be possible to reach 80 ppy with equipment that would support 50 ppy on a single shift. A more costly option would be to increase the amount of equipment that is available to the workers at that time. The goal is to reach 100 ppy by the end of the year, but it is possible to achieve as much as 150 ppy in the next few years. (and thus floor space used) to enable production of 80 with a single shift. Would the capacity be held in standby mode most of the time, available for use as needed; operated for months or years at 80 ppy for certain pit campaigns and held in low-rate production mode for certain periods of time. Would it be possible to operate at 80 for months at a time? Would it have the capacity to be operated in low rate production mode? would it be able to be used for months and years at once? other periods; operated at a steady rate, less than 80, to level out the workload between periods when no pits are needed and periods when 80 ppy are needed; or operated at full capacity at all times. What programs could be moved out of PF-4 if necessary to create enough ppy? What programs can be moved in and out ofPF-4 to make room for new programs? What can we do to make sure we have enough pits for all the programs we need? of space by allowing fewer pieces of equipment to produce a given amount of product, thereby reducing space requirements. Rocky Flats Plant, for example, generally operated using three shifts per day. On the other hand, a higher tempo for an extended period could increase operating cost, require more maintenance, reduce productivity and lead to higher operating costs. For more information, go to: www.rockyflatsplant.com and http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/features/article-news-features-top-stories-how-to-run-a-plant-like-Rocky-Flats-Plant. substantial fraction of the AC needed to support manufacture of 80 ppy must be evaluated in light of a revised path forward for AC that NNSA developed in June 2014. Based on an initial analysis by Los Alamos National Laboratory, NNSA determined that the combination of PF-4 and RLUOB with a higher plutonium limit, if properly equipped, could likely conduct all the AC. The planning for this approach will be conducted by personnel from NNSA headquarters (including the Office of support 80 p py) In PF-4 to manufacture 80 ppy. it might be useful to have an annual review of margin and potential factors that could affect it. Which organization could perform such a study? Candidates include LANL, another lab or plant in the nuclear weapons complex, or another lab in the U.S. nuclear complex, such as the Savannah River Site in South Carolina, which is home to the Bikini Atoll nuclear plant. The study could also be done in the United States or in Europe. would provide an added measure of confidence in the study. Before the study could begin, the Nuclear Weapons Council would need to define key parameters. What capacity is being sought? Is it 80 ppy, or 50 with a surge capacity to 80, or 80 with a Surge capacity to 125, the council would have to decide. The study is expected to be completed by the end of the year or early next year, according to the nuclear weapons council's website. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. which focuses on how to achieve a capacity of 80 ppy because that is the high end of DOD's range. While 80 p py has been beyond reach for a quarter-century, the debate over that capacity would take on added salience to the extent that it moves within the realm of the DOD's reach. The debate over how to get to 80p has been raging for decades, but is now taking on new salience because it is within the range of the Pentagon's capabilities. out of the Chemistry and Metallurgy Research building (described below), which became operational in 1952. While DOD has a requirement for up to 80 ppy, some key questions about how to manufacture at that rate remain not only unanswered but also unasked. These questions involve details about the facilities at the facility in Washington, D.C., which is home to the Department of Energy's National Institute of Standards and Technology (NS&T) The NS&T was established in 1947, and is located on the site of the former Chemistry and Metals Research building. Even calculating the amount of space for equipment is not linear. Each piece of equipment has a specific throughput. If one piece can support 40 ppy, then 80 ppy would require two such pieces. Adding complexity to the calculation, constraints imposed by room layout, facility layout, and process flows must be considered. determining the space needed for 80 p py requires analyzing the entire manufacturing process, including answers to such questions as: In moving to 80 p Py, how do we get to 80? reserve, and implemented only as needed. Having these means available for future deployment would add confidence that sufficient margin could be maintained. Determining how much MAR and space would be needed to manufacture 80 ppy would require an industrial process analysis. A study would seek to determine what equipment would time available for maintenance, increase the likelihood of equipment failure, and have more impact on production if equipment fails. Such options would almost surely be faster and less costly than major construction, but it is not possible to know if they would work. equipment would suffice because of efficiencies. In a process step, for example, a piece of equipment that could support manufacture of 300 ppy would suffice for any number less than 300, whether 10, 30, or 80. A study would need to take into account that there are many ways to produce ppy. The research was carried out by the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) in Washington, D.C. The study was funded by the U.S. Department of Energy. cost $2 billion for new construction and $700 million in annual operating cost to manufacture 80 ppy, would the added capacity be worth the added cost? A sensitivity analysis would provide the data, but the answer would be a matter of judgment. It appears that it would take over a $2.5 billion construction project to build a new 80-ppy plant. The new plant would cost $700million to build and $2billion to complete. The project would take more than a year to complete, but would be worth it. that some lessons learned would lead to increased costs. What is the first module estimated to cost? The second? How sensitive is the cost of pit manufacturing to capacity, and what tradeoffs might a sensitivity analysis reveal? As a hypothetical example, if it cost an additional several billion dollars to build a new pit, what would the cost be? What would the second module cost? How much would the third module cost, and how much would it cost to build the fourth module? How would the fifth module cost and the sixth would cost? LANL and perhaps elsewhere that would fabricate pits and perform supporting tasks. Without answers to these questions, Congress cannot know whether existing buildings, without modifications, could manufacture 80 ppy; or if modest upgrades would suffice. This report provides a framework for the future of the nation's pit-making capacity, the report says. The report concludes: "The future of pit manufacturing in the United States is uncertain but it is likely to improve in the coming years" The report's conclusion: The future of pits in the U.S. is uncertain, but it's possible to increase capacity. What is a reasonable tradeoff between cost and capacity? As a notional example, if LANL could manufacture 70 ppy using existing buildings and an operating cost of $500 million per year, but it would move, what would the move cost, and who would pay? What would MAR space or MAR.space or MAR, where would they go, and how much would it cost to move them? Who would pay for the move? What is the reasonable tradeoffs between cost, capacity? implemented quickly and at low cost; others might take longer and cost more. Still others that would entail high cost and long leadtime could be studied (e.g., design work on modules) to determine whether they are feasible and, if so, to facilitate possible future deployment. Any option could be deployed and could be used for a variety of purposes. The goal is to create a system that can be deployed for a range of uses, including medical, military, and civilian applications. RLUOB is permitted to have 26 grams of WGPu MAR for AC, which is not nearly enough to perform the AC for 80 ppy. If this limit remains in place, how much more MAR and space would be needed for AC at LLNL or SRS? What would it cost to enable RLUOB to hold 400 grams W GPu? Or would the released space be needed to accommodate added equipment needed to manufacture 80 p Py? If the MAR limit for RLU OB is increased to 400 grams of. WGPU for AC,. how much. more MAR, if any, would be required for AC? Category (HC) 3 facility can hold between 38.6 grams and 2,610 grams of Pu-239E, or about 26 to 1,760 grams of WGPu. NNSA considered several options for raising the MAR limit in RLUOB. One option was to retrofit the building by adding various safety upgrades to make it HC-3 at is so small. Therefore, NNSA would have to prepare a DSA to operate RLU OB as an HC-2 facility. the highest level (1760 grams WGPu) That option would have been costly and time-consuming. Another option was to create a "Hazard Category 4," splitting off the lower part of the HC-3 range into a separate category, with the upper bound, say, 1760 grams. That option was not necessary for conducting AC work required, the agency said. The agency said it would not be able to use that option for AC work needed for the next few years. different capacities and would require different upgrades to support whatever level of AC was required. Data on the MAR and space requirements, and the cost of the LANL, LLNL, and SRS options, would be needed to provide a basis for decision. The option of having LLNL or SRS conduct a review of the options would be a good first step to determine the best course of action for the project. The project is expected to be completed by the end of the year or early 2015. one cannot know which options are infeasible, which provide excess capacity and thus entail excess cost, and which are "just right" Regarding AC, the discussion shows that there are multiple options to provide AC capacity, and highlights the issue of whether all AC should be done at LANL and, if so, at what cost. If all AC is done atLANL and at the right cost, then all AC will be done there. If not, then some of the AC will have to be done elsewhere. not, how much AC should be done there and how much at another site. But without data on such matters as building condition and cost for any required upgrades and equipment, it is not possible to determine the relative merits of the options. Figure 8 shows a notional decision sequence for a number of possible locations. The options include: a new building, a new building on the site, or a new site on the other side of the city. The decision sequence is shown in Figure 8. Not at issue is that LANL would need the capability to perform all AC tasks even if it did not have the capacity to perform AC for 80 ppy. The key question for AC would be how much, if any, AC one or more sites other than LANL should perform. It may be difficult to provide enough MAR and floor space for all the AC needed to support manufacture of up to 80 p py. The foregoing discussion shows how much additional AC is needed to meet the needs of the industry. For example, LANL is validating an AC system that may require a sample size of 1.5 mg of WGPu instead of 225 mg. LANL and a second site could cross-check the accuracy of each other's AC measurements and processes from time to time. At issue are whether all AC should be done at LANL, and, if not, how much should it be done there and how much at another site. LNL and LLNL have for decades, since before the end of nuclear. space and MAR available across the nuclear weapons complex exceed space and MAR required by a considerable amount. The issue is how much AC should be done at LANL and how much, if any, AC should been done at other sites. At issue is what is needed to support that amount of AC, and what is expected to be done in the future. The floor space andMAR exist at other site in the nuclearweapons complex, so margin is not an issue. It is a question of what is required to support the amount ofAC that is needed. weapons complex has ample space and MAR for AC for 80 ppy. Uncertainty : Margins can change over time. While MAR and space margins could be calculated precisely for the present moment, they cannot be calculated in advance because many actions, events, decisions, and discoveries have the potential to create new margins. Weapons complex has plenty of space. MAR forAC for 80ppy is 2.5 times the size of a typical U.S. warship. The space margin for AC is 1.7 times that of a traditional warship, or 1.8 times the length of a warship’s length. of several nuclear weapons complex projects. Finally, having downselected to options that are feasible and affordable, one would compare those options against other possible criteria in order to make a final choice. Not shown in the figure is that MAR and space margins may change over time, as Figure 1 Figure 1 is a simplified version of the full report, which includes more detail on the cost of the nuclear weapons complexes. The full report can be found at: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/30/nuclear-weapons-complex-project/index.html#storylink=c. required vs. available would show whether there is enough space and MAR at the moment. Over time, however, various factors will affect availability and requirements. While few of these factors can be predicted, this report discusses ways to offset any adverse effects from them. In addition, decisions will be needed, and this report will discuss how to offset these decisions. For more information, visit the U.S. Department of Energy's website or go to: http://www.usdoj.gov/. promptly or held in reserve. For each, a decision would be needed on whether to proceed and, if so, when. Such decisions would depend on how much space was needed given then-current space availability and, later, on the extent of any reduction in space margin. This analysis also applies also applies to the development of a new airport in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, in the future. For more information, visit www.nasa.gov/planning and www.nasaweb.com/Planning-Planning. this latter number be much reduced if the samples were all analyzed at LANL? What turnaround time would be required for samples moved onsite or shipped offsite? The time required to receive AC results would be needed in order to estimate the number of gloveboxes and temporary storage locations, and to estimate how many samples would be in gloveboxes. This latter number would be much reducing if the sample were analyzed atLANL, and how many gloveboxes would be used to store samples. This number would also reduce the amount of samples that would need to be stored in temporary locations. would thus affect space requirements. The analysis would need to take into account that most AC is done on a confirmatory basis, i.e., manufacturing proceeds on the assumption that AC results will confirm that samples are within specifications. (Hemishells not within specifications would be recycled.) Such AC is not time-sensitive. It would also need to consider the fact that most of the time, AC results are done on an assumption that samples will be within specifications, not on a test basis.