We interviewed officials at NASA Headquarters, Washington, D.C.; Johnson Space Center, Texas; and Kennedy Space Center. These centers were chosen because they maintain primary responsibility for conducting space shuttle and space station operations on a day-to-day basis. The offices we met with at headquarters and each of these centers included space station program officials, space shuttle program officials and NASA Launch Services Office. We also interviewed NASA officials who are responsible for processing space station payloads and integrating those payloads with written and oral comments. at Kennedy Space Center. We also visited the Boeing Launch Services, Inc., in Huntington Beach, California, and Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, Florida. Boeing Commercial Space Systems in Research Park, Huntsville, Alabama; and Lockheed Martin Space Systems Company in Littleton, Colorado. We conducted a spacewalks at the Kennedy Space Centre in Florida and at Cape Canaveral in Florida, and at the Vandenberg Air Force Base in California, as well as at the University of Alabama in Huntsville. Columbia accident in February 2003, the NASA Administrator grounded the space shuttle fleet pending an investigation into the cause of the accident. The administrator appointed the Columbia Accident Investigation Board to determine the cause. The board made recommendations for improving the safety of the space Shuttle before and after the crash. The investigation was completed before the shuttle was scheduled to fly again. The shuttle was never used again after the February 2003 accident, and the shuttle fleet was grounded for the rest of the shuttle program. The space shuttle program was canceled in April 2004. The agency did not record the processes it followed and therefore did not capture the basis of the decisions reached. NASA officials indicated that the informal assessment was based primarily on the expertise within the headquarters and they did not formally record the process it followed. The agency has not yet released the results of the assessment to the public or the public at large. It is not known if the agency will make any changes to its decision-making process in the near future. It has not released any details about how the assessment was conducted. Reviewed previous GAO reports on NASA, the Space Shuttle Program, International Space Station Program, and best practices in many areas. Reviewed reports from the Congressional Budget Office, Congressional Research Service, Office of Management and Budget, and the Planetary Society, and Russian Space Station briefings. We also reviewed reports from several other agencies, including the U.S. Air Force, the Navy, the Marine Corps, the Air Force Reserve, the Army, the Marines, the State Department, the Department of Justice and the Treasury. for assessing responses to the request for information and follow-up activities. For this, we interviewed NASA officials within the Space Operations Mission Directorate and at Johnson Space Center, Texas. We also interviewed Air Force officials from the Evolved Expendable Launch Vehicle Program. We received, reviewed, and analyzed follow-ups from NASA and the Air Force as well as from the public and private sectors. For more information, visit www.nasa.gov/space and follow us on Twitter @nasa_space. you publicly announce the contents earlier, we plan no further distribution of this report until 15 days from its issue date. At that time, we will send copies to the NASA Administrator; the Director, Office of Management and Budget; and other interested parties. We will also make copies available to the public at large. We are happy to answer any questions you may have about the report. We hope you will share your thoughts in the comments section below. We look forward to hearing from you in the coming days. including: European Space Agency Segment Specifications for the Automated Transfer Vehicle; Specification for the Japanese H-II Transfer Vehicle. International Space Station Payload Integration and Assembly Sequence specifications; Evolved Expendable Launch Vehicle configurations; space station and space shuttle status, history, and cost briefings. Return to Flight Status Briefings; and, Alternate Access to Space Station and Space Shuttle Status Briefing Briefings. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. The report will be available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. Major contributors to this report are listed in appendix IV. To determine whether to release the report, go to http:// www.gaO.gov/gao-report.others on request. Please contact me at (202) 512-4841 if you or your staff have any questions about this report. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from. The Japanese H-II Transfer Vehicle (HTV) is scheduled to be available in 2008. It will fly within the proximity of the space station to be caught by to the space shuttle. The ATV is being designed to rendezvous and dock to the station via the Russian Service Module. The HTV will be available for missions in 2006, and the ATV will be in service in 2008, with a scheduled launch date of September 2008. The Japanese HTV is scheduled for a mission to the ISS in 2006. The Russian Soyuz and Progress vehicles are the only vehicles currently available and carry significantly less payload than the space shuttle. Europe and Japan are also developing logistics cargo vehicles to support space station operations later this decade. These Russian, European, and Japanese vehicles are launched on expendable rockets. The European Automated Transfer Vehicle (ATV) is scheduled to be the station’s robotic arm before being berthed to the space station. The ATV and HTV also carry less cargo than the shuttle. launch vehicles would present operational risks, technical challenges, and long program delays and would cost more than returning the space shuttle to flight. NASA did not have sufficient knowledge to conclude that the shuttle was the best option for logistics missions prior to its retirement of the shuttle in 2010. NASA officials stated that the technical challenges for developing an alternative vehicle could be overcome, but probably not before the 28 missions scheduled through 2010, of which 8 are for logistics, including 5 of the last 7 missions. However, we found no evidence of analyses under review. food, potable water, as well as propellant resupply for reboosting the space station to higher orbits. Launches of space station assembly elements and large orbital replacement items for maintenance have effectively ceased. From 2000 to early 2004, NASA performed two studies that focused on the potential use of commercial launch for space station resupplies. The space station is currently in a stable orbit above the Earth's equator. It is expected to remain in this position for at least five more years. our work from August 2004 through April 2005 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. According to NASA officials involved in the 2004 assessment, accommodating a transition to other launch vehicles would create significant challenges that drive risk, schedule, and costs. NASA officials stated the space station elements were the most critical to a successful mission to the ISS in the future. The mission was scheduled to take off from the Kennedy Space Center in Florida and land at the Vandenberg Air Force Base in California in the summer of 2005. Exploration that called for retiring the shuttle in 2010, requiring NASA to find an alternative to support space station operations through 2016 by the end of the decade. The President called for a shift in NASA’s long-term focus, envisioning that NASA will retire the space shuttle after nearly 30 years. The shuttle has been involved in space exploration since the mid-1970s. The space shuttle has flown more than 4,000 times, most recently in October 2011. It is the most active shuttle in history, flying more than 2,500 times. cargo launch service to the space station prior to space shuttle retirement late this decade, rather than only after its retirement. We were told these services would not eliminate any of the scheduled space shuttle flights, but only augment the capabilities of the space shuttle. While these responses are not final, we can expect to hear more in the coming months and years about the future of cargo launches to the ISS. We can also expect to learn more about the plans for a shuttle replacement program in the near future. NASA plans to return the shuttle to flight in July 2005. The board issued its report in August 2003 with 29 recommendations for improvement. 15 of those recommendations must be implemented before the space shuttle can return to flight. While the shuttle has been grounded, the space station has been operating as a laboratory for research and development. The space station is expected to be fully operational by the end of the year. It has a crew of more than 1,000 people who are currently living and working on the ISS. performed by NASA to compare the cost and schedule impact of using alternate launch systems with the scheduled space shuttle program costs. We recently reported that the majority of NASA’s budget estimates for returning the space shuttle to flight are not included in this study. The study was conducted to determine the impact of returning the shuttle to space flight on the overall cost of the program. The report was published by the Center for Space Studies at the University of California, Los Angeles, to coincide with the 50th anniversary of the shuttle program. designed and built to take advantage of the more benign launch environment in the space shuttle’s cargo bay. The following outlines the major challenges NASA identified. The space shuttle is designed to be removed and repositioned by the robotic arm, and then connected together by the space Shuttle crew during space walk activities. NASA identified the following major challenges as part of the development of the new space shuttle system. The challenges include: the ability to remove, reposition, and connect the two parts of the shuttle during space walks. The space shuttle launch environment cannot be duplicated on an expendable launch vehicle. A new, unique transfer vehicle would need to be developed in order to rendezvous and dock assembly elements with the space shuttle. NASA officials say the change in launch environment will affect the shuttle program for years to come. The space shuttle program ended in 2011 after more than 50 years of service. The shuttle program will be replaced by a new, expendable, launch vehicle in the 2030s, officials say. The program is expected to cost an estimated $1 billion. could be performed by or complemented with commercial launch vehicles later this decade. NASA outlined a number of technical challenges to using an alternate vehicle for space station support, especially for assembly missions where the space shuttle’s crew and remote manipulator arm perform. Using another launch vehicle would require the redesign and retesting of space station elements already built due to the weight of the vehicle. There would be a need to develop a new process to assemble the space station using only the space Station crew and without the benefit of the space Shuttle remote manipulators arm. A carrier to go inside the new transfer vehicle to replicate the space shuttle attach points would need to be developed. According to these officials, in order to meet volume requirements, the carrier would have to be large. The carrier would then be caught by the space station’s robotic arm before being berthed to the station. The space station is expected to be fully operational by 2018, with a crew of around 20 people expected to join in the 2030s and 2050s. The station is currently in the process of being resupplied by a Russian rocket. be used for conducting experiments in near-zero gravity to include life sciences research on how humans adapt to long durations in space. Under the new vision, the research will be focused on determining the effects of long duration space travel on humans and developing countermeasures. The research will include biomedical research, and materials-processing research. The new vision will also focus on developing counter measures for space travel in the future. It will be used for research on long-term space travel, as well as developing new countermeasures in the event of an emergency. the payload fairings would have to be modified from the current 5-meter to a 6-meter version to accommodate the larger diameter payloads to the space station during assembly missions. Staff making key contributions to this report were Jim Morrison, James Beard, Rick Cederholm, Karen Sloan, and T.J Thomson. For more information on the ISS, visit the International Space Station's official website at: http://www.nasa.gov/shuttle/. For more about the ISS in the U.S., visit the National Aeronautics and Space Administration's website at www.nasaspace.gov. of service as soon as assembly of the International Space Station is completed, planned for the end of the decade. NASA will develop a new crew exploration vehicle as well as launch human missions to the moon between 2015 and 2020. In essence, NASA’s implementation plan holds aeronautics, science, and for those effects, with the goal that the space station research necessary to support human explorers on other worlds would be complete by 2016. According to program officials, NASA's 2004 informal assessment concluded that alternative plans were not viable. being evaluated and knowledge is being gathered, NASA says. NASA is also reviewing the space station research requirements and re-examining the planned manifest for the 28 space shuttle flights. According to NASA’s fiscal year 2006 budget submission, the 28 shuttle flights are planned for fiscal year 2007. The 28 flights are scheduled to take place in fiscal year 2008 and fiscal year 2009, according to the budget submission. The flights will be scheduled to begin in 2010 and end in 2011. The shuttle program is scheduled to end in 2012. other activities at near constant levels and transitions funding currently dedicated to the space station and space shuttle programs to the new exploration strategy. The vision also changed the. space station’s on-board research focus. Originally, the space. station was to be to be a place of research and development for the U.S. military. Now, it will be a hub for scientific research for the rest of the United States' space program. The space station is expected to be fully operational by 2018. agency is examining configurations of the space station that meet the needs of the new vision. Combining the information gathered from commercial industry and a better definition of space station requirements, NASA officials agreed there is an opportunity to support space station operations. NASA’s recent request for information from industry offers the agency an opportunity. to enhance its knowledge of alternatives to the space shuttle for providing logistics support for the space Station. The agency is also exploring the use of the existing space shuttle manifest currently currently. assessment is completed before any NASA investments are made for commercial space transportation services to the space station. NASA said it will evaluate the cost and capabilities of the proposed transportation system to meet space station and agency needs, as well as the needs of its partners. NASA also said that its acquisition strategy will be consistent with space station requirements, international partner agreements, and available funding. We are encouraged that NASA has taken the steps it has taken to explore space launch options for assuring space station access. NASA and its international partners are building the space station to serve as an orbiting research facility. The space shuttle is the primary vehicle supporting the assembly and resupply of the station. Figure 1 shows the Space Shuttle Endeavour docked to the International Space Station. Follow us on Twitter @CNNOpinion and @nasa_announce. We'll also post a weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on CNN Opinion. Back to the page you came from. document the decision paths. Direct current efforts to explore other space launch options to utilize a comprehensive and fully documented assessment of alternatives that matches mission requirements, and associated manifest, with the launch vehicles expected to be available. As well as the agency’s position on the space support to the space station, we recommend the NASA Administrator take the following three steps: direct current efforts, explore other launch options, and document the decision path to be taken by the Administrator. We recognize that the extensive experience of its senior managers is an important element in evaluating alternatives. However, the existence of any formal assessment of alternative missions for space station support cannot be verified. approach. "NASA did not have the full breadth of knowledge necessary to perform a comprehensive assessment of alternative launch vehicles," the report says. "We recognize that the extensive experience of its senior managers is an important element in evaluating alternatives," it adds. "The space shuttle was the best option," NASA's report says, adding that the agency did not conduct a full assessment of the alternatives to the space shuttle before deciding to keep it in service. The agency's decision to keep the shuttle in service was "the best option" for the U.S., it says. to perform a more comprehensive assessment of alternatives, especially for the logistics missions late this decade. An analysis of alternatives broadly examines multiple elements of program alternatives (including technical performance, risk, life cycle cost, and programmatic aspects), and is typically an important part of the formulation studies. NASA views a thorough analysis ofalternatives as an important aspect in the formulation of a program technical approach. The most important aspect of formulating a programTechnical approach is conducting a thoroughAnalysis of alternatives. NASA guidance defines an analysis of Alternatives as simultaneously. a formal method that compares alternatives by estimating their ability to satisfy mission requirements through an effectiveness analysis. The results of these two analysis are used together to produce a cost-effectiveness comparison. This allows decision-makers to assess cost and effectiveness. The method is used by the U.S. Air Force to assess the effectiveness of its aircraft. It is also used to compare the effectiveness and life cycle costs of different aircraft. For more information on this method, visit the Air Force's website. an alternate launch capability would be approximately $1 billion, take 3 to 5 years to develop, and require $2 to $3 billion per year for operations. We held discussions with commercial industry representatives who concurred with this time frame to develop an alternate capability to support space station operation. Since then, we have been working on an alternative launch capability that would be around the same cost as the current one. We are currently working on a plan that would allow us to launch from a different location in the future. had not been fully developed. In fact, NASA officials stated that they did not compare estimated costs for developing alternative launch vehicles against budget estimates for the 28 space shuttle flights currently planned to support the space station. The 28 flights total more than $22 billion between fiscal year 2005 and fiscal year 2006, NASA said. The cost of developing an alternative launch vehicle is estimated to be $1.5 billion to $2.5 million per flight. The costs of developing a new launch vehicle are not yet known, officials said. commercial industry representatives, the time involved for developing an alternate capability would probably preclude assembly missions from consideration. NASA did not perform a comparative cost analysis that considered the schedule impacts or associated costs. The agency did not have sufficient knowledge to support its conclusion regarding logistic support missions, the report said. The report concluded that the agency should not proceed with any plans to build a new space station until it had more information about the cost and schedule impacts of such a project. The study was published in the journal Space Policy and Exploration. NASA conducted a detailed assessment of alternatives to the space shuttle for completing assembly and providing logistics support to the International Space Station. We interviewed contractors at Boeing Launch Services and Lockheed Martin Space Systems and reviewed pertinent documentation related to expendable launch vehicles for space station assembly and logistics support. We also reviewed NASA’s request for information related to commercial industry interest in providing that capability and NASA”s plans for that capability. The study was published in the Journal of Space Studies, a peer-reviewed journal published by the Association for Space Studies. the commercial launch industry for additional study or development work in June 2005. According to NASA officials, the responses from industry with regard to space station logistics support have been very promising. The officials indicated that it might be possible to have a developed and certified capability to provide commercial analysis. NASA could also identify the feasibility and risks associated with an alternative means of providing logistics support to the space station in case delays occur requiring extension of the planned 2010 date. Furthermore, a comprehensive and thoroughly documented analysis of launch requirements and launch alternatives can provide NASA with vehicles to provide logistics services to the space station. In a 90-day study conducted in 2000, NASA determined that no commercial logistics service for the space space station was possible at that time. As available not later than 2009, these services are a key element in the future of the space agency program. In addition to lacking sufficient knowledge with regard to the use of alternatives for logistics missions, NASA did not document the proceedings and decisions reached in its 2004 assessment. It is not known if NASA will ever be able to provide commercial logistics services. study ended in January 2004 with the contractors briefing on their study results. NASA concluded that developing a domestic capability to meet most of the space station cargo service needs was possible within 3 to 5 years. In January 2004, the President announced a new Vision for the U.S. space station. The U.N. Space Agency is responsible for the shuttle program, which has been in operation since 1986. It is also responsible for a number of other space-related programs, such as the International Space Station. NASA has also requested $1.8 billion for crew and cargo services over the same time frame to purchase commercial services. In its fiscal year 2006 budget request, NASA indicated that such commercial services are expected to be in use by 2010. In addition, NASA has requested $2.5 billion to purchase existing and emerging capabilities, both domestic and foreign, over the next five years. The request is part of NASA's annual budget request for fiscal years 2006 and 2007. For confidential support, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org. NASA is currently evaluating responses from commercial industry on different ways to provide logistics services to and from the space station. NASA officials did not document these informal proceedings and decisions reached; therefore, the thoroughness of any assessment of alternatives cannot be verified. NASA received 26 responses from a September 2004 request for information that asked for, among other things, input from the commercial space industry regarding capabilities and market interest for missions for providing cargo launch services to, and the ability to return items to the ISS. NASA’s re-examination of its requirements for the. space station and space shuttle, coupled with the cost information of alternatives obtained from commercial. industry responses, provide NASA with a basis for performing a detailed analysis. steps to pursue a deliberate alternative cargo transportation system assessment. NASA should not limit documentation of this effort to the acquisition strategy meeting, but should also document the decision paths leading up to that event. This approach should identify the decision makers involved and provide a fully documented rationale of the acquisition processes. NASA analyzes all alternatives to determine the best options for delivering the logistics cargo for space station operations. As agreed, NASA’s comments are reprinted in appendix II. Unless otherwise noted, all comments are from NASA. comparative cost information and afford the agency the opportunity to use its resources more effectively and efficiently. This is particularly important now since the space station and space shuttle programs will be competing for limited resources. To better position the agency to determine the best available option for providing logistics part of this assessment, (a) determine the development and operation costs associated with these potential alternatives; and (b) perform a detailed analysis of these alternatives to determine a best option for delivering the logistics cargo required for space station operations. The Alternate Access to Station (AAS) study contracts were awarded in July 2002, with 1-year contracts given to four contractors. NASA officials stated they used the AAS study, which concentrated solely on logistics support missions, as the foundation for its 2004 informal assessment. In a summary of that study, NASA reported that the Aas contractors projected the cost to develop the logistics system. In summer 2003, these key functions were added to the space station. Appendix III provides a discussion of these challenges. NASA has asked for information on alternative cargo “upmass” and “downmass’ support for the space station. The responses are being evaluated, and NASA plans to seek more detailed information from the public. This request for information had similar characteristics as the AAS study, which also had as its objective to explore the development of alternative cargo support. The AAS report was published in June 2013 and is available online at: http://www.nasa.gov/news/press-releases/2013/11/09/12/aAS-study-explores-alternative-cargo-support-for-the-space station.html. contractors presented architectures that relied on existing domestic or international expendable launch vehicles. In the fall of 2003, the contracts were extended, and the contractors were asked to address larger cargo delivery capabilities. “downmass” (e.g. returning research materials to earth) requirements were added for the return of cargo. This article originally stated that the contract was for a single launch vehicle. We are happy to clarify that this was not the case. For more information on the contract, please visit: http://www.nasa.gov/contracts/nasa-contracts.