Putin is expected to attend the Group of 8 (G-8) industrialized nations meeting at Camp David, Maryland, on May 19-20. The Administration has suggested that Obama and Putin may hold a summit on the sidelines of the G-8 meeting. Some observers have warned that if European missile defense issues remain contentious at the time of this NATO Summit, Putin may deliver a harsh anti-U.S. speech. On February 24, 2012, one Russian official appeared to urge Putin to indicate readiness before the Camp David and Chicago meetings for a summit. Russian media reported in early March that a lack of progress on missile defense made it unlikely that a NATO-Russia Council meeting would be held in Chicago. Deputy Foreign Minister Sergey Ryabkov indicated on February 29 that a decision on attending the NATO Summit awaited the election and movement on missile Defense issues. A mostly positive assessment of near-term U.S.-Russia relations was given by Director of National Intelligence James Clapper in testimony to Congress in late January on the state of relations between the two countries. if not disgruntled voters, including by offering opposition figures jobs and by making some changes in government postings. Russia's ambassador to NATO, the nationalist Dmitriy Rogozin, was elevated to deputy prime minister in a seeming effort to attract the nationalist vote, according to some observers. Also, the Russian president made some changes to the country's foreign policy, including the appointment of a special envoy to the European Union and the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe. The changes were made in response to international criticism of the Russian government. suggested that former Russian Finance Minister Alexey Kudrin might make a good choice as prime minister. He stated that the United States wanted a "strong, vibrant, and growing Russia," and good U.S.-Russia relations. The former Russian finance minister is now the head of Russia's state-owned bank, Vnesheconombank (Vneshconombank). Vneshomenkov is also a former Russian deputy prime minister, and served as the country's finance minister in the 1990s. a partnership over the key issues on the international agenda" In an interview with Western media on March 1, Putin praised the U.S.-Russia reset as "useful" Putin stated that he had warm relations with President Obama, whom he viewed as desiring good U.K.-U.S. relations. The two "agreed that the successful reset in relations should be built upon during the coming years," according to the White House. The reset took place soon after President Obama's inauguration on May 1, 2012. some opposition politicians with whom he had met. However, he has reported that he has had fruitful meetings with Russian officials since this criticism. One positive sign is that various meetings of the U.S.-Russia Bilateral Presidential Commission have continued in recent weeks. Another positive sign was that he reported that some of the opposition politicians he met with had met with him for the first time in a long time, and that they had been cordial and had discussed issues of mutual interest to the two countries. Putin rejected an argument that U.S.-Russia relations were "cooling off" "I don't think we are seeing a cooling," he said. "We dislike some of the things our colleagues are doing, they don't like some things we are doing" "In general we have built," the Russian president said of relations with the United States. "I think we have a lot of common ground," Putin said of Russia-U.S. relations. 'We have a constant dialogue,' he said of the two countries. the U.S.-Russia "reset," particularly if the opposition protests continue in Russia into the summer and are met by a government crackdown. Soon after he arrived in Moscow in December 2011, new U.N. Ambassador Michael McFaul was accused on state-owned television of providing orders and money to the opposition. He was later cleared of any wrongdoing and moved on to a new post in the State Department, where he is now in charge of foreign policy. He has been criticized for his handling of the crisis in Ukraine, where the opposition has been protesting for months. Senate Finance Committee Chairman Max Baucus stressed that the growth of U.S. trade and investment would be facilitated by further democratization. Russia's legislature will give approval for Russia's accession to the World Trade Organization (WTO) in 2012. Baucus met with Russian President Dmitry Medvedev in late February 2012 to discuss trade prospects ahead of hearings on Russia's entry to the WTO. The meeting took place in the Russian capital, Moscow, ahead of Russia's World Trade Organisation accession hearings. the ratification of WTO accession by mid-2012. Congress may consider whether to grant Permanent Normal Trade Relations (PNTR) to Russia. Congress could lift the applicability of the so-called Jackson-Vanik provisions of the Trade Act of 1974 to Russia (concerning emigration from the former Soviet Union). Russia's human rights and democratization could be considered as part of the PNTR. Russia could be granted permanent normal trade relations with the U.S. if it joins the World Trade Organization. Challenges to Russia's democratic development have long been of concern to Congress as it has considered the course of U.S.-Russia cooperation. The Obama Administration has been critical of the apparently flawed Russian presidential election which took place on March 4, 2012. Many Members have condemned Russia's invasion of Georgia and have called for continued engagement with Russia and ofU.S. intentions. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. sanctions on Iran, as well as the signing of the START Treaty and the work to gain Russia's invitation at the end of 2011 to join the World Trade Organization. It is possible that the anti-Americanism exhibited by Putin during the campaign could put a strain on future cooperation under the Obama administration, writes CNN's John Defterios. Defterio: Putin's anti-U.S. stance could put an end to Russia's cooperation with the United States in the future. has condemned such aid as interference in Russia's internal affairs. He may tighten restrictions on such aid for non-governmental organizations or even ban some aid activities. Ongoing congressional concerns about democratization, human rights, and trade will continue and may have been heightened by the Russian election outcome. During his trip, he will also meet with the heads of the European Union, NATO, and the European Council of Ministers. He is expected to meet with Russian President Vladimir Putin as well as other senior Russian officials. would impose a visa ban and an asset freeze on human rights abusers. A provision in the National Defense Authorization Act of 2012 ( P.L. 112-81 ), signed into law on December 31, 2011, that calls for a plan to provide defensive weaponry to Georgia. The Administration's foreign assistance program is designed to provide assistance to countries that are at risk of being attacked by the U.S. or its allies in the Middle East. The program is intended to provide aid to countries in Africa, Europe, and Asia. budget for FY2013 submitted to Congress in February 2012 requests $52 million for Russia. Most of it aimed to continue support for democratization. Administration additionally has notified Congress of plans to create a $50 million fund to further support these efforts. Some observers have suggested that since Putin has been in power, the U.S. has been more willing to grant aid to Russia than in the past. The Obama administration has not commented on the possibility of a change in policy in this regard, however. tightening sanctions on Iran, viewing it as a further "regime change" attempt. Russia has used the same rationale in vetoing UNSC resolutions on Syria. Russia is a major arms supplier to Syria and has a Mediterranean naval docking facility at Tartus. Members of Congress have criticized Russia's veto of the Syria resolution; and S.Res. 370 condemns Russia for supplying arms to Syria. On February 24, the Putin-Medvedev "tandem" defended the veto, it faced Russian domestic as well as international criticism. reforms. The Administration has pointed to successes of the U.S.-Russia "reset" of relations as including approval by Russia in 2009 for the land and air transit of military supplies. Russia continues to support this transit because it helps stanch terrorist threats aimed at Russia emanating from the United States. Russian officials have stated that cooperation on the transit of supplies will not be linked to other issues in U.K.-U.S. relations. The administration has said that Russia has expressed its support for U.N. Security Council resolution on Afghanistan. On other U.S.-Russia foreign policy issues, differences have remained or emerged in recent months. The United States continues to call for Russia to withdraw its troops from occupied areas of Georgia. In early 2011, Russia abstained on a vote on a resolution to end the war in Afghanistan. The U.N. Security Council has passed a resolution that would end the conflict in Afghanistan by the end of the year. The resolution would also end the use of force in Afghanistan, which Russia and the United States disagree on. UNSC resolution calling for a "no-fly zone" to protect civilians in Libya. Russia denounced NATO actions in Libya as aimed at "regime change," and proclaimed that it would not support another UNSC resolution. The United States and Russia viewed this abstention as support for the U.S.-Russia reset, but almost immediately Russia denounced the NATO actions as a regime change attempt. The U.N. Security Council voted in favor of a no- fly zone, but Russia abstained. Putin campaign orchestrated large-scale rallies, the most prominent of which was a pro-Putin demonstration on February 4 in Moscow. The government claimed that over 130,000 supporters attended the rally, although the stadium's capacity is about 84,000. At this final campaign rally of the Putin campaign, some individuals reportedly had arrived by bus or train after trips lasting more than 24 hours, even though Putin's attendance at the rally was uncertain. In addition to these pro-Russian rallies, there were also pro-Kremlin rallies held in other cities. Putin urged voters "not to look abroad ... and not not to take orders" for the launch of protests. Rogozin asserted that Secretary Clinton and former Secretary Madeleine Albright wanted to destroy Russia in order to take over Siberia's mineral resources. Putin urged voters to take "orders" to take protests to the streets of Moscow and other Russian cities. He also urged voters not to "take orders" from other countries, such as the U.S. and the UK, and to take responsibility for their actions. Small protest rallies reportedly numbering up to several hundred people occurred in several other cities of Russia. Putin victory rallies reportedly attended by 1,000-7,000 people also were held in several cities across Russia on March 5. A "for free elections" protest rally was held in Moscow on March 10, attended by between 10,000 and 25,000. After the rally some protesters attempted a march and were temporarily detained, including Udaltsov. Later were released, according to local reports. Demonstrations against the election began even before the polls closed, and over the next few weeks, several protests of up to 100,000 or more people were held in Moscow and many other cities. The protests were the largest since before the collapse of the Soviet Union over 20 years ago. These protesters demanded that President Vladimir Putin step down and that he be replaced by a more pro-Russian leader. They also demanded that he step down from his post as president of the Russian parliament. He was re-elected with a majority of the vote. those who view the electoral process as tainted appeared smaller in size and number than after the Duma election. Authorities approved a protest rally in Pushkin Square in central Moscow on March 5, along with Putin victory rallies elsewhere in the city. Some youth activists involved in the victory rallies were involved in protests, according to some activists involved with the rallies. The rallies were held in support of Putin's re-election to the Russian Duma on March 4. The protests took place on the same day as Putin's victory rallies. reportedly stated that they were ready to fight against "provocations" by the protesters. After some of the protesters allegedly did not disperse after the time for the rally had elapsed, police forcibly intervened. Up to 250 demonstrators, including activists Alexey Navalny, Sergey Udaltsov, and Ilya Yashin, were reportedly detained by police. The protesters were reportedly arrested after they refused to leave the rally site after it had ended. The arrests were reported to have taken place in central Moscow. failed to get over 50% of the vote, even though there may have been a concerted effort to inflate Putin's vote count in the city, according to some reports. Chechnya continued its tradition of reporting a high turnout (99.6%) and vote for Putin. Thousands of irregularities were reported by the election commission. The result was a victory for Vladimir Putin, who won the election with a majority of 99.8%. The results were announced at a press conference in Grozny. At a press conference, Golos also stated that its ballot count had given Putin just over 50% of the vote, giving him a win in the first round. Russian physicist Sergey Shpilkin estimated that Putin may actually have received about 58% ofThe vote, with the official result inflated by the ballot count. Golos said that Putin had received about 50% of the vote, but that the actual figure was closer to 58%. Golos stated that Putin received about 50% of the vote, but the actual number was closer to 58%. Vladimir Churov proclaimed just after the polls closed that only a tiny percentage would prove valid. Zhirinovskiy and Mironov immediately congratulated Putin for what they termed an honest win. Zyuganov and Prokhorov alleged that electoral irregularities meant that the election was not free and fair. According to the final report of the CEC, Putin won 63.6% of 71.8 million votes cast, CEC says. All but Zyug anov met with Putin on March 5, where a discussion of each candidate's platform proposals took place. somewhat less than the 71.3% he had received in his last presidential election in 2004. Some of Mironov's expected supporters instead may have voted for Prokhorov, reducing his result below that gained by his A Just Russia Party in the Duma election. Moscow was the only major city where Putin was not re-elected to a second term as president. He is expected to win a third term in the presidential election on December 18. He will be the first Russian president to do so. polls closed and after about one-third of polling precincts had reported that he had received a sufficient vote for a first-round win. He and Medvedev hosted a large pre-planned outdoor victory rally and concert in Moscow (the pro-Putin crowds had gathered well before the last polling places in Russia had closed) The pro-Russian crowds gathered before the final polling places had closed in the country on Sunday night. The rally was followed by a victory concert in front of a large crowd of supporters. in mid-December 2011 that two webcams would be placed in each of about 94,500 polling places. Most of these were installed. Individuals who pre-registered were permitted to view the voting and vote-counting on-line (the latter after a delay until all polls were closed). Putin declared victory two hours after the permitted many monitors at polling places, and installed webc cameras in most polling places in Russia. On election day, the OSCE monitors assessed voting positively overall in the over 1,000 polling places they visited. independent Russian activists, including video of individuals allegedly admitting that they had been paid to vote repeatedly. "hundreds" of buses parked in Moscow that allegedly had carried Putin's supporters into the city to inflate the voting results there for Putin. The performance of the webcams was uneven. Many were filmed by people who were not in the capital at the time of the vote. Many of them were filmed from inside the buses, which were parked in the streets of Moscow. The buses were parked on the outskirts of the city. not focused on the ballot boxes or views were blocked, or they malfunctioned. The independent Golos (Voice) monitoring group reported the heavy use of "carousel voting," in which buses carried groups that voted at several polling places. Golos also reported the use of absentee ballots in government offices, institutions, and government offices and government institutions. The group's monitoring group, Golos, is based in Madrid and has been monitoring elections in Spain since the 1970s and 1980s. what results the government planned for on election day. The government pointed to the polls as evidence that the results were valid and not due to ballot-box stuffing, according to critics. They point to Putin's award of the Order for Services to the Fatherland to VTsIOM after the 2007-2008 election. They also point to the fact that Putin awarded the organization a medal for services to the fatherland in 2007-08. The award was given to a member of the Russian parliament. election cycle as evidence of this collusion. On February 27, the last permitted day to release polling results, VTsIOM estimated that Putin would garner nearly 59% of the vote, so that a second round of voting would not be necessary. During the last few days, the estimate has been revised up to more than 60% for Putin, according to the group's latest estimate. The estimate is in line with the latest estimate from the U.S. State Department, which says Putin is expected to win the election with more than 59%. ballot box stuffing, by inflating the voter turnout and allocating these votes to Putin, and by other means. In their preliminary report, the 262 monitors led by the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) concluded that the election was well organized but that there were several problems. Although the elections were well organized, the monitors found several problems, including ballot box stuffing and other means of inflating voter turnout. The monitors concluded that there was no evidence of widespread fraud. officials and resources to garner support for Putin. The report also raised concerns that precinct polling place chairpersons generally appeared to belong to the ruling United Russia Party or were state employees. On the positive side, the OSCE reported that the government did not hinder demonstrators calling for fair elections, the report said. The OSCE report also said that thegovernment did not hinder demonstrators calling to fair elections. The Russian parliament is expected to hold elections on March 18 and 19. The results are expected to be announced at a later date. are owned by the government or receive government contracts, so their objectivity was of concern, according to some observers. In particular, the prominent All-Russian Center for the Study of Public Opinion (known by its Russian acronym, VTsIOM), is state-owned. Some critics have argued that VT'sIOM's polls were an announcement of the government's support for Vladimir Putin's anti-gay legislation. The Russian government has denied the allegations, saying that the polls were conducted in a free and fair manner. Putin government and campaign made several accusations that opposition politicians and other enemies of Putin were involved in criminal conspiracies. The most sensational was an announcement in late February that Ukrainian police had uncovered a plot by Chechen terrorists to assassinate Putin after the election. Other sensational accusations included those by Putin that oppositionist politicians planned to kill one of their own in order to blame the death on him. Another accusation was that oppositionists planned to stuff ballots marked with Putin's name into ballot boxes to declare that the election was illegitimate. businesses that were gathered up and checked by supervisors to make sure that the employees had voted for Putin. Golos concluded in its preliminary report on the election that although there appeared to be somewhat fewer irregularities than during the Duma election, the presidential election was not free and fair. The election was held on March 18, with the results announced on March 25. The vote was widely expected to be a victory for Vladimir Putin, who is expected to win a second term in the presidential elections in April. The report did not state outright that the election was "not free and fair" Some of the monitors at a press conference stated that they had not viewed it as free or fair. According to the report, Prime Minister Putin received an advantage in media coverage, and authorities mobilized local authorities to help him win the election. The election was held on March 18, with the result expected to be announced on March 25. The vote is expected to take place in Russia's regions of Chechnya, Krasnodar, and Mordovia. closed, which ostensibly is illegal). Putin proclaimed that the voters had rebuffed attempts to "break up the state and usurp power" Putin: "We proved that no one can impose on us.... We have won in open and honest battle" Even before receiving or reviewing most reports of electoral violations, CEC head had already made a decision to close the doors of the polling station, Putin said. "We have won," Putin said, "in an honest and open battle," adding that the CEC had already decided to close it. Five candidates were able to register for the March 4, 2012, presidential election. Four of the five candidates—Putin, Gennadiy Zyuganov, Vladimir Zhirinovskiy, and Sergey Mironov—were nominated by parties with political ties to the Kremlin. President Medvedev introduced some legislation that he claimed would enhance democratization in Russia in the future. The legislation was passed by the Russian parliament and signed into law by the president on March 4. The bill was introduced by Russian President Vladimir Putin and was signed by Russian Prime Minister Vladimir Putin on March 5. 30 other prisoners who had been highlighted by opposition politician Boris Nemtsov as "political prisoners" during a meeting with Medvedev on February 20. He also ordered the Prosecutor General to examine the mid-2011 denial of party registration to the Party of People's Freedom. The initial protests after Putin's election by the opposition were sparked by his decision to step down from the presidency. The protests were followed by a wave of anti-government demonstrations across the country, including in the capital, Moscow. Another bill may prove more reformist, however, by greatly reducing the registration requirements for new parties. On March 5, Medvedev directed the prosecutor general to review businessman/oligarch Mikhail Khodorkovskiy's conviction and that of another oligarch. The bill may permit many currently unrepresented interests in society to participate in political life, he says. It could also lead to an increase in the number of political parties in Russia, he adds. He says the bill is a good step in the right direction. in 2008, the death of lawyer Sergey Magnitskiy after being detained and tortured in a Russian prison in 2009, and the re-sentencing of businessman/oligarch Mikhail Khodorkovskiy in 2010 to several more years in prison. Recent legislation includes the Senate and House versions of the Magnitsky Rule of Law bills, which have been passed by both houses of Congress. The bills are in response to the deaths of the lawyer and two other prominent Russian businessmen. seats in the Duma. According to the election rules, other prospective candidates from minor parties not represented in Duma or self-nominated individuals were required to gather 2 million signatures of support, with no more that 50,000 in each of at least 40 regions nationwide, within about one month. Many prospective candidates were from non-Duma parties, such as the Communist Party, which is banned from running for more than one seat in a single Duma seat. Many minor parties were also banned from standing for office in the 2014 elections. of constituency races and the possibility of self-nominated candidates (Putin had abolished these in 2005). The bill submitted to the Duma called for altering electoral procedures so that voters in 225 new districts would select a party list with identifiable local candidates. Golos researchers have termed these two bills "two bills to change the electoral system in Russia" and "one bill to alter the electoral process in Russia in a big way" The bill was submitted to Duma on September 26. It was approved on September 27. analysts have viewed these and many other requirements imposed on prospective minor party and independent candidates as too restrictive and as limiting political participation. Of the 17 individuals who initially announced they would run for the presidency, some dropped out and many were disqualified on technical grounds by the Central Election Commission. Many of the candidates were from minor parties or independent parties, which are not allowed to run for president in presidential elections. The Central Elections Commission disqualified many of the potential presidential candidates on technical reasons, making it difficult for them to stand for election. were deemed valid and he was placed on the ballot. According to some critics, Mezentsev was a "technical candidate," who was nominated only to ensure that if all other candidates withdrew from the election, Putin would still have an opponent as required under the electoral law. After Prokhorov was registered, he was allowed to run for the presidency in 2012. He lost to Vladimir Putin, who was re-elected to a second term in the presidential election in March 2013. Yavlinskiy was deemed ineligible on the grounds that some signatures gathered electronically were not handwritten in ink and therefore were invalid. Many observers argued that he was eliminated because he would have been the only candidate left in the race. These critics claim.however, Mezentsev was no longer needed and was eliminated as a candidate, these critics claim, and that Yavlinksi was eliminated from the race for the presidency as a result of his disqualification. The result of the vote was a hung parliament, with the result of a vote of no confidence. Electoral Commission (CEC) and only three managed to submit signatures. Two out of the three—regional governor Dmitriy Mezentsev and opposition Yabloko Party head Grigoriy Yavlinskiy—were disqualified by the CEC on the grounds that over 5% of their signatures were invalid. The signatures of the third prospective candidate, businessman Mikhail Prokhorov, were also disqualified. The CEC has yet to announce its decision on who will be the next president of Russia. Prokhorov announced his candidacy just two days after a large opposition demonstration on December 10, 2011. Some critics have speculated that he was urged to run by the government as a candidate who might attract the votes of some of the liberal protesters. According to some reports, he praised Putin's policies in an interview with Russia's state-run news agency, Tass. He is the son of former Russian Prime Minister Mikhail Prokhorovsky, who died in a car crash in 2010. Just Russia Party could join with the Communist Party to form a new social democratic coalition. Business interests appeared to welcome Prokhorov's third-place showing and his indication that he would continue a role in politics by forming a party. The proposal also was endorsed by Putin on March 5, a proposal that was also endorsed by the Russian president on March 4, a day before the election. The election was held on March 18 and 19 in Moscow and St. Petersburg, and on March 25 in the rest of Russia. only bona fide opposition candidate on the ballot. Of the registered candidates, all but Prokhorov had run in previous presidential elections and lost badly. Zyuganov and Zhirinovskiy had run several times. While he was speaker of the Federation Council (the upper legislative chamber), Mironov ran in the 2004 presidential election, he said in an interview with CNN on Monday. He said: "I am not a candidate. I am a person. I want to be president of Russia" to polling, substantial percentages of prospective voters viewed all these candidates in a negative light. For instance, over one-quarter of those polled stated that they would never vote for an "oligarch" like Prokhorov (he is said to be the third-richest man in Russia). These are just a few of the reasons why they would not vote for any of these candidates, according to the poll. The full results of the poll can be found at CNN.com/suspect. a decade distinguished by one of the world's fastest economic growth rates. In the democracy article, he argued that there was no democracy in Russia in the 1990s, only "anarchy and oligarchy" But under his rule in the 2000s, democracy had been established, he said. He defined this democracy in terms of "one-of-the-world-fastest-growing-economy-in-a-decade" The article was published in the New York Review of Books. stated that the United States was not seeking to dictate to Russia, but suggested that the U.S. could provide a little bit of advice to a country that is just now beginning to enter its third decade of democracy. "A country that has had a 223-year history of democracy," he said, "could provide ... advice to ... a country ... that is ... just now ... entering its third century of democracy" "We are not trying to dictate," he added, but to offer advice. "We're just trying to offer some advice," Obama said. could grow to one-third by the end of the decade. By this time, a majority of the working population will be middle class, they estimate. These individuals, including many business owners and private-sector employees, want a government that is not corrupt and follows the rule of law, these sociologists report. For more, go to CNN.com/sociology and follow us on Twitter @CNNSociology, and on Facebook at CNNSciology and Facebook. same day. The Communist Party has planned to hold protests against the election in coming weeks. Some observers have discerned a lessening turnout at the protests. Some advocates of "right wing" democratization among the protesters, such as Yavlinskiy, have called for shifting the focus from rallies to organizing new or "right-wing" initiatives. The protests are expected to continue until the end of the month, when the results will be announced. The election is scheduled to take place on November 18. revitalized opposition political parties. Mironov has called for a change in electoral law to again permit party blocs. Udaltsov, who represents the "left wing" nationalists among the protesters, has disagreed, arguing that unauthorized protests should continue as one means to pressure the authorities. The protests are expected to continue until at least the end of the month, according to the opposition leader's spokesman. The opposition leader has called the protests a "humanitarian crisis" and said they should be followed by a crackdown. to participate in televised debates with the other candidates, but appeared extensively on television in the guise of carrying out his duties as prime minister. Also, from mid-January through late February, he published seven long articles in major newspapers. These "election manifesto" articles covered such policy issues as ethnicity, the economy, and the environment. He was also a frequent guest on CNN's "Larry King Live" and "This is Life with Larry King" on Sunday evenings and Monday mornings. He has also appeared on "The Today Show" on Monday and Tuesday mornings. if gubernatorial elections are reinstated. He also called for greater efforts to combat corruption, which he claimed had strengthened when young greedy people had moved into the civil service. In general, the articles appeared to be a reiteration of existing policies and sentiments, rather than a forum for launching new policies, he said. He added that he would like to see the return of gubernatorial elections if they are reinstated in the country. He said he would also like to bring back the right to vote for the first time in 30 years. Medvedev was elected by a wide margin in March 2008, and upon taking office nominated Putin to be his prime minister. Putin stressed that he was running for president on the platform that Medvedev would be nominated as prime minister, and that voters would decide democratically on in the short term. Most observers, however, believe that medvedev will be confirmed as prime Minister. Putin has stated that Medvesv would continue to carry out initiatives he launched as president. Medvesev had announced several democratization initiatives in his state of the nation address. this "tandem" Some observers suggest that a Prime Minister Medvedev would have substantial authority as a former president. According to this view, Putin would be unlikely to fire Prime MinisterMedvedev, at least for the time being. The "t tandem" would continue to operate much as it has over the past four years, observers say. The Kremlin has not commented on the possibility of a new prime minister or a new government in Russia. The Russian parliament is expected to vote on a new PM in the coming days. Putin and other observers have pointed to this growing middle class as major participants in the protests that began after the Duma election. Putin reportedly garnered a relatively low 47% of the vote. To some small degree, Putin and Medvedev have become cognizant that this rising middle class increasingly will demand reforms and have already offered some accommodative gestures. A major question is whether Putin will be able to deliver on his promises to reform the economy and the economy in a way that will benefit the middle class. 72 higher-level territorial electoral commissions. Putin (and outgoing President Medvedev) face rising dissatisfaction by many Russians with what are viewed as tainted elections, corruption, and other political and human rights problems. According to some Russian sociologists, about one-quarter of the Russian population belongs to the middle class and this portion of the population is more likely to be dissatisfied with the political system than the general population. About one-fourth of the Russians are believed to be in the middle-class. Russian political and economic institutions and civil society will face substantial strains to adapt to the long-term demands of a modern global economy. Some observers have speculated that Putin may not follow through on his announced plans to nominate Medvedev as his prime minister.discount such a scenario, however, but argue that Russian political andeconomic institutions andcivil society will be under significant strain to cope with the global economy's demands in the long term. They argue that Russia's political, economic, and social institutions will need to be strengthened to cope. negative views greatly hampered the effectiveness of these candidates' campaign efforts. Many voters may well have voted for Putin as the "lesser evil," according to some observers. Besides permitting protests "for free elections" as well as opposition presidential candidate meetings, the Medvedev-Putin government launched efforts to appeal to wavering voters. The Russian government says it is committed to free and fair elections. The opposition says it will continue to fight for democratic reforms and a better Russia. The government says the opposition will not be allowed to run for office again. economy, democracy, socioeconomic problems, national security, and foreign policy. Putin boasted that during his rule, he helped "deliver Russia from the blind alley of civil war, break the back of terrorism, restore the country's territorial integrity and constitutional order, and spark economic revival, giving us economic revival" In the first overview article, Putin boasted of his success in ending the civil war and ending terrorism. In the second article, he boasted of helping to "break the back" of terrorism. initiatives, according to many observers. Besides these efforts, Putin boosted or promised large increases in military and government pay, pensions, and student stipends. These benefits may have made many voters very receptive to his argument that they should elect him in order to preserve their benefits. A major aspect of Putin's election campaign was the promise of more money for the military and the state. He also promised to increase the number of Russian citizens living in Russia. He said he would also increase the numbers of Russians living in the country. Some in Congress also have criticized the conduct of the election, but have endorsed continued engagement. Others have called for stepping back and reevaluating the Administration's engagement policy. Congress may consider the implications of another Putin presidency, lagging lagging on issues of mutual strategic concern. The U.S. and Russia have a long history of working together, including during the Cold War and the early 1990s. The two countries also have a close relationship with each other, particularly in the area of defense. whether a Putin presidency can implement substantial economic and democratic reforms. Some critics have argued that Putin is not attuned to making such reforms, and that he will face rising civil discontent during his third term in office. A few have warned darkly that he could be ousted. Most observers believe that Putin will be re-elected to a third term as Russia's president in 2012. The next election will take place in April 2014, and Putin is expected to run for re-election in the same year. Clapper: Putin would not reverse the course of U.S.-Russian relations. He said Putin has an "instinctive distrust" of the United States. Clapper suggested that there would be "more continuity than change" in Russian domestic and foreign policy over the next year under a Putin presidency. He projected that Putin would be more "challenging" than Barack Obama in dealing with the U.N. Security Council and other world leaders. He was speaking to CNN's "State of the Union" program. democratization, and human rights abuses in Russia as it debates possible future foreign assistance and trade legislation. Former Russian President Vladimir Putin served two elected terms from 2000 to 2008, after which he was required to step down due to a constitutional limit to his term. U.S.-Russia relations are being discussed as part of a larger effort to improve relations between the two countries, including trade and economic ties. The United States and Russia have been at odds since the fall of the Soviet Union in 1991. Putin voiced qualms about this initiative, requesting that he retain control over who may run in such elections. The draft bill reportedly contains such a provision. Another vague proposal by Medvedev was to increase the openness of legislative elections. Some observers had hoped that this would include the restoration of the Magnitsky Act of 2002. The bill reportedly includes such a proposal. The vote is expected to take place in the second half of the year, after the Winter Olympics in Sochi, Russia, are over. Dreier endorsed an idea that Putin not run again after his third term in office. He also praised Medvedev's request for an examination of the sentence against Khodorkovskiy and others. Dreier also called for a new Duma election, and hold free and fair gubernatorial elections. and obviously has had more than a few challenges," Dreier said of the Russian leader. "He has had to deal with a lot of challenges," he said of Putin's third term. announced that they would exchange places so that Putin could re-assume the presidency. The two leaders claimed that they had agreed to consider this switch before Medvedev had been elected in 2008. This announcement created a great deal of resentment among many Russians who felt that a backroom deal had been made. It was claimed that the two leaders agreed to the swap before the 2008 election, but this was not the case and the swap was announced later. It has been described as a 'backroom deal' by some Russian commentators. record may well be part of the debate. On March 5, 2012, Representative David Dreier, chairman of the House Democracy Partnership, congratulated Putin on his election victory. Dreier objected to Putin's election night victory speech which appeared to characterize the U.S. as interfering in Russia's domestic affairs. Representative Dreier said that Putin's speech was inappropriate and that Russia should not be allowed to interfere in the United States' domestic affairs in the way it has in the past and in the future. The statement points to the results of the preliminary report of the OSCE in stating that the "election had a clear winner with an absolute majority" The statement also urged the Russian government to address shortcomings mentioned in the report. The statement hailed the president-elect after he is sworn in "after ... he is swearing in" for a second term. The election is set to take place on December 18, the statement said. The vote is expected to be followed by the swearing-in of the new president. "clear victory," and praised the significant level of civic engagement in the election. At the same time, she urged Russian authorities to address shortcomings mentioned in the OSCE report. She stated that the "EU looks forward to working with the incoming Russian President" to implement pledges of economic and political pledges of political and economic assistance to the country. The European Union has called on Russia to take steps to address the shortcomings in its election process to ensure a fair and democratic election. The EU has called for a transparent, fair and transparent election process in Russia. telephoned President-elect Putin to congratulate him on his electoral victory, and stated that he looked forward to meeting him at Camp David, Maryland, in May 2012. Other Western governments appeared to take similar viewpoints. The European Union's High Representative Catherine Ashton on March 5 "took note" of Putin's congratulatory phone call to her on his election victory. She said she "looked forward" to meeting with him at the Camp David summit in May, and that she was "taken note of" his comments. that a new Duma election be held, but also called for a scheduled March 4, 2012, presidential election to be free and fair. At first, these protests appeared to shock the Putin government, leading to some arrests, but the government soon decided to permit the protest rallies as a means of protest. The protests have since turned into more of a civil disobedience movement, with some calling for a boycott of the 2012 presidential election in protest of Russia's treatment of gays and lesbians by the government. large number of Russian citizens who turned out to monitor the election, held rallies, and otherwise "express[ed] their views peacefully" President Obama praised the intentions of the government to improve the political system by re-introducing gubernatorial elections, simplifying party registration, and making other reforms. On March 9, 2012, President Obama visited Russia and met with Russian President Dmitry Medvedev to congratulate him on his re-election. The visit was part of a tour of Russia that included stops in Europe, the U.S. and Asia. been foisted on them. The resentment was mostly low-key at first, but signs included polls showing growing dissatisfaction with Putin and Medvedev. The trigger for wider open discontent was a December 2011 election to Russia's legislature, the Duma, that was widely viewed by many Russians as not free and fair. It was seen by many as an attempt by the Kremlin to shore up its grip on power in the face of growing international pressure and criticism of the country's human rights record. the shift in tactics by the Putin campaign involved blaming the U.S. and the West for the protests. This anti-Americanism aimed to define the election as a patriotic vote for Putin. After Secretary Clinton voiced criticism of the Duma election in early December 2011, Putin accused her of "giving away" the election to the opposition. Putin accused Clinton of " giving away the election" to the Kremlin's political opponents. He also said that he would not allow the opposition to run for president in 2012. events, a wave of television shows was launched extolling Putin's rule and condemning alleged U.S. and opposition "subversion" against Russia. At the same time, authorities moved to harass and suppress independent vote monitoring groups, the Internet, and certain "old media" newspapers and broadcasters that the opposition relied on. Putin refused to step down, saying he was committed to the rule of law and constitutional order in Russia. He also said he would not step down if the opposition refused to accept his leadership. betray their motherland, but to stay with us, to work for [Russia's] benefit and its people. And love it the way we do." This anti-American theme also was prominent in a number of supposedly non-partisan talk shows and "documentaries" aired on state-owned or controlled television. Several major Russian polling organizations have also taken a dim view of the U.S. government. The U.N. Security Council has passed a resolution condemning Russia's actions in Ukraine. of the rights of Russians to employment, free healthcare, and education, although he admitted that civil society recently had demanded more political participation. However, he warned against creating a contentious electoral environment of "buffoons" rather than one where "responsible" people are elected. He called for retaining a strong federal government and called for a return to Russia's pre-revolution era of parliamentary democracy. He also called for an increase in the number of women in the Russian parliament, which had been cut in half since the 1990s. owned REN TV showed a program warning that if Putin was not elected, Russia would descend into civil war and destruction within a few months at the hands of the opposition. In an attempt to convince the public that the election would be free and fair, Prime Minister Putin announced that he would not run for a third term. He said he would step down if he was not re-elected in 2012. Putin is expected to win a second term in office in 2012, and a fourth term if he wins in 2016. federation speech on December 22 that he stated were partly spurred by the protests. Putin, in contrast, has asserted that the protests had no bearing on these initiatives. These proposals have been submitted to the legislature for debate. One proposal was to restore gubernatorial elections, which Putin had abolished in the past. The proposal has been submitted for debate in the Russian parliament. It has been referred to as the "Putin-Gorbachev plan" and is expected to be debated in the next few days. It remains to be seen whether the impetus to create and strengthen civil society organizations will be sustained. The day after the election, the State Department issued a statement that the U.S. "looks forward to working with the Russian government" A new Putin administration could crack down on civil society efforts in Russia, as it has done in other parts of the world. The State Department says it is looking forward to "working with theRussian government" in the coming days and weeks, if not months.