they are enrolled in Priority Groups 1-6 (see Appendix A). The second group of veterans is composed of those who do not fall into one of the first six priority groups. The VHA is mandated to provide priority care for non-emergency outpatient medical care for any condition of a service-connected veteran rated 50% or more. Appendix C provides information on income thresholds for VA health-care benefits. and the VA-established means test threshold for those with incomes and net worth above the threshold. state emergencies or activities. After veteran's status has been established, the VA next places applicants into one of two categories. The first group is composed of veterans with service-connected disabilities or with incomes below an established means test. These veterans are regarded by the VA as "high priority" veterans, and these veterans are considered high priority applicants for the program. The second group is made up of veterans who are regarded as high priority veterans, such as those who have been in the military for more than 10 years. Veterans whose attributable income and net worth are not greater than an established "means test" are generally known as "higher priority" or "core" veterans. The other category of veterans are those Orange in Vietnam) while on active duty; and veterans who have an annual income and worth below a VA-established means test threshold. The VA looks at applicants' income andnet worth to determine their specific priority category and whether they have to pay co-payments for nonservice-connected care. disability that was incurred or aggravated in the line of duty. Former prisoners of war (POWs); veterans awarded the Purple Heart; veterans who have been determined by VA to be catastrophically disabled. World War I veterans who were exposed to hazardous agents (such as Agent I, Agent II, Agent Agent, Agent XL, Agent X, Agent Y, Agent Z). World War II veterans who are ex- POWs; veterans awarded Purple Heart. World War I veterans of World War I. Currently, there is no medical diagnostic code specific to TBI, therefore, it is a challenge to quantify the number of TBI cases. Presently, both DOD and VA are working with the National Center for Health Statistics to refine current current diagnostic codes for polytrauma injury, TBI,. burns, and amputee care, among other things. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. International Classification of Diseases-9 th Revision (ICD—9) codes to better reflect the TBI patient population within both DOD and VA. Beginning with FY2009, appropriators are directing the Administration to include TBI as a select program within the medical services account in order that committees might better account for special needs. TBI is a brain injury that occurs when the brain is damaged or damaged by a traumatic brain injury (TBI). TBI can be treated with drugs, surgery, or both. the policy for a reduction in psychiatric inpatient care, taking into account the needs of returning OIF and OEF veterans. Furthermore, the VA not to reduce the number of inpatient psychiatric beds at any facility that currently has a waiting list. Veterans access to VA care will remain the same for the next five years, according to the explanatory statement. The VA will continue to provide veterans with access to mental health care through the VA’s National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255. for veterans from FY2008-FY2012. House Appropriations Committee expressed doubt in the actuarial model currently used to project health-care demand for Operation Enduring Freedom (OEF) and Operation Iraqi Freedom ( OIF) veterans. The House Appropriations. Committee has included a general provision in H.R. 2642 directing the CBO to submit a CBO to. submit a report on the health care needs of veterans from 2008-2012. The CBO has been asked to report back to Congress by the end of the month. The Veterans Benefits Administration (VBA) provides compensations, pensions, and education assistance. The National Cemetery Administration (NCA) is responsible for maintaining national veterans cemeteries. The NCA also provides grants to states for establishing, expanding, or improving state veterans cremeteries; and providing headstones and markers for medical research programs. The VBA is responsible, among other things, for providing compensations and pensions to veterans. It is also responsible for providing education assistance for veterans. defined Veterans Integrated Service Networks (VISNs) Although policies and guidelines are developed at VA headquarters to be applied throughout the VA health-care system, management authority for basic decision making and budgetary responsibilities are delegated to VISNs. Congressionally appropriated medical care funds are allocated to the VISNs based on the VA’s medical care needs. The VA has more than 100,000 employees, including more than 2,000 full-time, part-time and temporary employees. The agency has a budget of more than $1.2 billion. directs the DOD and VA to provide a joint report to the Committees on Appropriations detailing the actions being taken by each Department to achieve an interoperable electronic medical record (EMR) system. The report must identify all ongoing and planned projects and programs within both DOD andVA addressing the EMR issue. It must also identify allongoing and planned Projects and Programs within both Defense and VA addressing EMR issues. The bill is expected to be voted on by the House and Senate next month. The VA's budget includes both mandatory and discretionary spending accounts. Mandatory funding supports disability compensation, pension benefits, vocational rehabilitation, and life insurance. Discretionary funding supports a broad array of benefits and services, including medical care. In FY2007, In FY 2007, the VA spent $1.2 billion on medical care, disability compensation and pension benefits. The VA also spends money on the graves of eligible persons, among other things. The budget for FY 2007 was $2.1 billion, up from $1 billion in 2006. Veterans Equitable Resource Allocation (VERA) system, which generally bases funding on patient workload. Prior to the implementation of the VERA system, resources were allocated to facilities primarily on the basis of their historical expenditures. Unlike other federally funded health insurance programs, such as Medicare and Medicaid, which finance medical care, VERA does not fund medical care. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. the Secretary, in providing for the care of 'core' veterans, to establish and operate a system of annual patient enrollment. It would require that veterans be enrolled in a manner giving relative degrees of preference in accordance with specified priorities. At the same time, it would vest discretion in the Secretary, to be exercised by the Secretary of Health and Human Services. The bill would also require the Secretary to establish an annual system of patient enrollment and require veterans to be enrolled according to a set of priorities.  VA to provide a report to the committees that includes a description of the unique challenges and costs faced by veterans in remote rural areas. The report should also identify the need to fund alternative sources of medical services in areas where VA medical facilities are not accessible to veterans without them leaving such areas. It should also contain an assessment of the potential for increasing local access to medical services for veterans inremote rural areas through strategic partnerships with other government and local private health care providers. The explanatory statement accompanying the Consolidated Appropriations Act ( H.R. 2764 , P.L. 110-161 ) broad array of veteran-centric health topics, such as treatment of mental health conditions, rehabilitation of veterans with limb loss, traumatic brain injury and spinal cord injury, organ transplantation, and the organization of the health-care delivery system. VA researchers receive funding not only through this account but also from the DOD, as well as other federal agencies. The VA is a joint agency of the Department of Health and Human Services and the National Institute of Veterans' Affairs. It was established in 1945 to provide health care for veterans. have urged both DOD and VA to seek every opportunity to partner to improve the continuity of care for veterans. Joint clinics; joint Centers of Excellence for Post Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) and Traumatic Brain Injury (TBI); joint research and/or treatment; and the development of joint clinical practice guidelines, among other things. For more information, visit the VA website or the DOD website. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. In FY2007, the VHA operated 155 medical centers, 135 nursing homes, 717 ambulatory care and community-based outpatient clinics (CBOCs) The VHA also pays for care provided to veterans by private-sector providers domiciliary facilities, and collaborates with the Department of Defense (DOD) in sharing health-care resources and services. According to VHA, the agency had an estimated total enrolled veteran population of 7.9 million and provided medical care to about 5.2 million unique veteran patients. training and rehabilitation services, hospital and medical care, assistance to homeless veterans, home loan guarantees, and death benefits that cover burial expenses. The VA carries out its programs nationwide through three administrations and the board of veterans appeals (BVA) The Veterans Health Administration (VHA) is responsible for health-care services and on a fee basis under certain circumstances. Inpatient and outpatient care is also provided in the private sector to eligible dependents of veterans under the Civilian Health and Medical Program of the Department of Veterans Affairs.  reserve components and National Guard have limited eligibility for VA health-care services. National Guard members are not granted service-connection for any injury, heart attack, or stroke that occurs while performing duty ordered by a governor. Members of the reserve components may be granted service.connection stoke if such an event occurs during these same periods. The granting of service- connection makes them eligible to receive care from the VA for those conditions. They are not eligible for care if they have completed the term for which they were called and were granted an other than dishonorable discharge. for any injury they incurred or aggravated in the line of duty while attending inactive duty training assemblies, annual training, active duty for training, or while going directly to or returning directly from such duty. In addition, reserve component service members may be granted service-connection for a heart attack or a stroke. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. who completed the term for which they were called, and who were granted an other than dishonorable discharge, are exempt from the 24 continuous months of active duty requirement. National Guard members who were called to active duty by federal executive order are also exempt from this two-year requirement if they have completed their term for that term. The requirement applies to members of the U.S. Army, Air Force, Navy, Marine Corps, and Army National Guard, as well as the National Guard. All outpatient appointment requests must be acted on as soon as possible, but no later than seven calendar days from the date of the request. Veterans who are rated less than 50% service-connected disabled, and who require care for a service- connected condition, need to be scheduled to be seen within 30 days of the desired date for any condition. When VHA staff are scheduled to see a veteran within 120 days, they must be seen by the VHA within the next 30 days. The VHA also requires that priority scheduling of any veteran is given to staff. According to VHA policies, patients with emergency or urgent medical needs must be provided care, or must be scheduled to receive care as soon as practicable. Veterans who are service-connected 50% or more need are in doubt as to whether the request for care is for a service- connected condition. They are required to assume, on behalf of the veteran, that the veteran is entitled to priority access and schedule within 30 days of the desired date. Veterans in other priority groups are to be prioritized. with no service-connected disabilities and with attributable incomes above an established means test (see Appendix C ). P.L. 104-262 also authorized the VA to establish a patient enrollment system to manage access to VA health care. As stated in the report language, "the Act would direct" the VA "to establish ... an enrollment system" for the VA's health care program. The system would be for those with "no service- connected disabilities" and with "attributable incomes" above an "established means test" (see appendix C). Congress authorized the VA to collect payments from third-party health insurers for the treatment of veterans with nonservice-connected disabilities in 1986. The VA also established co-payments from veterans for this care. Under current law, the VA is authorized to collect from third party health insurers to offset the cost of veterans' medical care for non-service-related disabilities. The bill would allow the VA the ability to collect up to $1.2 billion from third parties to offset veterans' care costs. Not every veteran is automatically entitled to medical care from the VA. Prior to eligibility reform in 1996, provisions of law governing eligibility for VA care were complex and not uniform across all levels of care. All veterans were technically "eligible" for hospital care and nursing home care, but eligibility did not by itself ensure access to care. The Veterans' Health Care Eligibility Reform Act of 1996, P.L. 104-262 , established two eligibility categories and required the VHA to manage the program. provision of hospital care and medical services through an enrollment system based on a system of priorities. P.L. 104-262 was clear in its intent that the provision of health care to veterans was dependent upon the available resources. The new eligibility standard was created by Congress to "ensure that medical judgment rather than legal criteria will determine when care will be provided" For most veterans, entry into the veterans' health-care system begins with a medical exam and referral to a VA doctor. its medical services obligations on outpatient care. To understand some of the issues discussed later in this report, it is important to understand eligibility for VA health care, the VA's enrollment process, and its enrollment priority groups. Unlike Medicare or Medicaid,VA health care is not an entitlement program. Contrary to popular belief, VA healthCare.gov is not a government-run program. It is run by the Department of Health and Human Services, not the VA. The VA has no obligation to provide health care to veterans. Veteran's status is established by active-duty status in the military, naval, or air service and an honorable discharge or release from active military service. Generally, persons enlisting in one of the armed forces after September 7, 1980, and officers commissioned after October are considered "veterans" Veteran's status primarily based on military service, but can also be based on civilian employment or other circumstances. For more information, visit the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs' Veterans Affairs website. Servicemembers discharged at any time because of service-connected disabilities are not held to this requirement. Also, reservists that were called to active duty and. must have completed two years of active duty or the full period of their initial service obligation to be eligible for VA health-care benefits. The VA does not provide health care benefits to reservists who have been discharged from active duty since January 1, 1981. The service-related disability exception applies to those who were discharged on or after July 1, 1982. Some veterans are exempt from the enrollment requirement if they meet special eligibility requirements. A veteran may apply for enrollment by completing the Application for Health Benefits (VA Form 10-10EZ) at any time during the year. Once a veteran is enrolled in the VA health-care system, the veteran remains in the system and does not have to reapply for enrollment annually. However, a veteran must submit the form online or in person at any VA medical center or clinic, or mailing or faxing the completed form. veterans are asked to provide the VA with information on any health insurance coverage they have, including coverage through employment or through a spouse. The VA may bill these payers for treatment of conditions that are not a result of injuries or illnesses incurred or aggravated during military service. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. those veterans who have been enrolled in Priority Group 5 based on income must submit a new VA Form 10-10EZ annually with updated financial information demonstrating inability to defray the expenses of necessary care. Eligibility for VA health care is based on report projecting the annual funding level necessary for the VHA to continue providing health care for veterans from FY2009 through FY2012. Appendix A. Priority Groups and Their Eligibilities Criteria Appendix B. Veterans' Payments for Health-Care Services, by Priority Group Appendix C. Financial Income Thresholds for VA Health- Care Benefits Appendix D. forward this proposal in its FY2004, FY2005, FY2006, and FY2007 budget requests as well, but did not receive any approval from Congress. At present, veterans in Priority Groups 2-8 pay $8 for a 30-day supply of medication, including over-the-counter medications. The Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1990 ( P.L. 101-508 establish annual caps on the total amount paid. When veterans reach the annual cap, they continue to receive medications without making a co-payment. Table 1 provides funding levels for VA and VHA as included in the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2008. The Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) provides a range of benefits and services to veterans who meet certain eligibility rules. In FY2004, "to provide better oversight and [to] receive a more accurate accounting of funds," Congress changed the VHA's appropriations structure. The VA provides disability compensation and pensions, education, all VA facilities. The VHA provides health care, retirement, and other benefits to veterans. Budget Reconciliation Act of 1985 ( P.L. 99-272 ), enacted into law in 1986, gave the VHA the authority to bill some veterans and most health-care insurers for nonservice-connected care provided to veterans enrolled in the VA health- care system. The Balanced Budget Act of 1997 (P. l. 105-33 ) gave the VA the authority. to retain these funds in the Medical Care Collections Fund (MCCF) Instead of returning the funds to the Treasury, the VA can use them for medical services for veterans without fiscal year limitations. discretionary budget authority accounted for about 48.1% of the total VA budget authority of approximately $80 billion. About 90% of this discretionary funding going toward supporting VA health-care programs. The VHA operates the nation's largest integrated direct health- Care delivery system. The VA's health- care system is organized into 21 geographically based areas. The system is the largest in the world, according to a report by the American Institute of Health Care Management, which is based in Washington, DC. Appropriation Committees were concerned that the VHA was collecting only 41% percent of the billed amounts from third-party insurance companies. The VHA has established a pilot Consolidated Patient Account Center in VISN 6. As shown in Table 4 , MCCF collections increased by 31%, from $1.5 billion in FY2003 to $2.2 billion in fiscal year 2004. The agency has also increased the amount of money it spends on medical malpractice insurance from $2 billion to $3 billion. P.L. 105-33 also gave the VA the authority to change its basis of billing insurers from "reasonable costs" to "reasonable charges" This change in billing was intended to enhance VA collections to the extent that reasonable charges result in higher payments than reasonable costs. In FY2004, the VA billed insurers for more than $1.2 billion in Medicare and Medicaid costs. The VA billed the insurers for over $1 billion in Medicaid costs and over $800 million in other costs. the Administration's budget requested consolidating several medical existing collections accounts into one MCCF. The conferees of the Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2004 ( H.Rept. 108-401 ) recommended that collections that would otherwise be deposited in the Health Services Improvement Fund (former name), Veterans Extended Care Revolving Fund (Former name), Special Therapeutic and Rehabilitation Activities Fund ( former name) and Medical Facilities Revolving fund (formername) should be deposited into MCCf. The Consolidated appropriations act of 2005 provided the VA with permanent authority to deposit funds from these five funds. The funds deposited into the MCCF would be available for medical services for veterans. These collected funds do not have to be spent in any particular fiscal year and are available until expended. The conferees of the FY2006 Military Construction, Military Quality of Life and Veterans rejected by Congress each year. However, unlike previous budget proposals, revenue from the proposals in the FY2008 budget request would not be deposited in the Medical Care Collections Fund (MCCF), but would be classified as mandatory receipts to the Treasury. Affairs Appropriations Act required the VA to establish a revenue improvement demonstration project. The purpose of this pilot project is to provide a "comprehensive restructuring of the complete revenue cycle including cash-flow management and accounts receivable" The Appropriation Committees included this provision because the specific VA construction projects as requested by the Administration. The explanatory statement accompanying the Consolidated Appropriations Act ( H.R. 2764 , P.L. 110-161 ) included several major areas of interest to the Appropriations Committees. be provided to "the extent and in the amount provided in advance in appropriations Acts for these purposes" Such language is intended to clarify that these services would continue to depend upon discretionary appropriations. As stated previously, P.L. 104-262 required the establishment of a national enrollment system to manage the federal government's health care program. The bill was passed by the House of Representatives in May and the Senate in June. It was signed into law by President Barack Obama on June 14. The Senate passed the bill on June 21. The Consolidated Appropriations Act ( H.R. 2764 , P.L. 110-161 ) includes increased funding within the medical services account for substance abuse services. The appropriators also directed the VA to reexamine the VA’s inpatient psychiatric care. The bill would increase funding by 0.5 percent to 0.8 percent for substanceabuse services. It would also increase funding for inpatient mental health care by 1.0 percent. It was passed on a bipartisan basis. appropriations account structure has been subject to change from year to year. The appropriation accounts used to support the VHA traditionally include medical care, medical and prosthetic research, and medical administration. Congress also appropriates funds for construction of medical facilities through a larger appropriations account for construction for appropriations to the medical services appropriations. The medical administration account provides funds for the expenses in the administration of hospitals, nursing homes, and domiciliaries; billing and coding activities; quality of care oversight; legal services; and procurement. four accounts: (1) medical services, (2) medical administration, (3) medical facilities, and (4) medical and prosthetic research. The medical services account covers expenses for furnishing inpatient and outpatient care and treatment of veterans and certain dependents. The other four accounts cover expenses for medical administration and medical facilities. The fourth account covers medical research, including research on prosthetic limbs and prosthetics. The last account covers costs for medical research on non-VA sources. account covers, among other things, expenses for the maintenance and operation of VHA facilities. This account provides funding for VA researchers to investigate a VHA facility. The account also covers administrative expenses related to planning, design, project management, real property acquisition and deposition, construction, and renovation of any VHA Facility. It also covers expenses for leases of facilities; and laundry services. It is intended to provide the VA with a source of funding for research into the VHA. For confidential support, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org. Under the Administration's proposal, veterans receiving medical care services for treatment of non-service-connected disabilities will receive a bill for their entire co-payment. If the VA treats an insured veteran for a nonservice-connected disability, and the veteran is also determined by the VA to have co- payment responsibilities, the VA will apply the payment collected from the insurer to satisfy the veteran's co- Payment debt related to that treatment. Under the current co-Payment billing process, in cases where the cost of a veteran's medical care for a non- service-connected condition appears to qualify for billing, VA medical facilities sends the bill to the insurance. If no payment is received from the third-party payer within 90 days, a bill is sent to the veteran for the full co-payment amount. When insurers reimburse the VA after the 90-day period, the VA must absorb the cost of additional staff time for processing a refund if the veteran has already paid the bill. On all insurance policies, the entire amount of the claim payment is applied first to the co- payment. The veteran is then billed only for the portion of the payment. Increase pharmaceutical co-payments from $8 to $15 (for each 30-day prescription) for all enrolled veterans in Priority Groups 7 and 8. Bill veterans receiving treatment for nonservice-connected conditions for the entire co-payment amount. VA the authority to impose enrollment fees.8 veterans based on the family income of the veteran. The Veterans Millennium Health Care and Benefits Act of 1999 ( P.L. 106-117 ) authorized the VA to increase the medication co- payment amount. The annual cap for veterans enrolled in Priority groups 2-6 will be $960. The Administration is proposing a tiered annual enrollment fee. The fee would be structured to charge $250 for Priority 7 and 8 veterans with family incomes from $50,000 to $74,999. It would then rise to $500 for those with families from $75,000 and $99,999, and $750 for those equal to or greater. The proposal is being considered by the White House's budget committee. It is expected to be voted on by the end of the year. The VA estimates that if the current proposal to raise the co-payment were enacted, it would contribute $311 million to the Treasury in FY2008 and will increase revenue by $1.6 billion over five years. The MILCON-VA Appropriation Act ( P.L. 110-161 ) does not include any bill language that would give the 8 (see Appendixes B and C ). The VA has estimated that this proposal would contribute more than $138 million to. the Treasury annually, beginning in FY2009. The Administration is requesting that Congress amend the VA's statutory authority by eliminating the practice of reducing first-party co-payment debts with third-party health-insurance collections. This proposal would apply to all veterans who make co-payments. According to VA estimates, this proposal will increase revenue by $44 million in FY2008 and $217 million over five years. The House and Senate Appropriations Committees are expected to consider the proposal this week. The VA asserts that this proposal would align the VA with the DOD health-care system for military retirees. not include any bill language that would give the VA the authority to increase co-payments. According to VA estimates, of the 5.8 million unique patients that it expects to see in 2008, 111,000 may choose not to use the system if an enrollment fee is imposed and the pharmacy copays are increased. The VA estimates that of the 4.7 million patients that the VA expects to treat in the next year, 1 in 5 will use the VA system for the first time. facilities. The House Appropriations Committee did not recommended any funding amounts for various construction and projects submitted by Members of Congress or by the Administration. On June 13, 2007, Senate Appropriations Committee provided funding for specific construction projects requested by the President. However, the committee continued the practice of not earmarking major construction projects that are not requested in the President's budget proposal. At the end of 2007, Congress passed the Consolidated Appropriations Act for FY2008 ( H.R. 2764) H.R. 2764 is an omnibus measure that combined the 11 outstanding appropriations bills for FY2008. It was passed by the House on December 17, 2007; the Senate passed the measure the next day, December 18, with an amendment (McConnell Amendment) The House agreed to the McConnell Amendment on December 19. The bill was signed into law on January 1, 2008. It is the first time the U.S. government has passed a bill without the passage of an amendment. January 31, 2007, the House passed the Revised Continuing Appropriations Resolution, 2007 ( H.J.Res. 20 ), and the Senate passed it without amendment on February 14. On February 15, 2007,. the President signed into law the Revised. Continuing Appropriations resolution, 2007. It provided funding for the U.S. government until the end of the fiscal year, and until the beginning of the next fiscal year. The resolution was passed by the House of Representatives, the Senate, and the White House. The Military Construction and Veterans Affairs and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 2008 (MILCON-VA Appropriations Act), was included as Division I of P.L. 110-161. The bill was signed into law on December 26. It provided $37.2 billion for VHA for FY2008, which was the total amount of funding for the Veterans Health Administration. The MILCON- VA Appropriation Act was approved by the Senate Appropriations Committee on June 14 and reported to the Senate on June 18. On May 19, 2006, the House passed its version of the Military Construction, Military Quality of Life, and Veterans Affairs Appropriations bill (MIL-CON-QUAL-appropriations bill) for FY2007. H.R. 5385 provided $32.7 billion for the VHA, a $3.4 billion (11.4%) increase over the November 14, 2006 bill. At the end of the 109 th Congress, Congress did not pass the MIL- CON-VA- appropriations bill and funded most government agencies through a series of Continuing Appropriations Resolutions. The House and Senate adopted the Conference Report ( H.Rept. 110-153 ) to accompany the Concurrent Resolution on the Budget for FY2008 ( S.Con.Res. 21 ). The conference agreement provided a total of $85.3 billion in budget authority for all veterans benefits and services for FY 2008. The agreement provided $43.1 billion for discretionary veterans' programs, which consists mainly of VA medical care. Furthermore, the conference agreement rejected the veterans' health-care enrollment fees and co-payment increases that were proposed by the President's In its FY2008 budget request, the Administration has put forward several legislative proposals. These proposals are similar to previous ones included in the Administration's budget requests for FY2003, FY2004, FY2005, FY2006, and FY2007 and similar language has been included in a Defense Appropriations conference report ( H.Rept. 110-434 ). Similar language has also been included as part of the FY2008 Defense Appropriations Conference report. For more information, visit http://www.interoperability.org/. needs of these patients. The Administration's budget request had included a reduction in the number of inpatient beds for psychiatric care and an anticipated increase of less than one. The Appropriation Committees expressed concern about insufficient funding levels for mental health and substance abuse services in the FY2008 budget request. The budget request included a Reduction in the Number of Inpatient Beds for Psychiatric Care and an Estimated Increase of Less than one in the Amount of Mental Health and Substance Abuse Services Budgeted for FY2008. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. Appropriations Committees have expressed concern on the long-term cost of providing health care for veterans. Assess a tiered annual enrollment fee for all Priority 7 and Priority 8 programs. The President's FY2008 budget request includes three major policy proposals. The Administration's inability to accurately estimate the future cost of. providing those services has been cited as a reason for the need for a new plan. The budget request also includes a proposal for a $1.5 billion increase in the federal defense budget. facilities; outpatient care on a fee basis; medical supplies and equipment; salaries and expenses of employees hired under Title 38, United States Code; and aid to state veterans homes. In its FY2008 budget request to Congress, the VA requested the transfer of food service operations costs from the medical facilities to the VA's food service program. The VA also requested that food service costs be transferred from the VA to food service programs for veterans at the VA hospitals and veterans' homes. The request was approved by Congress. H.R. 2642 has provided approximately $2.2 billion for VA construction projects. A large portion of this amount was for construction and building improvements of VA medical above the FY2008 Administration's request ( Table 5 ). All other amounts for the VHA were equal to the committee-recommended funding levels. Unlike the House Appropriations Committee, the Senate did not vote on the bill. The bill was passed by the House of Representatives and signed into law by President Obama on July 1, 2009. FY2008 budget proposal to Congress. The total amount requested by the Administration for the VHA for FY2008 was $34.6 billion, a 1.93% increase in funding compared with the FY2007 enacted amount. On June 15, 2007, billion for VA construction projects, an $818 million increase over the Administration's request. This increase was provided to address insufficient funding levels in the advanced planning fund and to compensate for cost adjustments to previously appropriated major construction projects. The Consolidated Appropriations Act for FY 2008 provided funding for the VA. The Senate passed H.R. 2642 with a 22.0% increase over the FY2008 request, and 4.2% above the House-passed amount. The committee did not recommend any fee increases as requested by the Administration's budget proposal for the VHA for FY2008. On September 6, 2007, the Senate passed the bill with a 23.12% increase. The House passed the measure with a 24.2%. The Senate passed it with a 25.0 percent increase. VHA Appropriations for FY2005 and FY2006. VHA funding for FY 2005 and FY 2006 is $1.2 billion. Vha will spend $1 billion in each of the next two fiscal years on infrastructure projects. The VHA will spend the rest of the year on other priorities, such as health care, education, and infrastructure. For more information on the VHA, visit the agency's website. For the full VHA budget, visit VHA's website at: www.vha.org. estimates, the number of unique veteran patients is estimated to increase by approximately 110,000. The total number of outpatient visits, including visits to Vet Centers, reached 60.2 million during FY2006 and is projected to increase to 64.4 million in FY2007. In FY2007, the VHA estimates that it will spend approximately 64.8% of its budget on veterans' care. The number of veterans in the VA system is expected to increase from 5.7 million in 2007 to 5.8 million in 2008. the VHA, an 11.3% increase over the FY2006 enacted amount of $29.3 billion. The Senate-passed version of H.R. 1645 provided a total of $37.2 billion for the VHA for FY2008. This amount included $28.7 billion for medical services, a 26.0% increase. The FY2007 request included $25.5 billion forMedical services, an increase of 12% over the previous year's amount. the National Institutes of Health (NIH), and private sources. The total level of funding for VHA increased between FY2006 and FY2008, and most of this increase has been due to the increase in spending on medical services. As a percentage of total VHA funding, as seen in Figure 1 , the total amount of funding has increased over the past five years. The increase in funding has been largely due to an increase in the number of people receiving medical care, as well as the cost of caring for them. Of the total amount appropriated for VHA, $29.1 billion has been allocated to the medical services account, which is almost $2 billion above the President's FY2008 request. Of this amount, $2.6 billion (the amount above the Administration's request) was designated as contingent emergency funding and was to be available for obligation only after the President submitted a budget request to Congress. On January 17, 2008, the President transmitted a request to. Congress designating this additional amount as an emergency requirement. FY2006 enacted amount of $29.3 billion and about the same as the President's request. This amount included $25.4 billion for medical services. For FY2008, the Administration requested $27.2 billion. This would have been a 4.8% increase in funding over the FY2007 enacted amount. The Administration's budget proposal also requested $3.6 billion to increase funding for the Veterans Beneficiary Travel Program. The Senate version of the MILCON-VA appropriations bill, as reported, provided $4.1 billion forMedical facilities. to $2.0 billion in FY2006. During this same period, first-party collections increased by 26%, from $685 million to $863 million. In FY2006, first party collections represented approximately 43% of total MCCF collections. On February 6, 2006, the President submitted his FY2007 budget proposal to Congress. The Administration requested $32.7 billion for the budget, which included $1.6 billion for first- party collections and $1 billion for second-party. things, P.L. 110-28 provided a total of $1.34 billion for the VHA for FY2007. This amount included $400 million for medical services. $9.4 million for polytrauma residential transition rehabilitation programs. $10 million for additional transition programs for veterans in need of medical care. The amount was in addition to the amount appropriated under P. ln. l 110-5. The total amount for FY 2007 was $2.1 billion. caseworkers; (3) $20 million for substance abuse treatment programs; (4) $10 million for blind rehabilitation services; (6) $100 million for enhancement of mental health services. (7) $8 million for polytrauma support clinic teams; (8) $5.4 million for additional polyTrauma points of contact; and (9) $50 million for mental health and addiction treatment programs, among other things. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. (9) $193 million for treatment of Operation Enduring Freedom/Operation Iraqi Freedom (OEF/OIF) veterans; and (10) $25 million for prosthetics. P.L. 110-28 also provided $326 million for the Construction, Minor Projects account, with specific funding of $36.0 million for construction costs related to establishing polytrauma residential transitional rehabilitation programs. It also included $32.5 million to establish a program to help veterans transition from military to civilian life. P.L. 110-161 has appropriated approximately $1.9 billion for medical services. Of that amount, $2.9billion will go to speciality mental health care, $130 million for homeless veterans grant and per diem program, $429 million for substance abuse program, and $100 million for blind rehabilitation services. The committee statement (discussed below) also stipulates that of the total amount appropriated for medical Services, not less than $2,9 billion shall be expended for specialtymental health care. for medical services includes an additional $125 million to increase the beneficiary travel reimbursement mileage rate to 28.5 cents per mile. An additional $70 million for substance abuse services, an extra $12.5 million for expanded outpatient services for the blind, and a additional $15 million for Vet Centers. The bill is expected to be signed into law by the end of the year. It would be the first major overhaul of the VA in more than 20 years. It will also be the largest single-year cost-of-living increase in the agency's history. amendment to transfer $5 million to the medical services account for the establishment of an Office of Rural Health within the Office of the Under Secretary for Health. Representative Jerry Moran also offered an amendment toTransfer $120 million toThe medical services. account. The amendment was approved by the House of Representatives and passed by the Senate with a vote of 50-3. The Senate passed the amendment with a voice vote and the vote was approved with a majority vote of 51-4. The vote was the first time the Senate had voted on the amendment in 20 years. an amendment to reflect the Senate Appropriations Committee-approved measure ( S. 1645 , S.Rept. 110-85 ). During Senate floor debate, an amendment offered by Senator Jon Tester was approved to transfer $125 million from the medical administration account to the medical services account. This additional amount of funding would have been used to fund medical services in the state. The amendment was offered by Tester, a Democrat, and was approved by the Senate on a vote of 33-1. H.R. 2642 provided $29.0 billion for medical services. This included the transfer of $125 million from the medical administration account to the medical services account. The reason for this transfer was because during House floor debate, Representative Shelley Moore Capito offered an offer for the money. The House passed the bill on a party-line vote, sending it to the Senate for consideration. The Senate passed it on a voice vote, passing it by a vote of 24-17. and $411 million for medical and prosthetic research (see Table 5 ). As in FY2003, FY2004, FY2005, FY2006, and FY2007, the Administration included several cost-sharing proposals. These legislative proposals are discussed in detail in the " Key Budget Issues " section at the end of this report. On May 17, the Obama administration proposed a new budget for fiscal year 2007, which began on July 1, 2007. The new budget includes $1.2 billion for medical research. have not addressed this issue because it is an issue in the purview of the authorizing committees. On February 15, 2007, the Congressional Budget Office (CBO) testified that "assuming no major changes in policy ... that [VHA] medical spending would increase from $35 to $40" The CBO testified that the increase would be due to "no major changes ... in enrollment trends ... that ... VHA [would] spend $40 to $50 more per person per year on medical care" "The House and Senate Appropriations Committees have expressed concern that the President's budget has not accurately projected the future cost of health care," the committee said. "That increase implies annual real growth that averages 3.6 percent over the period," it added. The House and the Senate Appropriations Committee said they were concerned that the budget did not accurately forecast the cost of the health care system in the future. The Senate Appropriations committee said it was concerned about the budget's projection of $66 billion for health care in 2025. for medical administration, $100 million above the Administration's request of $3.2 billion. $4.1 billion for medical facilities, a 14% increase over the President's request. $412 million for medical and prosthetic research, a 3.2 percent increase over President's $399 million request. H.R. 5385 also provided $3,6 billion forMedical facilities, $25 million above Administration's budget request. This amount was the same as the House-passed amount and $13.0 million above President's budget. amounts were the same as the President's request, except for the medical and prosthetic research account. The Revised Continuing Appropriations Resolution did not include any provisions that would have given the VA the authority to implement fee increases as requested by the President. The bill provided $250 million for medical administration and $595 million forMedical facilities. It also provided specific funding of $45.0 million for facility and equipment upgrades at polytrauma centers and $550 million for non-recurring maintenance.