examiner reviews the case to ensure it adheres to SSA guidance, including a review of the DDS decision. If improvement has not occurred, the disability examiner skips to the fifth step in the evaluation. In fiscal point decision, or CPD, the examiner compares the current signs, symptoms, and laboratory findings associated with the beneficiary’s impairment(s) to those recorded from the last review. If the examiner finds that improvement has occurred, it is considered a successful CPD. DDS examiner concluded that medical improvement had occurred. On appeal to reconsideration 6 months later, a different DDS examiner conducted a review using the same medical evidence as the original examiner, but determined the findings did not correlate with the findings from both the physical exam and the laboratory findings. As a result, the examiner concluded the patient's condition had improved. The patient was allowed to return to work at the end of the year. The case was settled out of court in March 2013. The judge ruled that the patient was entitled to a full refund for her medical care. The second step is to determine if the individual’s current impairment(s) is included on the current list of disabilities that SSA maintains. The list describes impairments that, by definition, are so severe that they are disabling. If the individual's current impairment does meet or equal a current listing, then the DDS continues theindividual's benefits and does not continue with the evaluation process. If it does not meet orequal a current list, then DDS proceeds to step three in the evaluated process. benefit from education or training programs that could help the individuals work. We found that while the examiners and ALJs routinely assess whether a beneficiary has improved medically, they do not routinely assess if each of the exceptions applies to the case. If the DDS determines that the beneficiary’s current impairment is not severe, benefits are discontinued without further development. If it is determined that the impairment(s) is severe, the benefits are terminated. The DDS considers all of the beneficiary's impairments as well as any new impairments found in the current review. The law provides for certain limited situations when the DDS may discontinue a recipient’s benefits even though medical improvement has not occurred. The specific group I exceptions are (a) the individual is the beneficiary of advances in medical or vocational therapy or technology (related to the ability to work), and (b) the person is in a position to benefit from such advances. The law applies to people who are in the state of New Jersey, New York, Maryland, and Washington, D.C. the disability examiner proceeds to next step, the fourth step. The fourth step is to determine if the improvement found in step three is related to the ability to work. If the current assessment does not show improvement, then the disability examiner Proceed to step five. The fifth step isto determine whether an exception to medical improvement that any prior determination or decision was in error. If an exception applies, the examiner continues through to step six of the evaluation process. The sixth step is to determine if the current impairments are severe. At this step the examiner has done in the past, the evaluation continues to the eighth step. A disability examiner compares the beneficiary’s condition with the list of impairments in effect at the time he or she was first awarded. Meeting or equaling the prior listing: In this case, a disability examiner will determine if the beneficiary's same impairment(s) still meets or equals the prior list. A residual functional capacity (RFC) assessment: In these cases, the examiner compares a beneficiary's condition with a list of prior impairments that were in effect when the beneficiary was awarded the disability. In this case, a disability examiner compares the beneficiary’s previous functional capacity to the current functional capacity for the same impairment. If the impairment(s) meets or equals a prior listing, then benefits are continued. If not, then the examiner proceeds with the CDR evaluation. The seventh step is the residual functional capacity assessment. This consideration will result in a current residualfunctional capacity (RFC) assessment that shows the beneficiary's ability to do basic work activities and the evaluation continues to the seventh step. Of the directors who answered our survey question on insufficient documentation, 33 responded that they encounter cases with insufficient documentation infrequently or very infrequently, and 17 responded that such cases occurred more often. Survey respondents also differed in their opinions about the types of cases that more typically lack adequate documentation. 15 directors commented that cases decided on appeal were the most likely to lack inadequate documentation. One possible explanation for this may be that appeal cases are more likely to be decided by a majority of the board of directors. administrative law judge, then to the Appeals Council, and finally to federal courts. At the hearing before the administrative law judge (ALJ), the ALJ reviews the file, including any additional evidence submitted after the DDS determination. The ALJ may hear testimony from the individual as well as medical and vocational experts. The case will be heard by the Administrative Law Judge on November 14. The hearing will be held in front of a panel of three judges, one of whom will be the judge in charge of the case. streamlined processes at the appeals level. In an effort to process cases in a timely manner, ALJs sometimes issue quick decisions in which most of the evidence is on tapes that are not transcribed or placed in the beneficiary’s case file. For example, one ALJ we interviewed noted that, in an efforts to process Cases in a Timely manner, some ALJs issue quick decision in which the evidence on tapes is not transcribing or placed into the beneficiary's file. In 17 directors commented that assessing medical improvement is more difficult in cases with psychological impairments because evidence of these impairments is generally more subjective than evidence of many physical impairments. In addition, evaluations of psychological impairment tend to rely more heavily on assessment whether improvement has taken place. Two directors commented. that determining whether there is medical improvement for some types of psychological. impairments can also be complicated because medical experts’ opinions can vary. One director commented that the evidence to support psychological impairMENTS, such as evaluations for depression, rely less on medical experts' opinions. of functionality. According to some of these officials, an assessment of functionality is more subjective because it relies more on the beneficiaries’ account of their own conditions than on laboratory findings. Some officials reported that the severity of psychological impairments can fluctuate over time, making it difficult to assess. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. Assessing medical improvement may be more difficult in cases that involve certain types of psychological impairments, such as depression, than cases with physical impairments. In elaborating on this, we look at how the decision-making process increases when the process involves certain types. of impairments that are difficult to assess. We also look at the impact of different types of impairment on the patient's quality of life, as well as how these impairments can affect the outcome of a patient's treatment. “exceptions” to medical improvement appliesthe person benefits from advances in medical or vocational therapy or technology, the person has undergone a vocational therapy program that could help him or her work, new or improved diagnostic techniques or evaluations reveal that the impairment is less disabling than originally thought, or the evidence shows that the individual has undergone vocational therapy (related to the ability to work), and the individual’s impairment(s) is not as disabling as it was considered at the time of the CPD. the error exception could lead to a substitution of judgment by an adjudicator for the original finding of disability in instances where a person’s medical condition had not substantially improved. Some disability advocates we spoke with also noted that the narrow interpretation of the error exception is appropriate because it is based on a narrow set of circumstances. The error exception was approved by the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit in 2010. The court's decision was appealed to the Supreme Court, and the appeal is pending. on laboratory findings and more on clinical judgment. In contrast, certain tests for physical impairments tend to be less open to interpretation. For example, one director commented that X-rays of joint deterioration can generally be interpreted consistently among radiologists. The potential difficulty of assessing medical improvement in beneficiaries whose disability has been declared permanent is discussed in the book, The Disability of the Elderly: A New Diagnosis and Its Implications. The book is published by Simon & Schuster, priced £16.99. improvement related to the ability to work is evaluated two different ways, depending on whether the comparison point decision (CPD) was based on: (1) meeting or equaling a prior disability listing or (2) a residual functional capacity (RFC)or laboratory findings. Is this improvementrelated to the able to work? If so, it is considered an improvement related to work. If it is not, the improvement is considered unrelated to work, and is considered a negative improvement. If this is not the case, it can be considered a positive improvement. also to the guidance for determining if any medical improvement is related to the ability to work. As stated in the draft report, our discussion of medical improvement encompasses both elements (improvement in a beneficiary’s medical condition and its relation to the able to work) However, we did further clarify that we did not mean to imply that all medical improvement must be related to work-related improvements. We were referring to both elements of the discussion, not just one or the other. We are happy to clarify this. guidance instructs examiners to ensure a “reasonable relationship” between the amount of improvement and the increase in the ability to perform basic work activities. However, the guidance does not require a specific amount of increase in functioning. The DDS directors we surveyed reported that they interpret this guidance differently. Specifically, they interpret it differently as to how much improvement is needed to improve a person's ability to do basic work. The survey found that the directors interpreted the guidance differently than other examiners. with the need for clarifying guidance concerning the degree of improvement required to meet the medical improvement standard. However, the agency believed that the report was unclear with regard to whether this part of the recommendation applied only to guidance for determining if there has been any medical improvement, or if it also applied to guidance on how to determine if there had been a medical improvement in the past year. The report was released to the public on Wednesday. The agency said it was unclear if the report applied to the guidance on whether there had had a medical improvements in the last 12 months or the previous 12 months. case file included a general description of the beneficiary’s medical condition, but lacked sufficient evidence to determine if medical improvement had occurred since the initial decision, according to the examiner. As a result, medical improvement could not be shown and benefits were continued. However, we had no basis for determining which decision was correct. The amount of judgment involved was too large to determine the correct decision. We are happy to clarify that the decision to continue the benefits was not based on any evidence of medical improvement. Inadequate documentation of evidence and the judgmental nature of the process for assessing medical improvement are two additional factors that make it challenging to assess medical improvement. The standard establishes the prior decision as the starting point for conducting a CDR and requires examiners to continue or discontinue benefits. For example, in one of the CDR cases that we reviewed, the examiner conducting the initial CDR determined that medical improvement was shown and discontinued the individual’s benefits. The recipient was initially receiving benefits. improvements in beneficiaries’ medical conditions are related to their ability to work. At this step of the CDR process, examiners look for changes in a beneficiary’s ability to perform basic work activities since the last review, such as lifting heavy objects or standing or sitting for periods of time. The CDR is the final step in the process to determine whether a person is eligible for a pension or other type of pension. The process can take up to two years. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. took steps in the development of the questionnaire, the data collection, and the data analysis to minimize these nonsampling errors. For example, social science survey specialists designed the questionnaire in collaboration with GAO staff with subject matter expertise. Then, the draft questionnaire was pretested with a number of state officials to ensure that the questions were relevant, clearly stated, and easy to comprehend. The questionnaire was also reviewed by an additional GAO survey specialist. When the data were analyzed, a second, independent analyst checked all computer programs. electronic questionnaire. This eliminated the need to have the data keyed into a database thus removing an additional source of error. We conducted three pretests of this survey with DDS directors in three different states. We modified the survey to take their comments into account. We also provided SSA with an electronic questionnaire to help them with their data entry process. The results of the survey will be published in a special issue of DDS magazine, The DDS Journal, on November 14, 2014. introduce errors, commonly referred to as nonsampling errors. For example, difficulties in how a particular question is interpreted, in the sources of information that are available to respondents, or in how the data are entered into a database or were analyzed, can introduce unwanted variability into the survey results. We are happy to clarify these points in this article. We would like to make clear that we are not responsible for the accuracy or completeness of any of the data collected in this survey. The results of this survey are based on the results of an online survey conducted by CNN.com. This report does not contain all the results from the survey. The survey and a more complete tabulation of the results can be viewed at http://www.gao.gov/cgi-bin/getrpt?rptno=GAO-07-4sp. If you or your staff have questions concerning this report, please contact me at (202) 512-7215. To augment information from our state survey, we conducted a similar survey in the District of Columbia. we plan no further distribution until 30 days after the date of this report. At that time, we will make copies available to other parties upon request. In addition, the report will be available at no charge on the GAO’s Web site at http//:www.gao.gov. This report does not contain all the information requested by Congress. We are happy to make this information available to the public if it is requested by the public at a later date. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. the standard, and that their infrequent use is appropriate. In addition, SSA explained that when it issued the final rules governing the medical improvement standard, it intended the exceptions to be true ‘exceptions’ The agency also noted that a broader application of exceptions to medical improvement is appropriate and that its instructions are consistent with the intent of the law. After considering these comments, we revised the report to reflect the revised rules and the agency’s position on the issue of exceptions. officials and examiners we interviewed told us that the guidelines for using the error exception are written in a way that precludes its use, except in the most extreme situations. SSA officials explained that the exceptions were written to intentionally limit their use in order to prevent examiners from circumventing them. We continue to believe that additional guidance in this area is warranted if only, as the report notes, because most of the disability examiners whom we spoke with told us they were uncertain about when to apply the exceptions. We obtained written comments on a draft of this report from the Commissioner of the Social Security Administration (SSA) The agency generally agreed with our recommendation, but expressed reservations about the need for further guidance on the use of exceptions. More specifically, SSA believed that its implementation of the statutory exceptions was not working as it should be. The agency also expressed reservations that the exceptions were not being used in a manner that was consistent with the requirements of the law. We are happy to clarify these concerns. Some DDSs may be inconsistently defining what constitutes a minor change. For example, five DDS directors told us that they define minor changes to include those that may actually improve functioning or allow.minor changes. However, this explanation of minor changes is not included in the agency’s guidance. It is unclear if this definition is being followed by all DDS director's across the U.S. and around the world. For more information, go to the Department of Health and Human Services website. 17 of 49 directors reported that a large or very large increase in a recipient’s ability to do basic work activities is required. 24 directors reported a moderate increase is required; and 8 reported a minor or any increase at all. Two DDS directors in our community reported that an increase was not required at all or a minor increase was required. The report was based on a survey of 49 DDS Directors in the U.S. and one DDS Director in Canada. For more information, go to: http://www.dds.org/. are large numbers of DDS directors who are incorrectly applying the neutrality standard and, in our view, would benefit from additional guidance. SSA suggested that we provide additional context for some of the statistical information presented in our discussion of the proportion of directors who were incorrectly applying neutrality standards. We are happy to provide this additional context in the coming days. We hope this will help clarify the situation for the directors of the DDS and their staff. We also hope that it will provide some context for the statistics that have been presented in the past. SSA does not clearly define the degree of improvement needed to meet the standard. SSA guidance on this aspect of the standard is open to broad interpretation. Lack of clarity with respect to the appropriate use of SSA may result in inconsistent application of thestandard. These challenges pose challenges for ensuring that thestandard is implemented in a consistent and fair manner. The standard requires that a beneficiary’s improvement be great enough so that it actually enables the individual to work. The DDS directors we surveyed reported using different thresholds to show medical improvement. As a result of this apparent limitation survey inaccurately noted that the standard requires the improvement to be so great that the individual can work. and procedures for applying the standard, and (3) the degree to which factors external to the standard create challenges when determining if a beneficiary has improved medically and is able to work. To further assess how the standard is applied in practice, we took a nonprobability sample of 12 CDR. We found that the standard was applied to a large number of CDR beneficiaries. We also found that it was applied in a small number of cases where the CDR was not applied to the right person. the extent the individual is able to work. As a result, some DDSs may be inconsistently applying this aspect of the standard. This could potentially impact decisions to continue or discontinue benefits. We were unable to determine how much of an impact clarification of this guidance would have on clearer guidance on the discontinuation of benefits. Even so, we continue to believe that it is important for D DSs to consistently apply this aspect and that, towards that end, additional guidance would be useful. examiners to determine if a beneficiary has improved medically. Many disability examiners and DDS officials told us that they were unsure about the degree of improvement required to meet the standard. SSA guidance instructs examiners to disregard “minor’ question in our survey on ” minor’ changes. 21 reported that the practice of disregarding minor changes is not an impediment to making a disability determination, while 31 reported that it is an impediments. Similarly, we found that SSA Guidance may not provide DDS examiners with sufficient detail to determine whether a person is disabled. changes in a beneficiary’s condition. However, this guidance does not adequately describe what constitutes a minor change. SSA officials told us that only changes that would not affect a beneficiaries’ ability to work should be considered. They told us they would only consider changes if they would not adversely affect the beneficiary's ability to do their job. We asked SSA to clarify their understanding of what they meant by a ‘minor change’ and they said they would consider it if it would not have a major impact. such instances, it is unlikely that the DDS examiner would have complete information for conducting a CDR and determining if medical improvement had taken place. Several officials told us that guidance instructs ALJs to include enough information in their decisions so that the decisions will be legally sufficient. However, the guidance does not specifically instruct ALJ to include all of the evidence that will be needed to assess medical improvement at a future CDR. SSA is taking steps that may help to address the problem of incomplete information. Some DDS directors reported that it may be difficult to assess medical improvement in cases where the prior disability decision was based on incomplete or poorly documented evidence. While these problems raise concerns about the consistency of decisions when determining if medical improvement has occurred, the ultimate impact of presuming that an individual has a disability on CDR decisions is unknown. For example, in one of the CDR cases we reviewed, a beneficiary had had a disability prior to the last CDR decision. We were unable to empirically test how the presumption of a disability impacts CDr decisions find evidence of medical improvement since this last decision. Some DDSs may be inconsistently applying the standard as to what constitutes medical improvement. DDS directors differed on the extent to which the guidance to disregard minor changes impacts CDRs. Other factors, such as inadequate documentation of evidence and the judgmental nature of the decision process for assessing medical improvement may make it more difficult the beneficiary to work, the authors say. of the 52 DDS director who answered a prevents substitution of judgment and arbitrary discontinuations. According to our survey, a majority of DDSS incorrectly presume that a beneficiary continues to have a disability when conducting CDR. Disability advocates differed in their views on the clarity of SSA guidance on medical improvement. Clear guidance is especially important in view of the judgmental nature of the disability determination process. incorrect application of these guidelines by several DDSs suggests that the outcomes of CDRs could be affected. Other factors, including inadequate documentation of evidence, are more difficult to address in the short term. However, SSA with these disability experts about the effect of the standard on CDR outcomes and any challenges it presents. his benefits continued following the CDR because the rationale for the prior disability decision was vague, according to the examiner who reviewed the case with us. This beneficiary was originally awarded benefits on appeal based on recurrent stomach problems and depression. When the case was selected for a CDR, the the individual’s medical condition has occurred. This improvement is any decrease in the medical severity of the impairment(s) that was present at the time of the most recent favorable medical decision (i.e., the initial decision to award disability benefits) awarded disability benefits for a back injury with limited range of motion in the recipient’s back. When the CDR was conducted, the examiner evaluated all of the relevant evidence and concluded that the individual's range ofmotion had improved. The examiner also noted that the individuals allegations of pain did not hold up in court. The individual was awarded the benefits for the back injury on a case-by-case basis, not on the basis of a single incident. The benefits were paid out over a period of five years. with lower scores are, at least initially, sent a questionnaire, known as a “mailer.” Full medical CDRs involve an in-depth examination of a beneficiary’s medical and possibly his or her vocational status. SSA will find that disability has ended and will issue a CDR to the beneficiary if it is determined that they are eligible for disability benefits. The CDR mailers consist of a short list of questions asking beneficiaries to self- report information on their medical condition, treatments and work activities. he or she was selected for a CDR. Under a neutral review, it is assumed that beneficiaries had a disability at the time of the prior decision, but it is not assumed they still have a disability. Thirteen directors commented that the individuals are already receiving disability benefits, whether a recipient no longer has a disability and is able to work. Because 31 directors reported that examiners conduct CDRs with the presumption that beneficiaries continue to have a Disability, some may have their benefits erroneously. as well as SSA regulations and policy, which require that CDR decisions be made on a “neutral basis. SSA defines neutral basis as a review that neither presumes that a beneficiary (1) is still disabled because he or she was previously found disabled and (2) is no longer disabled because of a change in the status of that disability.’ ‘‘I’m sorry,’’ he said. ‘I don’t know what to say. I’ve been through a lot.” independent audit work in three states (California, Massachusetts, and Texas) to examine how SSA policies and procedures are carried out in the field. We selected locations for field visits based on the following criteria: (1) geographic dispersion; (2) states with large numbers of CDRs conducted; (3) states where CDR discontinuation has taken place in the past. We also selected states for the field visits because of their large number of SSA CDRs and their ability to conduct them in a variety of ways. rates above, below, and at the national average; (4) states with varying DDS structures (i.e., centralized and decentralized); and (5) states that have large numbers of Disability Insurance (DI) beneficiaries and large DI expenditures. In each state, we visited a DDS office, the SSA regional office, and the regional Office of Quality. We found that the DDS rates in each state were lower than the average for the U.S. as a whole. of the disability programs no longer had a disability and could work. Congress passed a law requiring SSA to conduct continuing disability reviews (CDR) beginning in January 1982. State Disability Determination Services (DDS) examiners began conducting medical CDRs under the of Disability Adjudication and Review. In total, we conducted in-depth interviews with 80 SSA and DDS managers and line staff responsible for conducting medicalCDRs, including DDS directors, CDR supervisors and examiners, medical consultants, and administrative. Western Pacific Islands, and the federal DDS. DDSs are the agencies responsible for conducting periodic CDRs to determine if beneficiaries’ medical conditions have improved and if they are able to work. We received 54 completed surveys for a response rate of 98 percent. The purpose of this survey was to find out if beneficiaries' medical conditions had improved or if they were still in need of medical care. The results of the survey were based on responses from 54 people who completed the survey. The response rate was 98 percent for the Western Pacific Islands. DI or SSI programs determine when they will be due for CDRs based on their likely potential for medical improvement. SSA should also work with DDSs to ensure that CDRs are conducted on a neutral basis, without a presumption that beneficiaries continue to have a disability, the authors say. They say CDRs generally once every 6 to 18 medical improvement possible—CDR once every 3 concerning (1) what degree of improvement is required to meet the standard and (2) when the use of exceptions to medical improvement is appropriate. Act of 1984 included a provision requiring SSA to find substantial evidence demonstrating medical improvement before ceasing a recipient’s benefits. SSA resumed CDRs in January 1986 using this standard, which is among the first steps of the CDR evaluation process. We recommend that the Commissioner of Social Security clarify guidance for assessing medical improvement when conducting CDRs. More specifically, SSA should clarify guidance law judges, we say. The standard has the is taking actions intended to address some of these problems. SSA is developing requirements for training examiners to ensure they understand the information needed to make accurate and adequately documented decisions. SSA has adopted guides for decision writing at the appeals level, and is in the process of developing guides for use at the DDS level. The agency is also developing.documentation for future CDRs, including guides for DDS examiners and decision writing guides for the appeals and DDS levels. It is also working on a guide for CDR examiners at the appellate level. same criteria used to evaluate initial disability claims. In 1981 and 1982, about 45 percent of those individuals who received a CDR had their benefits discontinued. There was no statutory requirement for SSA to show that a beneficiary had improved medically in order to remove him or her. In addition to medical improvement, SSA also removes beneficiaries for failing to cooperate during aCDR. For example, a beneficiary may fail to appear for scheduled meetings with disability examiners or physicians and thus may have his or her benefits terminated. full medical CDRs are the agency’s primary tool to determine whether a beneficiary has improved medically. More beneficiaries leave the disability programs because they either die or convert to social security retirement benefits. SSA data show that few beneficiaries who receive medical CDR are removed from the disability program. For more information, visit the SSA website at: www.ssa.gov/disability/disabilities/ disability-related-benefits-referred-to-medical-cDRs. years; or medical improvement not expected—CDR once every 5 to 7 years. SSA has also developed a method, called profiling, to determine the most cost-effective method of conducting a CDR. The method uses data on beneficiary characteristics, such as age, impairment type, length of time on disability programs, SSA says. It also uses statistical formulas that use data on benefit characteristics, including age and disability type, to calculate the CDR's cost-effectiveness, it says. the purposes of our study, we only assessed DI and SSI adult beneficiaries who left the programs as a result of receiving a full medical CDR. We did not include children or “age 18 re-determinations” in our analysis since there are differences between the medicalCDR sequential evaluation processes for those two groups. We also did not assess children or those who were re-evaluated after age 18, since those were considered “re-determined’. year 2005, SSA’s Office of Quality Performance reported nationwide accuracy rates for cases where CDR benefits were continued and discontinued of 95 percent and 93 percent respectively. The combined accuracy rate for all CDRs was about 95 percent. We found that on average, about 1.4 percent of all individuals who adults and children were CDR recipients. We verified the statistical data on CDR outcomes for internal logic, consistency, and reasonableness. We determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of our review. If functional capacity for basic work activities has improved, then the examiner finds that the medical improvement is related to the ability to work and proceeds with the CDR evaluation. The act allows SSA to discontinue benefits even when the beneficiary has not improved medically if one of the specific previous CDR activity, and reported earnings. SSA assigns a “score” to beneficiaries indicating whether there is a high, medium, or low likelihood of medical improvement. In general, beneficiaries with a high score are referred for full medical CDRs. ensure that CDRs be conducted on a neutral basis. However, it believed that more adjudicator training in this area would likely have little impact on discontinuing benefits. We cannot predict the impact additional guidance and training would have on continuing or discontinuating benefits. But, as the report points out, there is no guarantee CDRs will continue to be conducted in a neutral manner in the future. The report concludes that there are no plans to change the way CDRs are conducted in the near future. We reviewed prior studies by GAO, SSA, and external organizations related to the disability determination process and CDRs. We also reviewed the Social Security Disability Benefits Reform Act of 1984, regulations, and SSA policies and processes. To meet the objectives of this review, we reviewed prior study by SSA and GAO. We concluded that the review met our objectives and that the CDR was not in need of further review. We are happy to share the results of our review with the public. SSA’s Office of Quality Performance conducts quality reviews of disability determination outcomes. To conduct these quality reviews, SSA selects a random sample of cases each month from all final CDR decisions, stratifying the selection of cases by state and outcome. Then, a quality review is conducted of each of the cases to determine the quality of the outcome. The results of the quality review are published each month in a report to be made available to the public at a cost of up to $1.5 million. We interviewed 34 officials from SSA’s central offices to further document the reliability of these data. We interviewed officials from the Office of the Chief Actuary, the Office. of Quality Performance, the. Office of General Counsel, and the Office for Research and Evaluation Statistics. We also spoke with officials from Disability Programs, the office of Disability Programs and the office for Quality Performance. We are happy to share the results of our interviews with SSA officials to help you understand the data. An Update. Washington, D.C.: January 2005. SSA’s Disability Programs: Improvements Could Increase the Usefulness of Electronic Data for Program Oversight. Disability Insurance: SSA Should Strengthen Its Efforts to Detect and Prevent Overpayments. Social Security Administration: More Effort 24, 2003. High Risk Series: An Update. GAO-03-119. Major Management Challenges and Program Risks: Social Security. Administration. GAo-03,117. SBA and VA Disability Programs. Re-Examination of Disability Criteria Needed to Help Ensure Program Integrity. Hearings Level. Social Security Disability: Reviews of Beneficiaries’ Disability Status Require Continued Attention to. Achieve Timeliness and Cost- Effectiveness. GAO/HEHS-98-198. Supplemental Security Income: SSA Is Taking Steps to Review Recipients’ disability status. GAE/HE HS-97-17. Social security: Disability Rolls Keep Growing, While Explanations Remain Elusive. GAo/HE HHS-94-34. Team members made key contributions to this report. Social Security Administration: Agency.(202) 512-7215. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S., call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255 or visit www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org. For support on suicide matters in the United States, contact the National suicide Prevention Line at 1-877-788-7070. from the disability programs in a fiscal year for medical improvement ranged from 1.0 percent to 1.7 percent. The proportion of individuals who died ranged from 31.1 percent to 33.0% and the proportion of people who converted from disability benefits to retirement benefits ranged from 19.7% to 22.7%. The number of people in the U.S. who died in the past year was higher than the number who died the year before in the previous year, according to the federal government. interviewed stated that the medical improvement standard may artificially limit the percentage of recipients who are found to have improved medically. However, we were unable to identify any empirical data regarding the impact of the standard on the Percentage of recipients. who have their benefits discontinued, or what a “proper” ‘improvement’ is. The study was published in the Journal of the American Geriatrics Society (JAGS) and the American Journal of Geriatric Surgery (AJPS). About 2.8 percent of those who receive these CDRs are found to no longer have a disability under the medical improvement standard. Between fiscal years 1999 and 2005, an average of about 26,000 individuals each year (about 5.3 percent) were removed from the disability programs as a result of receiving a medical CDR. While the number of CDRs conducted between fiscal years1999 and 2005 fluctuated, the percentage of beneficiaries removed fromThe programs remained fairly constant. For example, in fiscal year 1999, 2002, and 2004, the. percentage of recipients who were removed as a their benefits discontinued was about 1.4 percent. (including earnings and resources above the limit allowed by program guidelines) (see fig. 2). During fiscal years 1999 to 2005, the proportion of all beneficiaries who were removed from the programs in each of the above categories remained fairly consistent. For example, during this period, the proportion of individuals removed from the programs remained fairly consistent. In fiscal years 2002 to 2003, the number of individuals who were removed from the programs increased by 1%. In fiscal year 2003 to 2004, the total number of people removed increased by 1%. engaged in SGA if they earn above a certain dollar level. For 2006, SSA considers countable earnings above $860 a month to be SGA for an individual who is not blind. Prior to 1980, some studies indicated that many beneficiaries of SGA were blind. For more information on SGA, visit the SSA's SGA website. The SSA is a federal agency that administers the disability insurance program for people who are blind or partially blind, and is based in Washington, D.C. beneficiaries, an SSA field office representative determines if the beneficiary is working at the level of substantial gainful activity (SGA) A beneficiary who is found to be not working or working but earning less than the SGA level (minus allowable exclusions) has his or her case forwarded to the state. The SSA has the power to deny benefits to people who do not work or work but earn less than SGA. The agency has the authority to grant or deny benefits. must (1) have lasted or be expected to last at least 1 year or to result in death and (2) prevent or be able to prevent him or her from being able to engage in substantial gainful activity (SGA) for that period of time. People are generally considered to be people who have been dead for at least a year. People who have died for more than a year are considered to have died of natural causes, such as a heart attack, stroke, or a stroke. SSA found that they had improved medically. More people leave the programs when they die, convert to full retirement benefits, or leave for other reasons. Our review suggests that several factors associated with the standard pose challenges for SSA’s ability to assess whether beneficiaries continue to be eligible for benefits. The review suggests several factors that pose challenges to SSA's ability to determine if beneficiaries are still eligible for the benefits they are entitled to under the current system. For more information, go to: http://www.ssa.gov/. a long-term disability. Workers who have paid into the Social Security Trust Fund are insured under this program. At the end of calendar year 2005, the DI program served about 8.3 million workers with disabilities, their spouses, and dependent children. The DI program paid out about $85 billion in cash benefits throughout the year. The program is funded by a trust fund that was established in the 1940s. The trust fund was created to provide benefits to people with disabilities and their spouses. calendar year 2005, the SSI program served about 6.8 million people and paid about $36 billion in federal cash benefits throughout the year. These cash benefits are paid from general tax revenues. SSI benefits generally can be discontinued for the same reasons as DI benefits, althoughSSI benefits also may be terminated. The program is funded by federal tax revenues and is administered by the Social Security Administration (SSI) SSI is a federal program that provides benefits to people who are unemployed or underemployed. The Social Security Administration administers two programs that provide benefits to people with disabilities. Disability Insurance (DI) and Supplemental Security Income (SSI) DI is an insurance program that provides benefits to workers who become unable to work. SSI is an income assistance program for disabled, blind, or aged people who have low income and limited resources. The Social Security Act’s definition of disability for adults is the same under both programs. A person�s physical or mental impairment is considered a disability under DI and SSI. the year. Once found entitled, individuals continue to receive benefits until they either die, return to work and earn more than allowed by program rules, are found to have improved medically and are able to work, or reach regular retirement age (when disability benefits convert to retirement benefits). SSI serves the elderly, disabled, and those with disabilities who are unable to work or who have been disabled for a long period of time. SSI is funded by the federal government and the state governments of New Hampshire, Rhode Island, and Vermont. SSA does not conduct CDRs on all beneficiaries each year. If SSA finds that the individual no longer has a disability and discontinues benefits following a CDR, the individual has the right to appeal the CDR decision. Most of the disability examiners whom we spoke with on our site visits told us that they were uncertain about when to apply the exceptions. SSA policies allow for various exceptions, including when the prior decision was in error or when persons no longer have a disability. By 1984 SSA placed a moratorium on all CDRs. Congress enacted the Social Security Disability Benefits Reform of beneficiaries removed from the disability programs each year. For example, SSA commented that the disability discontinuation rates in the early 1980s may not have been representative of the discontinuation rate prior to the implementation of the medical improvement standard due to special targeted initiatives aimed at removing individuals from disability programs.programs. The Social Security disability benefits reform was enacted in 1983. The reform was intended to address concerns that some beneficiaries were being inappropriately removed from programs. discontinue benefits if it determines that medical improvement related to the ability to work has occurred or that one of the exceptions applies, and the person’s impairments are not severe or the person can do past work or other work. If SSA determines that. medical improvement has not occurred and if SSA. determines that the person's impairment is not severe, SSA can continue to pay benefits. SSA could also terminate benefits if the person is found not to be able to work. following two elements that need to be met Is there improvement in a beneficiary’s medical condition? The regulations implementing the act define improvement as any decrease in the medical severity of the beneficiary's impairment(s) Since the last time SSA reviewed his or her disability, based on changes in symptoms, signs, from being able to work continue to receive benefits. At the same time, SSA has a stewardship responsibility to identify those beneficiaries who have improved medically and are no longer eligible for benefits. this throughout the entire report to minimize any confusion on this matter. SSA indicated that clarification of this guidance would probably have little noticeable impact on the number of cases in which SSA finds that a disability has ended. As our report notes, we cannot quantify the impact that the DI program who no longer had a disability. We revised the report to take into account these suggestions. The Commissioner’s comments have been reproduced in appendix III. See appendix IV for a listing of major contributors to this report. ability to work is confusing and unclear. One advocate stated that current SSA policies contribute to some recipients remaining in the disability programs despite their ability to work. We also found that while the act provides for exceptions to medical improvement that could result in additional individuals having their benefits extended, this does not apply to the current group of recipients. We found that the current system does not provide for exceptions that could lead to additional individuals receiving their benefits. The current system is not designed to accommodate this group of individuals. is based on certain types of psychological impairments is especially relevant, given that the proportion of all individuals in the disability programs whose disability is based on a psychological impairment has grown in recent years. SSA is responsible for assuring that individuals who truly have a disability that prevents them from working can get the help they need to get a job and live the life they want to live. It is also responsible for ensuring that individuals with disabilities are not denied the right to work because of their disability. Directors assume that the beneficiary continues to have a disability. Some of these directors also noted that they make this presumption because the beneficiary was found disabled when initially awarded benefits, and examiners must show medical improvement to remove them from the programs. If the beneficiary has the ability to do past work, then benefits are discontinued. If he or she does not have the ability. to do other work, benefits are continued. Robert E. Robertson, Director, National Institute on Disability, said benefits should continue if the beneficiary is able to do the work they did before the disability. Case files illustrate difficulties examiners face when determining if a beneficiary has improved medically and is able to work. We interviewed seven disability policy experts from national disability research and advocacy organizations to obtain their input on the impact of the law.continued or discontinued. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. Policy, Consortium for Citizens with Disabilities, Disability Law Center, Disability Policy Collaboration, National Organization of Social Security Claimants’ Representatives. Finally, we spoke with representatives from the National Association of Disability Examiners, the National Council of Disability Determination Directors, and the Social Security Advisory Board. We spoke with experts on disability policy, disability law, and social security. We also spoke with disability advocates and experts on the law and the disability community. We are happy to share our findings with you. standard on the disability programs and any challenges it poses when assessing individuals’ continued eligibility for benefits. We spoke with individuals affiliated with the following organizations American Association of People with Disabilities, Center for Health Services Research and Policy at George Washington Center for the Study and Advancement of Disability. We also spoke with the Center for health services research and policy at the University of California, San Francisco. We are happy to share our thoughts with you. We hope to hear from you in the coming days.