Customs Service (Customs), Transportation Security Administration (TSA), Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS), Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), and Federal Law Enforcement Training Center (FLETC) auditors had reported 30 reportable conditions, 18 of which were considered material internal control weaknesses. For fiscal year 2002 and prior to its transfer to DHS, Customs’ auditors reported nine internal control problems. For the 7 months ending September 30, 2003, Customs reported nine weaknesses. Customs, 2 from FEMA, 1 from INS, and 1 from TSA. Appendix III provides detailed information on the status of each of the 30 inherited weaknesses, including how they were reported in DHS’s Performance and Accountability Report. Component agencies took various steps to resolve nine of the previously identified weaknesses. For example, Customs had a previously identified weakness related to the effectiveness of its internal controls over accurate reporting of entry duties and taxes. This weakness was resolved by reinstituting a program that Customs had in place prior to the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001. TSA is a relatively new agency formed after the September 11, 2001, terror attacks. TSA obtained an unqualified audit opinion on its financial statements. TSA’s systems did not substantially comply with the requirements of FFMIA. INS's auditors reported four internal control weaknesses as of February 28, 2003, including weaknesses in the functionality of its financial systems; recording routine transactions; and hiring of qualified year audit staff. Finally, these weaknesses contributed to Customs’ systems inability to substantially comply. with the requirement of FFmIA. FLETC and TSA had weaknesses in their processes for accruing accounts payable or reporting accurate balances for undelivered orders. TSA has hired additional staff, thereby resolving its weaknesses of not having a sufficient number of qualified accounting personnel. FLETC has implemented policies and procedures to ensure that financial information was recorded and properly approved. TSA, and the Coast Guard had weaknesses. in their process for accrue accounts payable and reporting accurate. balances forundelivered Orders. TSA had a weaknesses in its processes for Accruing Accounts Payable and Reporting accurate balances. Financial reporting: Key controls to ensure reporting integrity were not in place, and inefficiencies made the process more error prone. The Coast Guard and the Strategic National Stockpile had weaknesses in financial oversight that have led to reporting problems. DHS’s auditors also found significant deficiencies at the Coast Guards and Secret Service, preventing them from being able to express an opinion on certain financial statements. In addition to the internal control weaknesses cited in its 2003 and complex as DHS. At the Coast Guard, the financial reporting was more error-prone. to which additional significant internal control deficiencies existed was unknown. For example, conditions at the Coast Guard have surfaced because of its greater relative size and increased audit scrutiny at DHS as compared to its former legacy agency, the Department of Transportation (DOT) As part of DOT’s financial statement audit, DOT was asked to identify deficiencies in its internal control system. The Coast Guard was the subject of an audit of its internal controls, which was conducted by the U.S. Department of Homeland Security. DHS reported 12 additional weaknesses that affect the department’s full compliance with certain objectives of 31 U.S.C. 3512(c), (d) (commonly known as the Federal Managers’ Financial Integrity Act of 1982 (FMFIA) Examples of the FMFIA weaknesses reported by DHS included deficient controls over laws and regulations regarding the border entry process, and lack of oversight and administration of major contracts at TSA. FEMA, Customs, and TSA each had weaknesses at the time of their transfer to DHS. as 3 material weaknesses, while 5 were reported as reportable conditions. The department’s independent auditors classified the remaining 7 weaknesses as lower level observations and recommendations. Auditors reported 6 additional weaknesses as of September 30, 2003, bringing the total number of reportable condition for DHS to 14 for fiscal year 2003. A description of these weaknesses can be found in appendix II. As mentioned previously, several of the departmentwide weaknesses resulted from the creation of the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) The auditors reported 14 reportable conditions on internal control, 7 of which were considered to be material weaknesses. Nine of the 30 internal control weaknesses identified in prior component financial statement audits have been closed as of September 30, 2003. The remaining 21 issues represent continuing weaknesses that have been reported in DHS’s first Performance and Accountability Report. For 5 of the agencies that from component agencies. For 3 of the inherited weaknesses, DHS combined previously identified weaknesses or reclassified them, rather than from resolving the underlying internal control problems. FLETC’s auditors reported four internal control weaknesses for fiscal year 2002. These weaknesses resulted from FLETC not having adequate policies and procedures in place to ensure that funds obligated were proper and that costs for construction in progress were recorded properly. Many of these weaknesses lead to the systems’ inability to substantially comply with the requirements of FFMIA. DHS has made some progress in addressing theinternal control weaknesses it inherited in 2002. The agency is working to correct these weaknesses. performance information, having neither material internal control weaknesses nor material noncompliance with laws and regulations. DHS obtained a consolidated financial audit for the 7-month period from March 1, 2003, to September 30, 2003. All four agencies’ systems were found not to be in substantial compliance with the requirements of FFMIA. Most of the 22 components that transferred to DHS had not been subjected to significant financial statement audit scrutiny prior to their transfer. Table 3 lists relevant financial management laws and describes their relationship. substantially comply with federal financial management systems requirements, applicable accounting standards, and the U.S. Government Standard General Ledger at the transaction level. It also requires auditors to report whether the agency’s financial management system substantially comply with the three requirements of FFMIA. Although DHS is not currently subject to FFMia, its auditors disclosed systems deficiencies in its financial management information systems, the application says. The agency is not required to comply with provisions of the application. accounts payable and related accruals; financial reporting; and controls over its financial management system. Weaknesses such as these have existed for several years and contribute to INS’s systems continuing inability to substantially comply with the requirements of FFMIA. Although the weaknesses did not interfere with the agency’S ability to obtain information, they did hinder its ability to act on the information it did obtain. The agency's systems continue to be unable to substantially compliant with the FFMia requirements. its five governmentwide initiatives, the President’s Management Agenda recognized that an unqualified financial audit opinion is a basic prescription for any well-managed organization. "Without sound internal control and accurate and timely financial information, it is not possible to accomplish the agenda and secure the best performance and highest performance," the agenda says. The President's Management Agenda is a governmentwide initiative that aims to improve the performance of the federal government. The agenda also aims to strengthen the economy, create jobs and improve the quality of life. measure of accountability for the American people. In addition, the Joint Financial Management Improvement Program (JFMIP) Principals have defined certain measures, in addition to receiving an unqualified financial statement opinion, for achieving financial management success. These additional measures include being able to routinely provide timely, accurate, and useful financial and other information. The U.S. Treasury Department says it has no plans to change the way the federal government manages its finances. The department says it will continue to work with Congress to find ways to improve the nation's finances. GAO examines the use of public funds; evaluates federal programs and policies; and provides analyses, recommendations, and other assistance. GAO’s commitment to good government is reflected in its core values, which include accountability for the American people. The agency provides information to help Congress make informed oversight, policy, and funding decisions. For more information on the GAO, go to: www.gao.org/government/government-wide-examining-funds-and-policies. Weakness (Financial Systems Functionality and Technology) Material Weakness ( financial Reporting) Reportable Condition (Intragovernmental Balances) Agency and Condition Reported in 2002 Federal Law Enforcement Training Center 22. Laws and Regulations (OMB Circular) Reportability & Recommendations to Management Reportable Conditions to Management. Reportable conditions to management Reportable condition to management. Reportability and Recommendation to management reportable condition (Intl. Balances), reportable Condition to management, reportability and recommendation to management and reportability to the public. A-127) 24. Laws and Regulations (OMB Circular A-11) Material Weaknesses (Financial Reporting; Financial Systems Functionality and Technology) Materialweakness (Property, Plant, and Equipment) A-127. The Government Accountability Office, the audit, evaluation and investigative arm of Congress, exists to support Congress in meeting its constitutional responsibilities and to help improve the performance of Congress. A- 127. The GAO's mission is to help Congress meet its responsibilities and improve its performance. FEMA’s auditors reported seven internal control weaknesses for fiscal year 2002. FEMA’S financial systems were unable to perform certain basic accounting functions efficiently. FEMA was unable to accurately track basic accounting information, such as real and personal property and accounts receivable. Many of these weaknesses specifically contributed to FEMA's systems’ failure to substantially comply with the requirements of the federal financial reporting system for the 2002 fiscal year. The report was released to the public on October 1, 2002. which allows for more accurate reporting of these taxes and duties. Another weakness DHS inherited relates to FEMA’s inability to identify and record certain accounts receivable in a timely manner. FEMA's accounts receivables processes were strengthened to ensure that accounts Receivable are determined and recorded on a timely basis. In the U.S., FEMA is responsible for collecting and reporting federal income tax, property taxes, and other taxes. In Europe, FEMA is in charge of collecting, reporting, and distributing federal income taxes, property tax, and customs duties. in information technology (IT) systems, and issues concerning the strength of its core financial systems. These weaknesses can result in inaccurate reporting of certain material elements of Customs’ financial situation. System security weaknesses that could leave Customs' information vulnerable to unauthorized access. The necessity of extensive manual procedures and procedures to deal with these issues. The need for extensive manual processes and procedures, as well as the need for regular checks on the accuracy of these procedures, are among the reasons for the lack of accuracy of Customs' financial reporting. personnel, financial reporting and systems, property accounting and financial reporting, financial management policies, administration of screener contracts, and maintenance of adequate information in its personnel files. These weaknesses can result in uncontrolled spending of taxpayer dollars, misplaced or unaccounted for property, and challenges in producing financial statements. In its first year, the county spent $1.2 billion on personnel, systems, equipment and software. It spent $2.7 billion in its second year on personnel and systems. In the third year, it spent $3.1 billion on systems and equipment. controls over its financial systems environment; financial system functionality; financial reporting process; real and personal property system processes; account reconciliation processes; accounts receivable processes; and the lack of a process to evaluate the accuracy of a new claims estimation methodology. These weaknesses resulted in the need for extensive manual effort to implement a new claim estimation methodology for the company. The company's financial system also had to be updated to reflect the changes in the industry. The changes were made to make the company more efficient and effective. no charge on GAO’s Web site at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staff have any questions about this report or wish to discuss it further, please contact me at (202) 512-6906 or Casey Keplinger, Assistant Director. In addition, Heather Dunahoo and Scott Wrightson made key contributions to this report. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. Each weekday, GAO posts newly released reports, testimony, and correspondence on its Web site. The fastest and easiest way to obtain copies of GAO documents at no cost is through GAO’s Web site (www.gao.gov). To have GAO e-mail you a list of newly posted products, e-mails jennifer.smith@dailymail.co.uk or call 1-800-273-8255. For confidential support on suicide matters call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch or click here. every afternoon, go to www.gao.gov and select “Subscribe to Updates” to get the latest news from the GSA. For the latest GSA news, visit the agency’s website at http://www.gaos.gov/news/gao-news-and-reporters/daily-news/top-stories/stories/gsa-news_topstories.shtml. For more GSA News, visit www.gsa.gov or click here. plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days after the date of this letter. At that time, we will send copies of thisReport to interested congressional committees and subcommittees. We will also make copies of the report available to others on request. In addition, the report will be available at the following sites: www.cnn.com, www.dailymail.co.uk, and www.thestar.com/2013/01/29/kremlin-report-took-out-of-record-report.html#storylink=cpy. of duties, and service continuity. Many bureau systems lacked certain functionality to support the financial reporting requirements. The Coast Guard was unable to support $2.9 billion in PP&E due to insufficient documentation provided prior to the completion of audit procedures, including pension liability for certain of its employees and retirees. When corrected, the auditors had insufficient time to audit the amount recorded. There was insufficient documentation for $201 million in post-service benefit. The auditors were unable to audit this amount. a result, the auditors were unable to verify the recorded value of $497 million in OM&S. The Coast Guard also had not recently reviewed its OM &S capitalization policy, leading to a material adjustment to its records. Actuarial liabilities: The Secret Service did not record the $500 million in liabilities it owed the Coast Guard in OM & S. The auditors could not verify the value of the Secret Service's $300 million in O&S liabilities, which the agency did not report. documentation to support its estimation methodology. The Transportation Security Administration (TSA) lacked a comprehensive property management system and adequate policies and procedures to ensure the accuracy of its PP&E records. Internal controls over physical counts of OM&S were not effective at the Coast Guard. As a result, the U.S. Coast Guard was found to be the most vulnerable agency to terrorist attacks on U.N. facilities. The agency was also found to have the highest levels of terrorist activity in the United States. perform cycle counts of its work in process that would facilitate the accurate calculation of deferred revenue and reporting of related operational information. Fund balance with Treasury (FBWT): The Coast Guard did not perform required reconciliations for FBWT accounts and lacked written standard operating procedures (SOPs) to guide the process, the report said. The report said the Coast Guard lacked written SOPs to guide it in reconciling its accounts with the Treasury. It also said it did not have the ability to make changes to the FBWT account balance. and prevent excessive drawback claims and payments. CBP did not have a reliable process of monitoring the movement of ‘in-bond’ shipments. ‘In-b Bond’ is merchandise traveling through the U.S. that is not subject to duties, taxes, and fees until it reaches a port of destination.CBP lacked an effective compliance program for “in-Bond” shipments. The agency also lacked a reliable system for tracking “excess drawback claims” measurement program to compute an estimate of underpayment of related duties, taxes, and fees. Acceptance and adjudication of immigration and naturalization applications: The Bureau of Citizenship and Immigration Services’ (CIS) process for tracking and reporting the status of applications and related information was inconsistent and inefficient. Also, CIS did not. compute an estimates of underpayment of related fees and duties, and did not provide a method to determine if a person had underpaid taxes or fees. Condition (In-bond Movement of Imported Goods) Observation & Recommendations to Management Material Weakness (Financial Systems Functionality and Technology) Immigration and Naturalization Service (as of February 28, 2003) Reportable Condition (Acceptance and Adjudication of Immigration and naturalization Applications) Reportables Condition (Accounts Payable and Undelivered Orders) Reportsable condition (Accounting Payable & Undel delivered Orders) Reportability Condition (Reportable Condition) of Management Material. The CFO Act requires certain agencies to have a qualified, presidentially appointed, Senate-confirmed CFO who reports to the head of the agency. The Accountability of Tax Dollars Act of 2002, however, does not require compliance with the CFO act. The financial management improvements of FFMIA build on the C FO Act by emphasizing the need for systems that can generate reliable, useful, and timely information with which to make fully informed decisions and to ensure accountability, the authors say. They say the goal is improved financial performance to properly safeguard the government's assets. also charged with ongoing integration of these functions within the department. The CFO Act requires the agency’s CFO to develop and maintain an integrated accounting and financial management system that provides for complete, reliable, and timely financial information. The system facilitates the systematic measurement of performance at the agency, the development of new programs, and the management of the agency's finances. The agency's CFO is also charged with continuing to develop new programs and programs, as well as managing the department's finances and operations. subject to pending legislation. DHS is currently subject to most financial management improvement laws except for the CFO Act and FFMIA. DHS should not be the only cabinet-level department not covered by what is the cornerstone for pursuing and achieving the requisite financial management systems and capabilities in the federal government. Given its early implementation, it to comply with the C FO Act andFFMIA and that the systems DHS acquires are capable of meeting the requirements of those laws, as well as ones currently applicable. Meeting these financial managementimprovement requirements will help produce timely and useful financial and business information. requirements of the CFO Act and FFMIA. It would certainly make good business sense to do so given DHS’s size and mission. DHS has implemented a commercial-off-the-shelf tool called Dynamic Object Oriented Requirements System (DOORS) to track the requirements of various laws, regulations, and circulars place on the development of the agency. It is not clear if DHS will use the tool to track requirements of the federal government in the near future. DHS is currently required to have annual audits under the Accountability of Tax Dollars Act and to report on its internal controls under FMFIA. DHS’s CFO has testified that DHS complies with the audit provisions of the CFO Act and will continue to do so. We continue to strongly support passage of legislation that would statutorily make DHS a C FO Act agency, and thus guarantee future requirements to adhere to important financial management legislation. As arranged with your office, unless you publicly announce its contents earlier, we will not reveal the contents of this letter. the Congress may wish to consider the following action: Enact legislation to designate DHS as a CFO Act agency. We are making eight recommendations for executive action at DHS that will improve financial management at the department. Specifically, we recommend that the Secretary of Homeland Security direct the Under Secretary to improve the department's financial management. We also recommend that DHS designate a chief financial officer (CFO) to oversee the department’s financial operations. The CFO position is a key role in the management of the Department of Homeland security. similar to those discussed throughout this report. We fully support DHS including all management-identified control weaknesses as well, and have updated our recommendation accordingly. DHS commented on its commitment to full adherence to the CFO Act and FFMIA. We applaud the current leadership at DHS for voluntarily complying with these laws. We are happy to share our findings with the Department of Homeland Security and other agencies. We hope to hear back from you in the next few days about your plans to address these issues. Although we did not perform audit procedures to determine the impact of these reductions, reduction of service providers prematurely, without considering the provider’s reliability, or without an overall consolidation plan, could be negative if it interferes with the enterprise approach or causes significant short-term effects. From top management and users in eMerge, we offer the following tips to help you stay on top of the latest developments in the industry. We are also happy to share our thoughts on the future of the industry with you. the reduction of financial service providers, but we did not complete audit procedures to determine if these reductions were positive or negative for the department. Finally, we reviewed the RMTO’s strategic framework. However, substantial documentation related to the eMerge initiative was not provided to us until after we completed our audit. The RMTO did not provide any additional information about the e-Merge project until after the audit was complete. The e-merge project is expected to be completed by the end of the year. is to be completed in July 2004. Concurrent with eMerge, DHS has issued a request for quotation (RFQ) for an interim project—the Business Automation Initiative. The RFQ requested system proposals to automate purchase requests for the department and to streamline the employee entry/exit process. the requirements from various high-level DHS officials. However, these documents were not provided to us until after we completed our fieldwork. Thus, we are not providing description, analysis, or evaluation of such information in this report. Another interim initiative was considered by the department to integrate data mining and warehousing. Instead of pursuing this interim solution, DHS plans to include it in the requirements of the eMerge initiative. DHS has plans to integrate and consolidate its financial and business systems. But without such things as continued active oversight from top-level management and systematic approaches to this integration, DHS could find itself in a mess, the agency says. The department has obtained approval of outstanding inherited weaknesses, as well as address the newly identified department-level weaknesses. includes defining, acquiring, and testing the planned solution. Phase II involves implementing the solution throughout DHS, and Phase III is ongoing maintenance of the solution. According to DHS, the eMergevendor selection to occur in April or May of 2004. However, vendor proposal requests were issued in June 2004 and selection was made in July 2004. For more information on the e-Merge, visit the DHS e-merge website. for more information about the iMerge project, visit the dhs.gov/eMerge. DC Courts began its system acquisition in 1998 and has struggled in its implementation. One of the key impediments to the success of integration efforts at NASA was the failure to involve key stakeholders in the implementation or evaluation of system improvements. As a result, NASA has spent more than $1.5 million on its two prior failed efforts. The new system is expected to be fully operational by the end of the year. It will be the first of its kind in the U.S. and will replace a number of other systems. a result, new systems failed to meet the needs of key stakeholders. DC Courts struggled in developing requirements that contained the necessary specificity to ensure the system developed would meet its users’ needs. To avoid similar problems, it is important, among other things, that DHS ensure commitment and extensive involvement with the project. It is also important to ensure that the project is funded on a long-term basis and that it is fully funded by the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) to ensure its success. For example, we have reported on the efforts of National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), and the District of Columbia Courts (DC Courts) to acquire new information systems. NASA is on its third attempt in 12 years to modernize its financial management process and systems, and has spent about $180. DC Courts has spent more than $100,000 on new computer systems since 2008. NASA has spent $180,000 in the last 12 years on the same project, and is on the third attempt.  RMTO has termed its financial enterprise solution project “electronically Managing enterprise resources for government effectiveness and efficiency” (eMerge) RMTO’s Strategic Framework “establishes the strategic direction for migration, modernization, and integration of DHS financial, accounting, procurement, personnel, asset management and travel systems, processes, and and we are unable to determine if DHS, through the RMTO, is developing aFinancial enterprise solution that will be in alignment with departmentwide information technology plans. reduced the number of its legacy financial systems. DHS has established the Resource Management Transformation Office (RMTO) within the Management Directorate to manage its financial enterprise solution project. However, the acquisition is in the early stages, and continued focus and follow through, among other things, will be necessary for it DHS has to integrate its financial management systems. We reviewed documentation detailing management, financial reporting, systems implementation, and requirements. We have not reviewed system requirements or other recently developed plans because these were completed. inefficiencies for agencies that must quickly adapt to other systems. It is too early to tell whether DHS’s planned financial enterprise solution will be able to meet the requirements of relevant financial management improvement laws. While DHS systems must meet the. requirements of laws they are currently subject to, it is also important that DHS be proactive and incorporate the fieldwork. Thus, we did not include analysis or evaluation of such information in this report. We reviewed relevant laws and regulations, and relevant guidance related to financial. management. The support of top officials at the department will be key in ensuring that the necessary resources are available to address the weaknesses. DHS expects the acquisition and implementation of the financial enterprise solution to take place over a 3-year time period and cost approximately $146 million. According to the strategic framework DHS provided to us, the development of an integrated financial enterprise. solution will be accomplished in three phases. Phase I is the acquisition, deployment and testing of the solution. Phase II is the testing and evaluation of the system. DHS estimated that several thousand compliance requirements will be tracked using DOORS once analysis is completed. After the repository is complete, requirements reports are to be printed directly from DOORS and attached to future RFPs to ensure that contractors are aware of the legislative requirements of the systems to be developed. A system to record, track, and link all legislative requirements as a financial management system is being developed is important. Also important is that DHS be statutorily required to develop an integrated financial system. and transformation of DHS is an enormous undertaking that will take time to achieve in an effective and efficient manner. components to be merged into DHS already face a wide array of existing challenges, and failure to effectively carry out its mission would potentially expose the nation to terrorist attacks. DHS is a joint agency of the Department of Homeland Security and the Federal Bureau of Investigation. It was established in 1947 to protect the U.S. from terrorist threats. The agency was created in response to the September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks on the United States. classified as observations and recommendations, a much less serious classification. Lower classification within DHS does not mean that the issues are now somehow less severe, it merely refers to the materiality of a component within DHS. Considered against operations or assets of the stand-alone entity, these issues by themselves were not considered serious enough to be classified as a threat to national security by DHS. The agency has not commented on the new classification of the threat to U.S. national security as a potential threat. In the aftermath of the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, responding to potential and real threats to homeland security became one of the federal government’s most significant challenges. To address this challenge, the Congress passed, and the President signed, the Homeland Security Act of 2002. The act merged 22 federal agencies into a single agency, the Department of Homeland Security. The DHS is responsible for protecting the U.S. from terrorism, homeland security threats, and other threats to national security. among other things, preventing terrorist attacks within the United States, reducing America’s vulnerability to terrorism, minimizing subsequent damage, and assisting in the recovery from attacks that do occur. To help accomplish this integrated homeland security mission, the various mission areas and associated programs of 22 federal agencies were merged, in part by merging the National Security Agency and the Department of Homeland Security. In part, the National Guard and the Army were merged into one agency, the Army National Guard, and the Air Force National Guard. agencies and organizations into DHS, making it the department with the third largest budget in the federal government, about $40 billion for fiscal year 2005. In January 2003, we designated implementation and transformation of the new Department of Homeland Security as high risk based on three factors: (1) the implementation, (2) the transformation, and (3) the cost of implementing the new system. The Department of DHS is responsible for protecting the nation's security. It has a budget of about $39 billion for 2005, up from $28 billion in 2004. whole or in part, into DHS. The department’s organizational structure consists of eight major components. There are five directorates, each of which is headed by an Under Secretary. The U.S. Coast Guard (Coast Guard) is the largest agency in the department, followed by the Secret Service. The Bureau of Citizenship and Immigration Services (CIS), is the second-largest agency. The Department of Homeland Security is made up of more than 100,000 employees. and obtained after our fieldwork was completed. We requested comments from the Secretary of Homeland Security or his designee. Written comments were received from the department’s Chief Financial Officer and are reprinted in appendix IV. We performed our review from October 2003 through June 2004 in Washington, D.C., and obtained comments after we had completed our work. We are happy to share our findings with the public and ask that you share your thoughts in the comments section of this report. For confidential support, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255. the department is committed to resolving the remaining weaknesses and has developed a plan to do so. According to the CFO’s plans, corrective actions will be developed by each applicable bureau or directorate and submitted to the OCFO. While progress has been made to address the known material weaknesses, much work still remains. Follow-through with planned corrective actions is paramount. actions developed by the department to address its fiscal years 2002 and 2003 material weaknesses and reportable conditions. Further, we conducted a walk-through to review the system DHS is developing to track planned corrective action.  corrective action plans of varying levels of detail are in place to address 12 of the 14 internal control weaknesses. Some of the plans are scheduled to be completed by the end of fiscal year 2004. However, 2 of the 12 weaknesses have yet to be addressed. The plans are based on plans submitted by the applicable bureau or directorate. They are intended to address the weaknesses in 12 out of 14 areas of internal control. The other two weaknesses are to do with the internal control of the U.S. Postal Service. material internal control weaknesses do not currently have any planned corrective actions in place. Along with developing corrective action plans, the CFO testified that DHS plans to implement a departmentwide tracking system to monitor the status of corrective Financial Officer. The comments DHS provided to us are reprinted in appendix IV. In commenting on a draft of this report, DHS generally agreed with the overall findings and recommendations. However, in response to our recommendation to incorporate allinternal control weaknesses in the tracking system DHS is currently developing, DHS said it would not comply. for Management to do the following: Continue to maintain strong involvement of key stakeholders and top management throughout the acquisition and implementation of the eMerge. Maintain a tracking system of all auditor-identified and management- identified control weaknesses. The original intent of our recommendation was to encourage DHS to track and resolve all auditor reported material weaknesses, reportable conditions, and observations and recommendations. We obtained written comments on a draft of this report from DHS’s Chief DHS felt the recommendation was too broad and suggested that we change the language. management ensure that it has an organizational structure that supports the planning, directing, and controlling of operations to meet agency objectives. The standards also define internal control as a key component necessary to ensure that the agency meets its objectives. They also define key areas of authority and responsibility; and provides for appropriate lines of reporting. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. Within the Management Directorate is DHS’s Office of the Chief Financial Officer (OCFO) OCFO is assigned primary responsibility for functions, such as budget, finance and accounting, strategic planning and evaluation. OCFO needs to establish financial reporting roles and responsibilities, assess critical needs, and establish standard operating procedures (SOP) for the department. OIG reviewed planned corrective D.C., in accordance with U.S. generally accepted government auditing standards. These conditions were not unexpected for a newly created organization, especially one as large as DHS. Reports for the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) and the Departments of Transportation, Justice, and Treasury. We reviewed testimony of DHS’s current and former Chief Financial Officer (CFO) and DHS's OIG reports related to financial management at the department. Finally, we interviewed officials from the OIG and the Office of the Inspector General (OIG) for the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) for their reports on the department's financial management in 2009 and 2010. One of the department’s key challenges is integrating the components’ respective financial management systems, many of which were outdated and had limited functionality. The Homeland Security Act of 2002 states that DHS’S missions include, this report.very serious consequences. We reviewed relevant DHS Office of Inspector General (OIG) reports and our January 2003 report on major management challenges at DHS. We looked at how such challenges are being addressed and identified existing weaknesses in the financial management system for DHS component agencies. relatively more significant than when considered in the context of the much larger consolidated operations of DHS as a whole. Resolving all previously reported internal control weaknesses, regardless of the current designation at DHS, is key to DHS’s ability to produce relevant and reliable financial information. DHS must address all the same position as other federal departments— producing an ineffective and costly financial management system that does not provide the information needed by management. Finally, we believe that it is of critical importance that DHS be statutorily required to comply with the requirements of financial management laws.  auditors found weaknesses across DHS in its entitywide security program management and in controls over system access. Several DHS bureaus lacked clearly documented procedures, making them vulnerable if key people leave the organization. DHS has begun working with a contractor to design and implement a tracking system for outstanding weaknesses identified during the department’s independent financial audits. While this system is still being developed by the OCFO, with assistance from contractors, it is not yet fully functional and does not include information process was complex and labor-intensive. liabilities. Transfers of funds, assets, and liabilities to DHS lacked controls to verify that monthly financial reports and transferred balances from legacy agencies were accurate and complete. Drawback claims on duties, taxes, and fees: The Bureau of Customs and Border Protection’s (CBP) accounting system lacked automated controls to detect Drawback Claims on Duties, Taxes, and Fees (DTCF). DTCF is a federal agency that oversees the U.S. Department of Homeland Security (DHS) primarily as the result of a new financial system that substantially increased the number of reconciling differences. Several large DHS bureaus had not developed and adopted effective SOPs or established systems to track, confirm, and reconcile intragovernmental balances and transactions with their trading partners. Strategic National Stockpile (SNS): SNS had not been established to track and confirm, confirm and reconcile transactions with the trading partners of the DHS and other government agencies. SNS was created as a result of the creation of the U.S. Department of Homeland Security. The SNS accounting process was fragmented and disconnected, largely due to operational challenges caused by the laws governing SNS. A $485 million upwards adjustment had to be made to value SNS in DHS’s records properly. Accounts payable and undelivered orders: CIS and the Bureau of Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE), CIS and ICE, SNS’ accounts payable. SNS accounts receivables: SNS, CIS, ICE, CIS and SNS' accounts receivable. auditors for fiscal year 2003, four were newly identified and contributed to the auditors’ inability to render an opinion on all of DHS’s financial statements. Newly identified weaknesses included the lack of procedures at DHS to verify the accuracy and completeness of balances transferred on March 1, 2003, and significant significant deficiencies in auditing procedures at the Department of Health and Human Services. The auditors were unable to render a opinion on the financial statements for the entire fiscal year of 2003. addressed. We also reviewed DHS’s Performance and Accountability Report for the 7 months ending September 30, 2003. We reviewed prior-period component agency annual financial statement audit reports when available. Immigration and Naturalization Service’S (INS) financial statements audit report for the 5 months ending February 28, 2003; and Performance and accountability report for 7 months of 2002-03. We looked at the Department of Homeland Security's (DHS) Financial Statement Audit Report for 6 months of 2001-02. consolidated balance sheet as of September 30, 2003. Auditors were unable to opine on the consolidated statements of net costs and changes in net position. The combined statement of budgetary resources, and consolidated statement of financing were also unable to be opined on by the auditors. The auditors' report for the 7 months ending September 30th 2003 was not available to the public at the time of the report's release. The report was published online on October 2, 2003, at 10:30 a.m. ET.