Russian leaders fear that a post-Saddam Iraq mightmaximize its oil output, dramatically driving down the price of oil. Some analysts estimated that a $6/bbl fall couldcut Russia's projected economic growth in 2003 in half. A sharper price drop, below $18/ bbl, would severely impactRussiangovernment revenues, jeopardizing Moscow's ability to pay salaries and pensions and to fund its already meagersocial expenditures. The price ofoil peaked near $40per barrel in early March 2003. Most discussions of Russian interests in Iraq focus on economic factors. Moscow has cultivated friendly relations with Baghdad since the 1960s. U.S.R. was Saddam's main arms supplier during Iraq's 1980-1988 war with Iran. Russia stillperceives itself ashaving strategic interests and an historic role in that region and does not want to be seen as betraying a long-timefriend. Back to Mail Online home. Backto the page you came from. Back To The page you come from. U.S. response is asfollows: Russia's economic interests in Iraq will receive due consideration. However, Iraq owes money to manycountries. Its debtto Russia ought not be put in a special category in preference to all others. U.S oil companies, among others,have been shut out ofIraq for years. Why should Russia be treated any differently from other countries? It's not fair to put Russia on a par with other countries. It's a matter of national sovereignty. Russian firms be guaranteed a special privileged place in post-Saddam Iraq, possiblyat the expense of U.S. firms? Contrary to persistent Russian belief, the United States does not control the price of oil and cannot guarantee specificprice levels. U.s. officials reportedly suggested an informal "gentleman's agreement" to respect Russian economic interests in Iraq. The Russian government has not commented on the report, which was published in the New York Times on Monday. The article was amended on Tuesday to make clear that the report was published on Monday, not Tuesday. and that Russianeconomic interests in Iraq were respected. These discussions werereported in the Russian and U.S. press and undoubtedly were detected in Baghdad. Iraq's announcement (August 16, 2002) of the $40 billion agreement for Russian firms to modernize Iraq'sinfrastructure may have been an attempt to ensure Russian political support. However, in in the end, the deal was not a success and Iraq was forced to withdraw from the Mideast in 2003, leaving Russia in charge of Iraq's infrastructure. Russia was very short of hard currency. Russian oil companies havecontracts that could beworth as much as $30 billion over 20 years to develop Iraqi oil fields. In August 2002, Iraq announced that Russian firms would receivecontracts worth $40billion over 5 years to modernize Iraq's oil, electrical, chemical, agricultural, and transport sectors. The Russian economy is extraordinarily dependent on oil and gas exports. In 2000,Russia's oil exports earned $25.3 billion. The total Russian Federal budget in 2000 was $48 billion. Baghdad owed Moscow $7-$8billion for Soviet-era arms sales during the Iran-Iraq War. Adjusted for inflation, this debt may total $10-12 billiontoday. It is widelybelieved that one of the reasons why Russia regularly took Iraq's side in U.N. debates in the 1990s was tofacilitate debt repayment, especially as Iraq was in debt to Moscow. The debt is now estimated to be in the region of $10-$12 billion. December 2002, Iraqi authorities cancelled a $3.7billion contract with Lukoil to develop the huge West Qurna oil field. Many analysts viewed this asretaliation against Lukoil, whose CEO, Vagit Alekperov, reportedly held discussions with U.S. Energy Secretary Spencer Abraham. Lukoil's future role in a post-Saddam Iraq is still unclear, though some analysts believe it will be a key part of the country's post-9/11 reconstruction. U.S. Ambassador to Russia Alexander Vershbow reportedly toldRussian reporters on March 12 that a Russian veto of the U.S.-backed Security Council resolution on Iraq woulddamage bilateralrelations. Versh Bow mentioned cooperation on security, energy, antiterrorism, antimissile defenses, thatcould jeopardize the international security system. Other Russian officials emphasized theimportance ofminimizing the damage in bilateral relations. The Russian Duma postponed action on the Strategic OffensiveReductions Treaty,citing the Iraq crisis. with alleged links to Al Qaeda as terroristorganizations. On March 6, the Senate unanimously approved the Strategic Offensive Reductions Treaty, and onMarch 10, SenLugar introduced a bill ( S. 580 ) to exempt Russia from the provisions of the Jackson-Vanik amendment. None of thesemoves are directly related to Iraq, except for the bill introduced by Sen.ugar on March 10, which is aimed at exempting Russia from a provision of the treaty that would make it harder for U.S. troops to enter Iraq. Washington whereby Russia would agreenot to use its UNSC veto in return for U.S. guarantees of Russian economic interests in Iraq. A Russian parliamentary leader close to Putin suggested such a deal in October 2002. (7) InFebruary 2003, Boris Nemtsov, former Deputy Premier and now leader of a liberalpolitical party, wrote that Russia would use its veto to prevent the U.N. Security Council from passing a resolution condemning Iraq's use of chemical weapons. (8) "If the Americans and British can reassure Moscow that a future Iraqi regime will not beprejudicial toRussian economic interests, they will be better placed to secure its acquiescence" (8) Putin sent his chief of staff, Aleksandr Voloshin,to Washington (February 24-25, 2003), where he met with the President, Secretary of State, and the Vice President. "If the U.S. and UK can reassureMoscow that afuture Iraqi regime won't bejudicial to Russia's economic interests," Putin said. that there wasstill an alternativeto war and that Russia, France, and Germany were determined to work together to complete disarmament in Iraqpeacefully. (14) On March 2, Putin rejected regime change as a legitimate goal in Iraq. "[T]he international community cannot interfere with thedomestic affairs of any country in order to change its regime," he said. On March10, Foreign Minister Ivanov declared that if the U.S.-backed resolutionauthorizing war was submitted to the UNSC, Russia would vote against it. France took the lead in pressing the United States for concessions while Russia played a moremoderate role. Many observers believed that the conclusion of Putin's balancing act would be a deal with the U.S. The U.N. Security Council's (UNSC)approval of Resolution1441 (November 8, 2002), in which France took the leading role, was seen as a sign that Russia was on the verge of a major concessions deal. The UNSC's approval of Resolution 1441 was seen by many as a signal that Putin was close to a deal. and the spaceprogram as areasthat could be adversely affected by a Russian veto of the resolution. (13) In February 2003, Russian opposition to U.S. military action against Iraq hardened. February 9-12, Putin traveled to Berlin and Parisand joined French President Chirac and German Chancellor Schroeder in a joint declaration stating that Russia would veto the resolution if it was voted on by the United States. (14) In March 2003, Putin met with German President Schroeder to discuss the situation in Iraq. hoped to prevent this disagreement from damaging broaderbilateral relations. On March 12, Deputy Foreign Minister Georgi Mamedov said that if war erupts, Russia "will cooperate with the UnitedStates for anearly resolution" of the conflict. "We will strive to minimize negative effects and bring the situation back topolitical and diplomaticarenas," he said. (4) As a result of this disagreement, Russia and the U.S. are at odds over the use of chemical weapons in Syria. Putin changed the tone when he warned of the dangers of U.S. and British warmongering. "Russia, whichhad beenstraddling both sides, jumped firmly into the French and German camp" Moscow's shift suggests two questions: why? and who is behind it. 27.27.17: Russia's shift in tone: "President Vladimir Putin changed thetone ... when hewarned of the. dangers ofU.S., Britishwarmongering and called on the military to be ready to defend Russia's. interests" 27.28.16: Russia, which had been straddled both sides: "Russia jumped firmlyinto the French, German camp." There are probably multiple factors behind Putin's more hard-line stance toward the United States. There is Russia's interest inpromoting a "multi-polar world" and bolstering the stature and authority of the U.N. Putin has not "jumped into the French and German camp," but has taken a harder line on U.S. policy on Iraq, writes CNN's John Defterios. For more, go to CNN.com/soulmatestories and follow CNN Living on Facebook and Twitter. and excessive reliance on military force. The idea of a multi-polar world not totallydominated by asingle "hyper-power" still has strong appeal in Russia. Although Putin has adopted a generally cooperative stance toward the United States, he does not want to be perceived (6) Moscow can also be seen trying to balance its interest in preserving a major role for itself in aMulti-Polar world in cooperation withFrance, Germany, and China, on one hand, against its desire to avoid conflict with the U.S. on an issueWashington views as vital. traditional U.S. allies France and Germany as well as withRussian partnerssuch as China. Putin reoriented Russian foreign and defense policy toward broad cooperation with the United States. Putinsees Russia's economic reconstruction and revitalization proceeding from its integration in the global economic system dominated by the advancedindustrial democracies. This cannot be accomplished in an atmosphere of political/military confrontationor antagonismwith the United State, he says. He says Putin therefore shifted Russian policy in 2001 to put some limits on U.s. power. Russia may have an interest inprinciple in opposing "unilateral" U.S. military action in Iraq. Putin does not seek to project Russia into theforefront of ananti-American coalition. He seeks, in cooperation with the United States, to defeat al-Qaeda and other al Qaeda groups in the Middle East and elsewhere in the world. He does not want Russia to be seen as an American "vassal" nor to be viewed as a "vast majority" in the region. With a Duma (lower legislative chamber) election in December 2003 and Putin expected to seek reelection in March2004, such adevelopment is dreaded in the Kremlin. Many observers believe that Russian policy is also motivated by a desire to restrain U.S. global domination and rein in perceived U.s.tendencies toward unilateralism. (2) Many observers think that Russian foreign policy is aimed at the United States and its allies in Europe, Asia, and the Middle East. The battlefield aspect of the Iraq conflict is essentially over. It remains to be seen how strong Russian opposition will be to U.S. policy in Iraq. That may depend on how Putin weighs the benefits of "principled" and domestically popularopposition to the United States against the costs of incurring costs to the Russian people. The U.N. Security Council is expected to vote on a resolution to end the Iraq war this week. The vote will be followed by a vote on whether to continue the war, which could last until 2015. and National SecurityAdvisor. TheRussian press reported his trip as, "an attempt to seal concrete economic deals in return for Russia's support orabstention on theSecurity Council" U.S. sources made a similar assessment. Based on U.K. and Russian press reports and discussions with U.U.S and Russian officials, it appears that the trip was an attempt to make economic deals with Russia in exchange for Russian support for the U.N. Security Council. (9) casualty figures, which must be much higher than announced. Thewide and widening gap between U.S. and Russian military capabilities both embarrasses and frightens many Russians. It appears that the Bush Administration has not given Moscow the firm assurances it wantsguaranteeing Russian economic interests in the United States. The Bush Administration appears to have failed to provide Moscow with firm assurances that it will protect Russian interests in America. It also appears that it has failed to give Moscow the assurances it needs to protect its economic interests. Russiawanted concrete, unequivocal guarantees. On February 28, 2003, the U.S. State Department designated three Chechen groups. There were [American] expressions of sympathy but noguarantees, says one Russian think tank director. The U.N. Security Council passed a resolution authorizing the use of force against the Chechen group on February 27, 2003. The vote was followed by a vote of disapproval on February 28. The resolution was approved by the United Nations Security Council on February 29. hisgenerals and diplomats, the political establishment, and the voters. By early April, the demonstration - yet again - of America's unrivaled military capability must have been very disturbing to manyRussians, especially in view of Moscow's miserable experiences in Chechnya. Russian military spokesmen regularlyclaim that theU.S. Government is hiding its true military capabilities. The U.S.-led invasion of Syria is the latest in a series of attacks on Russian forces in the region. national security policy toward integration with the West and cooperation with the United States. Most observers believe this remains the basis of Putin's national security policy. By February 2003, Russian experts concluded that war in Iraq was virtually inevitable and Russia began evacuating its citizens. Although Russia opposed U.S. military action, it did not want to be seen to be in the middle of a war with the U.K. and its allies in the Middle East. The U.N. Security Council voted in favor of a resolution condemning the Iraq war in December 2003. By mid-2002, some Russian officials and scholars hinted that Moscowmight not objecttoo strongly to U.S. military action against Iraq. Washington did not act unilaterally, they said. The Bush Administration began to make clear in 2002 its determination to overthrow the regime of Iraqi President SaddamHussein. Moscow reassessed its Iraq policy in mid- 2002 and decided to back the United States in the fight against the Iraqi regime. The U.N. Security Council passed a resolution authorizing the use of military force against Iraq in March 2003. the media, especially TV. Russian public opinion overwhelminglyopposed whatmost Russians saw as U.S. aggression. There were large anti-war rallies in major cities and spontaneousmanifestations ofanti-Americanism. 'There is something slightly alarming in Russia's new, more hard-line stance toward the United States over Iraq,' observed the Moscow Times editorial page on February vis-a-vis the United states. Most of Russia'spolitical elites as well as the majority of the national security establishment were hostile to the prospect of a U.s.war in Iraq. the enmity of the Bush Administration on an issue that Bush clearlyconsiders to be ofsupreme importance. The two presidents spoke by telephone on March 18 and reportedly agreed that despitedifferences on Iraq,bilateral cooperation on other issues would be increased. On March 20, Putin criticized the U.S. attack as a"political blunder" and called it a "blunder" on Putin's part. He also called the attack "a political blunder on the part of the United States" Iraq conflict. Several legislative leaders close to Putin, however, criticized this action as against Russianinterests andpredicted Russian approval of the treaty soon. (18) Some lawmakers close to the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, have called for the treaty to be scrapped. (19) Russian lawmakers have also called for an end to the U.S.-led invasion of Iraq. (20) Russian legislators have also criticized the treaty, saying it is against Russian interests. (21) The treaty is expected to be approved by Russia soon. in Iraq, Putin called the attack "a big mistake," "unjustified," and insistedthat military action be ended quickly. Russian media, like that in many other European countries, took a generallynegative attitudetoward coalition military action. InRussia, however,the Kremlin exercises very strong influence over the media, which is dominated by the state-run news agency, RIA Novosti, and other news outlets. In Russia, the media focuses on innocent civilian casualties and coalition mistakes and problems.