financial assistance. Estimated subsidized loans, if above the loan limit level, were set at the maximum amount allowed by law. For the students attending institutions for which no Stafford loan recipients were reported, we assumed that estimated subsidized loan was $0. All students were assumed to borrow the Stafford loan amounts. For each student in the NPSAS sample, we also the estimated subsidized award, we replaced the estimated unsubsidized award with the loanlimit minus the estimated subsidy award. For students at institutions with no reported Stafford loans, estimated subsidized loans were $0 for each student. of recipients in school year 2003-04. Our estimate of students’ subsidized loan awards is based upon the federal needs analysis methodology for subsidized Stafford loans. For each student we estimated a cost of attendance (minus room and board and personal expenses) for the period enrolled in school (loan COA) We calculated and prorated the expected family contribution for the number of months the student attended school. We also calculated each student’s estimated financial assistance, adding federal, state, private, and institutional aid. estimated an unsubsidized award. Unmet need was estimated to be the loan COA, minus prorated expected family contribution and federal, state, private, and institutional aid. If the estimated unsubsIDized award was greater than the loan limit minus unmet need, it was considered an award. If it was less than the limit, the award was considered a "non-awarded" award. The award was not considered an "award" because it did not meet the criteria for an award of this type. maximum Pell Grant award. The maximum unsubsidized Stafford loan award is equal to the student’s cost of attendance. Adult students also received financial aid from states, postsecondary institutions, and other federal sources. In 1999-2000, states awarded a total of $975 million to adult students enrolled in college or university, according to a report by the National Council on Postsecondary Education (NCPE) The maximum award for a less-than- halftime student was $781. The highest award was $3,125 for fulltime students. effects on postsecondary institutions and on students. Permitting all less-than-halftime students to participate in the Stafford loan programs would increase federal subsidy costs by approximately $113 million in fiscal year 2004. The average unsubsidized Stafford loan taken out by adult students enrolled less than halftime would be approximately $680, while the average subsidized loan would be about $1,200. Federal subsidy costs in subsequent fiscal years would change depending upon the number of students enrolled at eligible institutions, loan amounts per student, and federal subsidy cost per loan dollar. school year 2003-04, we projected the estimated number of Stafford subsidized and unsubsidized recipients in school year 1999-2000 who are less than halftime students seeking a certificate or undergraduate degree. Inherent in this assumption is that all students who are eligible will apply for Stafford loans. We did this by assuming that the proportion of this estimated number. of recipients to the for which they qualify. Education officials provided information on federal subsidy rates for Stafford. loans, budget estimates for the Pell Grant program and reviewed our estimation methodology. and class year were projected from school year 1999-2000 to school year 2003-04 by assuming that the proportion of this estimated loan volume to the total loan volume in fiscal year1999-2000 would equal the proportion. The average loan award in school year2003-04 equals the estimated loanVolume in 2003-2004 divided by the estimated number of recipients. The proportion of recipients in schoolyear 2003- 2004 to the proportion in 1999- 2000 would be the same as the proportion that would be given in fiscal 2000-01 to 1999-01. year 1999-2000. To estimate the average Pell grant in school year 2003-04, we projected the estimated number of Pell grant recipients. We did this by assuming that the proportion of this estimated number. of recipients to the total number of recipients in. school year 1999- 2000 equals this proportion in schoolyear 2003- 04. The average Pell Grant in school. year 2003/04 equals the estimated federal cost in schoolYear 2003/4 divided by the estimated. number of recipient in school Year 2003/2004. If the student did not apply for financial aid, or the institution they attended did not have any Pell recipients in 1999-2000, we assumed that the student’s estimated Pell Grant to be $0. The same steps were taken in estimating a student's Pell Grant under the Pell Reference. If the student didn’t apply forFinancial Aid, or they didn't attend an institution that had Pell recipients, the student's estimated Pell Grants were not calculated. If they did apply for Financial Aid, they were estimated to have received a Pell Grant of $1,000. alternative COA for the 1999-2000 school year. Estimated total federal costs under current law and the alternative COA were calculated by summing the estimated individual grants. Federal cost associated with changing the Pell Grant policy was calculated as the difference between the estimated federal cost under Current Law and the estimatedFederal cost under Alternative COA. To receive a Pell Grant under the alternativeCOA, the individual must have applied for financial aid. Inherent in this assumption is that an alternative Pell cost of attendance will not be included. in FY 2003-04. The federal cost of this policy change equals the projected loan volume times the applicable subsidy rate. Federal costs other than the subsidy costs of the loans were not considered. To estimate the average loan awards in FY 2003/04, summed over FFELP/FDLP, school type, and class year. The average loan award for a school in that year was $1.2 million. For more information, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/29/education/top-10-school-loans-by-schools-2013/index.html. response to the policy change. This enrollment response would cost the federal government $9,764,063. In addition to those named above, the following people made significant contributions to this report: Cedric Burton, Betty Clark, Cindy Decker, Gordon Gordon, and Cindy Decker. For confidential support call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. For support on suicide matters call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch or click here. to determine the amount of money that the adult student is expected to contribute to his or her own education, called the expected family contribution (EFC) Statutory definitions establish the criteria that students must meet to be considered independent of their parents for purposes of financial aid, and statutory formulas are used to determine the EFC. The EFC is the amount that an adult student can expect to contribute, or the amount a student is expected to contribute to their own education. For more information on how to apply for financial aid in the U.S., visit the U.S. Department of Education's website. establish the share of income and assets that are expected to be available for the student's education. Once the EFC is established, it is compared to the cost of attendance at the institution chosen by the student. As table 2 indicates, the elements included in the student’s cost of Attendance are listed in table 2. For more information, visit the U.S. Department of Education's Education Cost Of Attendance (ECoA) website or the University of California, Berkeley's EFC website. for the purpose of calculating the Pell Grant award vary according to the extent of their enrollment. If the EFC is greater than the cost of attendance, the student is not considered to have financial need for federal Title IV aid programs. Pell Grant awards are calculated by subtracting the student’s EFC from the maximum Pell grant award. Students attending less than halftime are eligible to receive one-quarter of the award. Maximum Pell grant awards are prorated by the student's enrollment intensity. 2003-04. Federal costs other than the amounts of the Pell Grants were not considered in our analysis. Our estimate of students’ Pell Grant awards is based upon the federal needs analysis methodology for calculating the Pell Grant. The Regular Disbursement Schedule for Determining Less than Halftime Awards (FSA) was used to determine the amount of Pell Grants to be awarded to students for the 2003-04 school year. The Pell Grant is a federal grant for students to attend college in the United States. of assistance they received did vary by household income. In 1999- 2000, most adult students (85 percent) had incomes above 150 percent of the federal poverty guideline. According to federal and state financial aid rules, these adult students typically relied on work-related sources of assistance to meet school costs. The opposite was true of higher-income adult students, who received 71 percent of their support from work- related sources assistance. Both groups had about the same school costs and levels of assistance and, aid. higher-income less-than-halftime adult students, fewer low-income students worked, and, if they worked, fewer were employed fulltime. About half of these low- income adult students had no federal income tax liability. Only 1 percent received either federal or state student aid. Most who had incomes above this level were fulltime workers, and a larger share received both employer assistance and Lifetime Learning tax credits than did their peers. The study was published in the Journal of Higher Education. poverty guideline, which for a three-person household in 1998 was $13,650. An estimated 14 percent had household incomes at or below 150 percent of the federal poverty guideline, or $20,475. Adult students choose to enroll on a less-than-halftime basis for many reasons, the most important of which is to meet school costs. Those with incomes above 150 percent had approximately 44 percent of their estimated $1,048 in costs met through all forms of assistance. An estimated 7 percent of all adult students enrolled less than halftime in 1999-2000 had household incomes at or below 100 percent of the federal poverty guideline. Less-than-halftime adult students received assistance equaling about 44 percent of their school costs, typically from sources other than federal and state student aid. Few adults who enrolled less-than.halftime in 1999/2000 had incomes below 150 percent of. the federal income guideline. Those who did received the bulk of assistance with their school. costs from student financial aid. In 1999-2000, one-third of adult undergraduate students, about 2.3 million, enrolled less than halftime. Most adults who enroll as less-than-halftime students intend education or training costs. About one-half of these costs were comprised of tuition and fees, while the remaining amount was comprised of books, equipment, childcare, and transportation costs. (See app.education.com for more information.) For those who are not in school, an estimate implied, in part, by some research, there could be an additional federal budget cost of about $10 million. of a larger student population, there are no confidence intervals associated with them. The following steps were taken to estimate the additional federal budget costs associated with permitting degree-seeking students enrolled less than halftime to include room, board, and miscellaneous personal expenses in calculating their cost of attendance (alternative COA) For more information, visit the U.S. Department of Education's National Institute of Education website. For more details on how to apply for a degree, visit the U.N.’s Institute of Education. costs for resident tuition and fees at public 2-year institutions and the amount of available state aid varied. For example, in California the cost for resident 2- year tuition was lower than for all other states ($330), but no state aid is available to students pursuing their postsecondary credentials on a state-funded basis. For more information on how to apply for state aid, visit the University of California, Los Angeles website. For information on state aid on a national level, go to the U.S. Department of Education website. Maryland ranked 9th among states in tuition and fees at public 2-year institutions. Like California, Maryland did not have state financial aid available to less-than-halftime students. Both Virginia and Ohio had state aid available for less- Than-Halftime students, but Virginia’s tuition was lower than that of Virginia. Maryland ranked ninth in the nation in the number of students who attended public universities on a first-year basis, compared to Virginia's 1,304. Ohio ($2,300). Within each state, we contacted three to six institutions (see table 1). Because most less-than-halftime adult students are enrolled at 2-year public institutions, we visited more of this type than other postsecondary schools. In addition, we selected institutions with large proportions of adult students in their overall student population. Ohio ($3,000) and New Jersey ($4,000). Ohio ($5,000), New York ($6,000); New Jersey $7,000, New York $8,000. Postsecondary institutions awarded $941 million in aid to adult undergraduate students in 1999-2000, often for the purpose of receiving a Pell Grant. About half of the states did not have aid programs in which adults enrolled less than halftime were eligible to participate. We estimated Pell Grant awards under the current law, and under an amended Pell Grant Act. We also estimated a Pell grant for all students in the sample who were less-than- halftime students seeking a certificate or undergraduate degree. The study was conducted by the National Postsecondary Student Aid Study. Grant award for the rest of the student population. Of the 33 million people aged 18-35 who are not enrolled in school and without a undergraduate degree, we assumed that only 18 percent of them would consider going to school less than halftime. We assumed that the same proportion of the undergraduate population would go to school. We awarded the grant to the people who would attend school for less than half an hour a day. We also awarded the award to the students who would stay in school for more than two hours a week. met through assistance. Among low-income, less-than-halftime adult students, educational costs averaged just over $1,100. About 14 percent of these students received federal Pell Grants to assist them in meeting these costs. Adults who work part-time receive employer financial assistance for enrollment in credential programs less often than those who work fulltime. Compared with full-time adults, the Pell Grant program is less expensive than the Lifetime Learning tax credit, which is more generous to part-timers. assistance with transportation and childcare expenses. Federal work study assistance that permits them to maintain a full credit load throughout the calendar year. These supports permit a relatively large proportion of program participants to complete a certificate or degree. Changing how the Pell and Stafford programs treat less-than-halftime programs is a priority for the White House and the Department of Education. The White House says it is looking at ways to make the program more affordable. The Department of Justice is also looking at how to make it more accessible to women. students who do not receive a Pell award under current law would receive an average award of $630 under this alternative in the 2003-2004 academic year. In addition, about 150,000 less-than-halftime students would get a Pell Grant award increase of $111 per year. The total federal budget cost of changing Pell Grant policy would be approximately $25 million. This cost estimate assumes that adults who are not enrolled in school will not choose to enroll in response to the policy change. The policy change would increase the number of people who are qualified of Pell Grants on enrollment. About 35,000 people between the ages of 18 and 35 who are not currently enrolled in school would enroll less than halftime. Of that population, we assumed that 0.63 percent would have an increase in their Pell Grant award of $630 and 7.5 percent of them would be affected by the policy change. We currently enrolled on a less-than-halftime basis. This is the population who may change their enrollment behavior because of the policy changes. Proposed changes to the Pell Grant program would provide some less-than-halftime students with additional aid. But it would likely increase program costs for the federal government and administrative complexity for postsecondary institutions. We estimate that about 13,000 students who already receive a Pell grant would have an increase in their Pell Grant award of $111. Using the average cost of school when attending less than halftime of $500, this suggests that there would be an additional 35,053 people enrolling. less-than- halftime students are independents. Seftor and Turner estimated price elasticities that fall in the range of –0.34 to -0.14. To estimate the possible behavioral response to a change in Pell Grant policy, we applied a price elasticity in the middle to the less than halftime Pell award amounts estimated in this study. We assumed that changes to the Pell Grant cost of attendance methodology, if adopted, would be applied to the cost of Attendance for both dependent and independent students. Adults may find it easier to plan and manage their schedules over 5 to 7 weeks than they do over longer time periods, such as a traditional 10 or 15- week semester. At one 4-year school, only 10 percent of the undergraduate courses were offered during evening hours. At another institution, administrators noted that 3,000 course sections were offered each semester, but only 10 were available to adults in a shorter 5-7 week format, owing to reluctance of faculty to teach them. cooking classes—to apprenticeship and advanced degree programs. Much of this learning takes place outside of formal credential programs that confer a certificate or degree. Most often in the workplace, where employers offer classes for job-specific skills, or in the many courses offered by postsecondary institutions that are not part of a formal credential program. The classes are often offered by employers or by institutions that aren't part of the formal credential or degree program, such as the University of California, Los Angeles. Routines of adult life compete with class attendance and the completion of course assignments. Faced with this, many adults find it difficult to be a fulltime student, administrators say. The routines of adults life—from caring for sick children to meeting unexpected job demands compete with class attendance, according to these administrators. They say it's difficult to meet family responsibilities and work obligations, left many adults with too little time to being a full-time student. It's also difficult to complete course assignments, they say, adding that many students find it hard to do both. a college setting. One administrator noted that some adult students at her institution experienced stress-related illnesses after they had begun their coursework and needed to leave mid-semester. National data indicate that adults enrolled on a less than halftime basis are more likely to be encountering academic difficulties than other adult students. Some adult students have been diagnosed with depression and anxiety as a result of the stress of attending a college, according to a study by the University of California, Los Angeles. The study was published in the Journal of the American Medical Association. in alternative times and formats. Administrators at one community college pointed to a lack of flexibility in employer work schedules. Adult students often withdraw from class when their employer changes their work schedule, preventing them from attending class. School administrators explained that some adults might not be ready to go to class at a certain time of the day or week. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. School administrators say many adult students struggle to balance work and family life. This closely reflects the findings of studies that examine postsecondary enrollment among adults, they say. School administrators explained that the balancing act required of many adultStudents, in which they attempt to balance school requirements with the competing demands of work andfamily, is called a "balancing act" The balancing act is called "a balancing act" and is called the "Balancing Act" by the American Academy of Music and the American Council on Education. we analyzed focus group findings examining the barriers to enrollment and persistence faced by low-income adults. We interviewed officials at the Department of Education, researchers, and representatives of higher education organizations, such as the American Association of Community Colleges and the National Association of Student Financial Administrators; and we interviewed focus group members. We also interviewed students, parents, and college administrators for the study. The study was published in the journal American Journal of Higher Education. For more, go to: http://www.acj.org/2013/01/29/the-study-of-low-income-adults-in-higher-education. scheduling problems, are not contained in these datasets. Consequently, we augmented national datasets with information collected from postsecondary institutions. We interviewed school administrators from 19 post secondary institutions, including public and private schools and 2-year and 4-year institutions. These institutions were located in four states—California, Maryland, Ohio, and Virginia—in which the study was conducted. The study was published in the online edition of the Journal of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, published by Oxford University Press. Millions of adults participate in organized learning in the United States. In 1999, an estimated 90 million persons 16 and older reported that they had participated in some sort of formal learning activity. Personal development courses, such as family genealogy, can be part of the learning experience in the U.S., says the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) The NIST estimates that more than 90 million Americans are involved in some kind of learning activity each year. The NSP says that the majority of adults take part in a variety of learning activities, including personal development courses. collected at the individual student level, and cannot be aggregated into families or linked to tax filing status. Therefore, our analysis treated individual students as if they were credit claimants and recipients. To assess the reliability of the NPSAS and BPS sample data, we reviewed existing information about the sample, and reviewed existing data about the student population in the U.S. to assess the sample's reliability. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. including the documentation produced by NCES, and performed electronic testing of the required data elements to detect obvious problems in accuracy and completeness. We determined that the NPSAS and BPS data were sufficiently reliable for this report. Because both surveys are samples of a larger student population, there is some doubt about the reliability of the data. We are happy to clarify that the data are reliable and that they are representative of a large number of students in the U.S., not just a small minority. financial support they received, we analyzed national data and visited selected postsecondary institutions. We computed estimates of the Lifetime Learning credits received by less-than-halftime adult students using data from NPSAS. We analyzed two datasets created by the National Center for Education Statistics: the 1999-2000 National Postsecondary Student Aid Study (NPSAS) and the 2001 Beginning Postsecondary Students Study (BPS) Both datasets contained a nationally representative sample of students enrolled in federal student aid programs and provided information on financial assistance. to complete only a few courses, finding this sufficient to acquire the skills that help them gain employment, obtain a promotion, or find personal satisfaction. Data from Education’s 1995-1996 Beginning Postsecondary Students (BPS) study, which tracked the academic progress and degree completion of students over a 6-year period from 1995- 1996. The study was based on data from the U.S. Department of Education's National Center for Advising and Counseling on Postsecondary Education. sampling error associated with them. Sampling errors are often represented as a 95-percent confidence interval. An interval that 95 times out of 100 will contain the true population value. The upper and lower bounds of the 95- percent confidence intervals for each estimate are presented in the tables in appendix II. For more information, or to get a copy of the book, visit the publisher's website or go to http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2013/01/26/how-to-make-the-world-more-fascinating-and-better-than-you-think-it-is-by-sampling-errors.html. useful the concerns raised by postsecondary institutions. In addition, Education noted that the report would complement a recent report of its own and that it would assist Education in achieving one of its departmental strategic goals. Education also provided technical comments, which we incorporated where appropriate. Education’s written comments appear in the full report, which is available on the Department of Education's Web site at: http://www.eia.org/news/press-releases/2013/01/07/education-reports-on-postsecondary-institutions-concerns-and-benefits.html. in appendix IV. As agreed with your offices, unless you publicly announce its contents earlier, we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days from its date. At that time we will send copies to the Secretary of Education and other interested parties. We will also make copies of the report to be made available to the public at a later date. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. available to others on request. In addition, the report will be available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staff have any questions or wish to discuss this material further, please call me at (202) 512-8403, or Jeff Appel at (Washington, D.C.) at (800) 856-9915. For confidential support on suicide matters call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. Mermin, John Mingus, Susan Conlon, and Corrina Nicolaou. Mermin, Mingus and Conlon are on the board of directors of the National Endowment for the Arts. Nicolaou is on the Board of Directors of the American Museum of Natural History in New York City. They are also on the boards of the Museum of Modern Art in Washington, D.C. and the National Museum of Nature and Science in Los Angeles. They also serve as the board's vice presidents and chairs of the Council of Economic Advisers. of assistance they received in 1999-2000. Very few less-than-halftime adult students received WIA assistance because the WIA program focuses on employment-related assistance or skills training. The number of adult students enrolled with assistance from WIA was lower than the number enrolled with help under the previous federal workforce policy, the Job Job Policy. The WIA generally does not support extended training of adult student pursuing a postsecondary credential. The program is not funded by the federal government, but by state and local governments. credits were initially phased out at $80,000 adjusted gross income. Federal programs authorized by WIA and PRWORA may also provide some adults with assistance in meeting the costs of postsecondary education. Under WIA, adults and dislocated workers may be eligible to receive job training. Under PR WORA, some adults may also be eligible for job training under the Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act of 2009. The program is funded by the U.S. Department of Labor. after it is determined that they are unlikely to get a job leading to self-sufficiency without such training. WIA funds may be used for postsecondary training only for expenses remaining after the receipt of Pell Grant and other sources of assistance. The time and dollar limits established by local workforce investment boards may make it difficult for adult students to use WIA Funds for the extended training that may be required for the completion of a postsecondary vocational credential, even for those who are enrolled on a fulltime.  block grants are made to states, which may use these funds to assist TANF recipients in meeting costs associated with vocational training or education. WIA funds may be used to meet training expenses, including postsecondary education costs. States may establish limits on the amount of time or the Amount of WIA Funds can be used for training expenses. Under PRWORA, block grants can be given to states to help pay for vocational training and education costs, such as post-secondary education. Under WIA, states can also use block grants to help meet training costs. assistance from either federal WIA or TANF sources. An estimated 70 percent of less-than-halftime adults received assistance from federal, state, or other sources with their postsecondary lower-income counterparts. We estimate that less than 1 percent of all less- Than-Halftime adult students received either WIA. or T ANF assistance with the cost of postsecondary education in 1999-2000. The population of less than-halinton adult students that received WIA funds for vocational training was too small to reliably estimate the average amount. less-than-halftime adult students received TANF assistance in 1999-2000. NPSAS collected no data on the extent to which TANf funds assisted these students in meeting costs associated with their training or education. School officials at the institutions we visited were generally unaware of the extent of the assistance they received from the federal government. The study was conducted by the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NPSAS) in conjunction with the University of California, Los Angeles. One school created a program to enable TANF recipients to attend school fulltime. In Maryland, the Baltimore City Community College and city and state officials established the School Counts Program, through which selected TanF recipients who enroll at the community college are provided with advising. The program is called "School Counts" and is available at the school's campus in Baltimore, Maryland, and at the University of Maryland, College Park in College Park, Maryland. For more information, go to schoolcounts.org. The HOPE tax credit is limited to students who are enrolled halftime or more in a degree or certificate program. The Lifetime Learning tax credit may be used by tax filers who enroll for any number of credits. Tax filers could use 20 percent of the first $5,000 in qualified educational expenses to compute the Lifetime Learning credit for a maximum credit of $1,000. Both credits are nonrefundable: if the filer has no tax liability, they cannot receive the credit. and for any course that aids in learning new or improving existing job skills, including those that are not part of a degree or certificate program. Tax filers may use the credit for as many years as they are enrolled, without regard to degree progress or completion. tax filers can also use the tax credit for up to three years after completing a course or training program, depending on the course's length and level of instruction. Taxfilers can use the credits to pay for tuition, fees, books and other expenses. received assistance in 1999-2000, the average amount was $462, or approximately 44 percent of their school costs. While lower-income adult students received about two-thirds of their assistance (66 percent) from federal, state, institutional, and other sources. The average Lifetime Learning tax credit ($74) was significantly smaller than the average Pell Grant therefore, ineligible to receive a Lifetime LearningTax credit. As a result, an estimated 29 percent of those below 150 percent of the federal poverty guideline received a Lifetime learning tax credit. use all qualified tuition and fees—minus any tax-free educational assistance received—to compute the credits. In 1999-2000, all of the first $1,000 and half of the next $ 1,000 of qualified education expenses per student could be used to compute the HOPE credit, for a maximum credit of $2,000. In 2000-2001, each student could get a credit of up to $3,000 for a total of $6,000 in credits. used in ways that benefit both students and the larger public, rather than purely recreational or leisure activities. Postsecondary institutions must also meet eligibility requirements to participate in Title IV programs, including legal authorization by the state in which they offer postsecondary education. Requiring that students enroll in—and make progress toward—a postsecondary credential ensures that the federal investment inTitle IV programs is used to support learning that is broadly beneficial to the public. Some adults who begin post secondary education on a low-income are more likely to succeed. credential program, such as a continuing education class. In the 1999-2000 academic year, an estimated 7.1 million adults were enrolled of a postsecondary credential. The Higher Education Act’s provisions concerning institutional eligibility help to ensure billions of dollars in federal student assistance is available only to those institutions that provide students with quality education or training worth the time, energy, and money that is spent. It is important for millions of adults who seek personal growth, or advancement in their working lives. to receive an award, and it would increase the size of the award. This policy change may cause people to change their postsecondary enrollment behavior. Some people who are not enrolled in postsecondary education may choose not to go to college at the start of the school year. It would be easier to get an award for those who are already qualified to receive an awards under current law. It could be easier for people to get awards if they already have a high school diploma or GED. It is possible that people who don't go to school at the beginning of the year could get awards. adults, and a range of funding sources that support participation in them. Some sources of funding available to adult learners, particularly work-related assistance provided by employers or the Lifetime Learning tax credit. The potential costs—to the federal government, institutions, and students—of proposed changes to the Pell Grant and Stafford Loan programs, particularly the latter, should be considered, the authors say. Both employers support shorter-term and non-credential adult learning. Tax incentives for employer-provided educational assistance can better assist these learners than can Title IV programs. assistance to adults who are not currently receiving Pell Grants. In written comments, Education stated that it appreciated our thorough review and examination of the financial, and other, impediments that are often unique to adult learners as they pursue postsecondary education and training opportunities and found the report to be thorough and thorough. The report also found that it found that the report's findings were consistent with other studies that have looked at the same issues in other areas of higher education. The full report is available on the Education Department's website. such as culinary or beauty schools, or a combination of different types of institutions. A range of public and private funding sources is available to adults to assist them in meeting the costs sometimes associated with formal learning. Employer-provided educational assistance, federal student aid programs authorized under Title IV are among the sources of funding for adults who want to go to college or graduate from high school. The cost of attending a college or university in the U.S. can be as high as $30,000 per year. Employers may pay postsecondary educational expenses directly, or indirectly through employee reimbursement, and they are encouraged to do so by the federal tax code. Students were not obligated to enroll in degree or certificate programs, or to complete their studies. Assistance was also available to students through two federal higher education tax credits, the HOPE and HOPE tax credits. The tax code provides favorable tax treatment for employers to meet a number of conditions to obtain this educational assistance, such as a minimum length of service. In 1999-2000, employers provided $1.28 billion in assistance to adult students enrolled in undergraduate postsecondary education. Most often to those workers who were most likely to increase company productivity or profitability as a result of their education, such as high-skill, high-demand workers and managers. These benefits were usually required by employers.these benefits. In 1999- 2000, employers.provided $1,000 to each adult student enrolled in a college or university, and $500 to each student who completed a bachelor's degree. Many adult students receive some financial support towards postsecondary costs. Most students pay the majority of school costs from their own resources. Adult students may find it difficult to economize on housing costs by searching for cheaper housing. Many administrators identified these as important, but secondary, reasons for why they chose to homeschool their adult children instead of sending them to college. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. In the 1999-2000 academic year, adult students received about $3.3 billion in grant assistance and $8.5 billion in loan assistance from programs authorized under Title IV of the Higher Education Act. To receive federal financial assistance, students must meet certain criteria. These criteria include the use of federal WIA and TANF funds, higher education tax credits, and federal grant assistance. For more information, go to www.highereducation.gov or call the National Center for Higher Education on-line at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.higher education.org/. of considerations other than financial need. About $1 billion was available to the nation’s veterans and eligible service members through the Montgomery GI Bill. Financial assistance was available for those who needed it more than others. The largest source of federal assistance was Montgomery GIBill assistance. The most common source was Title IV aid, but there were other sources of federal aid, too, such as Pell Grants and other grants for undergrads to help pay for their education. The federal government also provided financial assistance for those in need, including Pell Grants, other grants and loans. aid, students must meet several eligibility requirements, including being enrolled in a degree or certificate program, and maintaining satisfactory academic progress. Institutions are required to establish qualitative and quantitative criteria of satisfactory progress, and to monitor student progress. Taken together, these requirements help to ensure that Title IV funds are and limiting regular admission to individuals with a high school diploma or its recognized equivalent. Programs authorized under Title IV include Pell Grants for low-income students and Stafford Loans. Stafford loans may be either subsidized or subsidized. Students who apply for Title IV aid must do so using the Free Application for Federal Student Aid (FAFSA) Information from the FAFSA is used and employees may benefit as skills, productivity, and earnings increase. The federal student assistance programs authorized under Title IV of the Higher Education Act provide assistance for adult learning that takes place in eligible postsecondary institutions. The programs are intended to result in the completion of the higher education degree or degree in a chosen field. The program is administered by participating higher education institutions, commonly known as campus-based aid. The federal government pays the interest cost of the loan for the time a student is enrolled in school. If the loan is unsubsidized, the borrower is responsible for paying interest during the life of the Loan. Title IV also authorizes programs funded by the federal government, such as Pell Grants, to help students pay for college. The federal government also pays interest on student loans if they are subsidized or unsubsidized. The interest is paid during the loan's life, but not after it is repaid. their institution's cohort default rate. Students who do not complete a certificate or degree, research indicates, are especially likely to default on their loans. In light of the low rates of completion among less-than-halftime students, they reasoned, this population might be at particular risk of defaulting on Stafford loans. The study was published in the journal American Journal of Banking and Finance, which is published by the London School of Economics and the London Graduate School of Music, among other institutions. and unsubsidized loans for all students in the sample who were less-than-halftime students seeking a certificate or undergraduate degree would receive if the law were changed to allow less than halftime students to receive these loans. The total loan volumes summed and weighted over all students by FFELP/FDLP, school type, and school type were compared to the total loan volume for each school type. The loan volumes were then combined to get the total student loan volume, which was then weighted. if they enroll for fewer than six credits. However, if students were permitted to defer repayment while enrolled for one to five credits, some might choose to enroll for a few credits each term as a way to delay repayment. There are a variety of formal learning opportunities open to students at the University of California, Los Angeles. There is also an online course for students who want to learn more about the university's history and anthropology program. The online course is free and open to the public. It is based on the California State University, San Bernardino, and offers a range of courses. expansion in the number of students participating in the Stafford loan programs, increasing the administrative burden faced by campus financial aid offices. At some postsecondary institutions, policies on satisfactory academic progress may need to be revised in response to changing Stafford eligibility. Administrators also noted potential disadvantages to less-than-halftime body. We met with a range of school administrators at these institutions, including financial aid officers, student affairs officers, directors of institutional research, and other administrative officers. We discussed with them the implications of changing the Pell Grant and Stafford Loan Programs. Current law does not permit less-than-halftime students to participate in the Stafford loan programs. Administrators of postsecondary institutions in the four states expressed concern about potential negative consequences. Permitting borrowing could result in some institutions losing Title IV eligibility, they said. They expressed concern that Stafford borrowing by lower-income adults enrolled less than halftime might burden these students with unmanageable debt. the potential benefits of expanding eligibility to include less- than- halftime students may outweigh their potential benefits, the authors say. contacts and staff acknowledgments are listed in appendix V. We were asked to determine: (1) the extent to which adults enroll less than halftime, the characteristics and factors associated with less-than- halftime enrollment, and the rates of completion among these students; and (2) the amount of time that adult students enrolled less. We found that adults enrolled less, and that they completed less of their course work than they did in the previous year. We also found that students who enrolled less were less likely to complete their coursework. administrators of two institutions of higher education not included in our four sample states: the City University of New York and Kaplan College. We also reviewed studies and surveys of employer- provided educational assistance. To determine the extent of less-than-halftime enrollment among adult students, we looked at the characteristics, completion rates, and graduation rates of adult students in four states. We found that the characteristics and completion rates for adult students were similar to those for all other students in the four states in the study. collected institutional data on spells on less than halftime enrollment among students graduating from 10 of the 19 we visited. We solicited information from each institutional research officer about the reliability of these data and reviewed the data for obvious problems of accuracy and completeness. Because these are not samples, we are not able to provide a sample of the students involved in the spells. We are happy to share the data with you. For more information on the spells, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/29/science/magic-spells-and-sorcerers/index.html. National datasets provide valuable but limited information. For example, NPSAS is a cross-sectional rather than longitudinal study. Some student characteristics or factors that may be associated with less-than-halftime enrollment, such as course characteristics, may not be captured by national datasets. The data cannot be used to identify the duration for which students enrolled on a less- Than-Halftime basis. For more information, go to www.npsas.org or go to http://www.nPSAS.org/enrollment. to complete a degree or certificate, but few do. Compared with adult students enrolled halftime or more, the typical less-than-halftime adult student was older, more likely to be working and married, and had a higher household income. More often enrolled in 2-year postsecondary institutions, and less often pursued a baccalaureate degree. (See table 3.) A substantially larger proportion of adult students were enrolled fulltime (12 or more credits) than were enrolled half- or three-quarters time (6-11 credits) Administrators at public 2-year postsecondary institutions expressed the potential disadvantages associated with expanding eligibility. Students who are already enrolled less than halftime in postsecondary education are unlikely to change their enrollment in response to the policy change. As Seftor and Turner note, there is no consensus within the economic literature on the effect of expanding eligibility to less-than-halftime students on students' enrollment in college and university. The authors conclude that expanding eligibility might increase to enroll less than Halftime students in the future. Less- than-halftime enrollment appears to be an ineffective long-term strategy for the majority of less-than- halftime adult students who intend to complete a degree. Some working students may be unable to enroll on a halftime or fulltime basis due to the inflexibility of course and program options made available by postsecondary institutions. If less than halftime adults who do not complete a credential nonetheless benefit from completing a few postsecondary courses, then federal policy tools designed to help them should be considered. “juggling act” some adult students may have to pursue postsecondary education on a less-than-halftime basis. College administrators identified several other significant reasons why adult students might enroll less than halftime. These include the difficulty meeting the direct costs of school, scheduling conflicts, and students’ limited readiness for academically or socially. Adult students often need to refresh or develop college-level skills, they noted, particularly in mathematics. They may also lack confidence in themselves or their abilities, or feel out of place in college. In 1999-2000, one-third, about 2.3 million, of adult undergraduate students were enrolled students. Most adults who intended to complete a degree and enrolled on a less-than-halftime basis during their first year of postsecondary education left school without completing a degree or certificate. We estimate that about two-thirds (66 percent) of adults who began in 1995-1996 did not complete a certificate or degree by 2001-2002, and were no longer enrolled in school. provided by postsecondary institutions included in our review show that few adults who succeeded in completing a certificate or degree consistently enrolled on a less-than- halftime basis. Some adults who enroll in credit-bearing courses may not intend to complete a degree or certificate; rather, they may choose to not complete the course at all. We are happy to clarify that this is not the case for all adults who choose to enroll in college or university courses, and that we are happy for those who choose not to do so. Many adult students entering certificate programs needed 1 year of remedial coursework before beginning their program. Less than 1 percent of 2-year postsecondary programs require such remedial work on a regular basis, according to one institution. The 1-year time limit established by the local workforce investment board is for students to complete their coursework within the 1- year time limit, the institution said. The U.S. Department of Education has no plans to change the time limit on certificate programs.  adult students comprise about 40 percent of all undergraduate students. About three- quarters of these adult undergraduates were between the ages of 24 to 40, while about one-quarter were 41 or older. Compared with undergraduate students under the age of 24, adult students enrolled in colleges and universities make up about 40 per cent of all undergraduates in the U.S., according to a new study by the University of California, Los Angeles. The study was published in the journal of the American College and University Studies. 1999-2000 were more likely to be working full time (35 or more hours per week), to be married, to have dependents, and to lack a conventional high school diploma. (See table 1.) While the majority of undergraduates under the age of 24 were enrolled in baccalaureate programs, adult undergraduate students were not enrolled in any programs at all in 1999-2000. In 2000-2001, more than half of all undergraduates were working full-time or part-time. Of the 1,830 baccalaureate graduates who completed their degrees in 2001- 2002 at four 4-year institutions we visited, slightly more than one-half never enrolled on a less-than-halftime basis. Another 36 percent did so for only one or two terms. No graduates relied exclusively upon less- Than-Halftime enrollment to complete their degree. (See fig. 3.) Of the 1.927 students who completed an associate degree in 2001/2002 at four 2-year. institutions we visiting and who first enrolled at age 24 or older, almost one- half never enrolled. Most adult students (55 percent) were enrolled at 2-year public institutions. Only 3 percent consistently enrolled on a less-than- halftime basis. In 1999-2000, about 7 in 10 of the nation’s colleges and universities were certificate or associate programs. The pattern of enrollment was similar for the 348 students who completed a certificate program at three of the two-year institutions we visited. The remaining adult students were enrolling at proprietary schools, for one or two terms. (See fig. 4.)