Hardrock mining operators may have financial assurances greater than required for a number of reasons. There are about 2.4 times as many notice-level operations as there are operations that cause operations. Over one-third of the number of all hardrock operations and about 84 percent of the value of all operations are in hardrock mines, according to the Bond Review Report. A greater percentage of plan-level Operations had inadequate financial assurances than did notice- level operations. The report was published by Bond Review, an independent, non-profit organization. financial assurances are for hardrock mining operations located in Nevada. See appendix IV for further details on the number of plan- and notice-level operations in each state. Mr. Chairman, this concludes my prepared statement. I would be happy to respond to any questions that you or Members of the Committee may have about this matter. Thank you for your interest in this matter and I look forward to hearing from you in the coming days and weeks. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from. notice- and plan-level operations, by state (table 9); and BLM’s and our analyses of the differences between financial assurance requirements and actual value of financial assurances in place for notice-and-plan-level ops by state. BLM: Financial assurance requirements are based on the amount of money owed to the federal government by the U.S. Treasury. The amount of the money owed by the Treasury is based on how much the government owes to the Treasury, and the amount that the Treasury owes the Treasury. or stabilizing buildings and other structures to reduce safety risks; removing mining roads to prevent damage from future traffic; and establishing self- sustaining vegetation. One of the agencies’ key responsibilities is to ensure that adequate financial assurances, based on sound reclamation plans and cost estimates, are in place to guarantee the safety of the land and the environment. The agency is responsible for ensuring that the land is reclamation-ready by the end of the year. It is also responsible for maintaining the land’s natural resources. assurances in place with the total estimated reclamation costs. This calculation approach has the effect of offsetting the shortfalls in some operations with the financial assurances of other operations. However, financial assurances that are greater than the amount required for an operation cannot be transferred to an operation with the same financial assurances. The financial assurances in place can only be transferred if they are in excess of the amount needed for the operation to be carried out. For more information, visit the coalition's reclamation-reclamation website. 52 of the 1,463 hardrock mining operations had inadequate financial assurances. The financial assurances for these 52 operations should be more accurately reported as about $61 million less than needed to fully cover estimated reclamation costs. The report also indicates that about $28 million less was needed to cover estimatedReclamation costs for the operations. The operations are located on BLM lands in 11 western states, including California, Nevada, New Mexico, Oregon, Utah, Washington and Wyoming. The total number of mining operations on the BLM lands is 1,462. reclamation costs. If a mining operator fails to complete required reclamation, BLM or the Forest Service can take steps to obtain funds from the financial assurance provider to complete the reclamation. BLM requires financial assurances for both notice-level hardrock mining operations. If the proposed hardrock operation is likely to cause a significant disturbance, the Forest service requires financial assurance. Both agencies allow several types of financial assurances to guarantee estimated reclamation costs for hardrock operations on their lands. According to regulations and agency officials, BLM and Forest Service officials can obtain financial assurances. Reclamation involves regrading and reshaping the disturbed land to conform with adjacent land forms and to minimize erosion. For hardrock operations on Forest Service lands, agency regulations require reclamation of sites after operations cease, but do not require financial assurances for the reclamation. However, according to the U.S. Forest Service, reclamation must be completed within three years of the end of a hardrock mining operation. Reclamation can vary by location, but generally involves such activities as removing mining operations over 5 acres of land. the Forest Service allow cash, letters of credit, certificates of deposit or savings accounts, and negotiable U.S. securities and bonds in a trust account. BLM also allows surety bonds, state bond pools, trust funds, and property. Neither agency centrally tracks all the types of financial assurances in place for hardrock. The Forest Service allows cash, Letters of Credit, Certificate of Deposit or Savings Accounts, and Negotiable securities and Bonds in a Trust Account. The BLM also allow surety Bonds, State Bond pools, Trust Funds, and Property. operations on its lands. BLM’s LR2000 tracks most of the types, and BLM is updating the database to include more types of financial assurances. Data are incomplete for the types of assurances currently in the system. The Forest Service does not have readily available information on the type of assurances it provides to the federal government on behalf of the Forest Service. The U.S. Forest Service has no publicly available data on the types it offers to federal government agencies on its behalf on its land. role in cleaning up these abandoned mining sites and ensuring that currently operating sites are reclaimed after operations have ceased. In 1997, BLM and the Forest Service each launched a national Abandoned Mine Lands Program to remedy the physical and environmental hazards at thousands of abandoned hardrock mining sites. BLM manages about 258 million acres in 12 western states, including Alaska. The Forest Service manages about 193 million acres across the nation. The U.S. government manages more than 450 million acres of public lands in their care. mine sites on its lands. That said, we still have concerns about the accuracy of the Forest Service’s recent estimate because it includes a large number of sites on lands with “undetermined” ownership, and therefore these sites may not all be on Forest Service lands. BLM has also acknowledged that it has acknowledged that there are some sites that it does not know where to find or what to do with. We are working to find out what this means for us and the public. methods to identify sites in the early 1980s. The extent and quality of these efforts varied greatly. Only about 20 percent of BLM land has been surveyed in Arizona. The agency focuses more on identifying sites closer to human than those closer to the ground, officials said. The federal government estimates that only about 20 per cent of the U.S. land in Arizona is currently surveyed for human habitation. It estimates that the majority of the land in the state is not accessible to the public. of the difference between financial assurances in place and required for those operations where financial assurances are inadequate and have taken steps to modify LR2000. BLM officials said that financial assurances may appear inadequate in the Bond Review Report when expansions or other changes in the operation have occurred. We conducted a limited reliability assessment of the bond report data. Although the data are of undetermined reliability, our limited assessment indicates that they are not of high reliability. The data were taken from the Legacy Rehost System 2000 (LR2000) database. requiring an increase in the amount of the financial assurance; BLM’s estimate of reclamation costs has increased and there is a delay between when BLM enters the new estimate into LR2000 and when the operator provides the additional bond amount; and BLM has delayed updating its case records in LR2000. There is also a delay in getting the operator to provide an estimate of the cost of the reclamation project to the BLM for the first time in more than a decade. There are no immediate plans to change the status of the project. BLM calculated its shortfall by comparing the total value of financial inadequate financial assurances. In contrast, we totaled the difference between the financial assurance in place for an operation and the financial assurances needed for that operation to determine the actual shortfall for each of the 52 operations for which BLM had determined that financial assurances were inadequate. The $33 million difference between our estimated shortfall of nearly $61 million and BLM’s estimated shortfall was due to the difference in the two methods of calculating the shortfall, BLM says. determining the adequacy of financial assurances is not useful because it does not clearly lay out the extent to which financial assurances are inadequate. For example, in California, BLM reports that, statewide, the financial assurances in place are $1.5 million greater than required, suggesting reclamation costs are being more than fully covered. However, according to our analysis of only those California operations with inadequate financial assurances, they are nearly $440,000 less than needed to fully cover reclamations costs. appendix provides information from BLM’s November 2007 Bond Review Report. It includes information on the number of financial assurances in place for hardrock operations on BLM lands in 11 western states. It also includes the value of these financial assurances by state (table 8) The report also details the number. of inadequate financial assurances for. Hardrock operations in the U.S. (table 7); and the. number of inadequate assurances for Hardrock Operations in the United States (table. 8). surface disturbance on 5 acres or less. There are plan-level operations on BLM land that disturb more than 5 acres. About 99 percent of the value of financial assurances is for plan- level operations, while 1 percent is for notice-level. The U.S. has more than 2 million acres of BLM land. It has 1,033 notice- Level operations and 430 plan-Level operations, according to the agency's most recent annual report. The agency has a budget of $1.2 billion for the year. Problems with BLM and the Forest Service’s estimate of 100,000 abandoned hardrock mines on their lands because the agencies included non-hardrock mines and mines that may not be on their land. Using our consistent definition, 12 western states and Alaska estimated a total of at least 161,000 Abandoned Hardrock Mine Agencies and State-developed…inventories presented may possess inconsistencies and are not intended for exact quantitative comparisons. In September 2007, the agencies reported that there were an estimated its estimate of abandonedhardrock mine sites on its lands. In addition, BLM officials said that the agency's field offices used a variety of field offices. that are not on Forest Service land. In November 2007, the Forest Service provided a revised estimate of the number of abandoned hardrock mine sites on its lands, excluding coal or other non-hardrock sites. According to this estimate, theForest Service may have about 29,000 abandoned hard rock sites. That figure is based on an estimate that the hardrock site population is about 30,000. The Forest Service estimates that about 1,000 hardrock sites are abandoned each year. The U.S. Forest Service says it has about 1.5 million hardrock mines on its land. habitation and recreational areas than on identifying more remote sites, such as in the desert. To estimate abandoned hardrock mining sites in the 12 western states and Alaska, we developed a definitions and methods for estimating abandoned sites. The definition we ultimately chose was clear and incorporated enough flexibility for all major hardrockmining states to reasonably comply with our request, despite differences in how the states do it. Table 2 shows the Forest Service’s and BLM's most recent available estimates of abandoned mine sites on their lands. We identified six studies conducted in the past 10 years that estimated the number of abandoned hardrock mine sites in the 12 western states and Alaska. We found sites in their states on state, private, or federal lands. At these sites, on the basis of state data, we estimated that at least 332,000 features may pose physical safety hazards, such as open shafts or unstable or decayed mine structures. At least 33,000 sites have degraded the environment, by, for example, contaminating surface water and groundwater or leaving arsenic- contaminated tailings piles. readily available records or data sources, such as published or unpublished geological reports, mining claim maps, and the Mineral Availability System/Mineral Industry Locator System (MAS/MILS), which states indicated were typically incomplete. Several of those states that relied primarily on literature used the literature only as a starting point, and then used it as a beginning point. Some states that used literature as a start point used it only as an initial starting point and then went on to use other data sources. support a past operation, including prospecting, exploration, uncovering, drilling, discovery, mine development, excavation, extraction, or processing of mineral deposits. Can range from an isolated prospect shaft and its associated waste rock pile and adjacent prospect pits, to a complex site with multiple entries, shafts, and pits. Can be a single shaft or a complex of multiple shafts and pits, or a shaft with multiple entrances and shafts. can be a shaft and pit or a pit and pit with multiple entry and entry points. pit, and a tailings pile could be listed as one site or four sites, depending on the definitions and methodologies used. See appendix III for more information on estimates from these studies. In addition, some regional or state estimates included coal and other non-hardrock mineral sites because it was considered a waste site. The U.S. Geological Survey estimates the number of tailings piles could be as high as 1,000,000 by the end of the 20th century. The current estimate is about 1,100,000. open pits, mill buildings, waste rock piles, a tailings pond, and associated environmental problems; and includes only hardrock (also known as locatable), non-coal sites. Features that pose a significant hazard to public health and safety include features, such as mine openings, structures, and highwalls; and impoundments that poses a threat. Includes only hard rock, non- coal sites, and does not include open pits, mills buildings, or waste rock pile sites. (1) not important to distinguish between the type of minerals mined or (2) difficult to determine what mineral had been mined. In 2004, EPA commented on this problem, noting, “it is important to keep in mind that a universally applied definition of an does not exist at present…therefore, the various definitions of ‘an’ may not be universally applied.’’ ‘An’ can be used to refer to a variety of different minerals. were up to six times as many. Some states were less readily able to provide the data directly from their systems without manipulation or estimation. For example, New Mexico estimated the number of abandoned as needed through telephone interviews to clarify and confirm problematic responses. Our definitional and editing processes provided us with reasonable assurance that the data were as clean and consistent as possible. Using these final edited data, we calculated the estimated number of Abandoned Mine Sites in the U.S. and their number of features. abandoned sites and hazardous features vary substantially by state. Some states, such as Colorado and Wyoming, indicated they had done extensive and rigorous fieldwork to identify sites and were reasonably confident that their estimates were accurate. Other states, however, relied less on rigorous field work, and more on unverified, unverified estimates. The U.S. Geological Survey has released a new report on abandoned and hazardous sites in the United States. The report is titled Abandoned Sites and Hazardous Features: A State-by-State Perspective. example, we found that, within the same study, some states define an abandoned mine site as a mine opening or feature. We then provided states with an edit-controlled data collection instrument that requested data specifically tailored to our definitions and methods. Our definition of abandoned hardrock mine sites includes all associated facilities, structures, improvements, and disturbances at a distinct location associated with activities to support a past operation, including prospecting, exploration, uncovering, drilling, discovery, mine development and excavation. standard definition for these mine sites. In developing this definition, we consulted with mining experts at the National Association of Abandoned Mine Land Programs. We defined to document differences in estimates, definitions, and methodologies. We also consulted experts in mining and abandoned mine land programs at the Interstate Mining Compact Commission; and the Colorado State Department of Natural Resources, Division of Reclamation, Mining and Safety, Office of Active and Inactive Mines. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. mines by fiscal year (table 5) and by state (table 6) Range of estimated abandoned mines previously (2001) (2007) (2004) “openings” No data provided Western Governors’ Association and National Mining Association, Cleaning Up Abandoned Mines: A Western Partnership, 1998. This article includes information from the Mineral Policy Center, Earthworks, and the Western Governors' Association. We are happy to clarify that the mineral policy center and Earthworks are separate entities. mines on the federal lands they manage. According to a September 2007 report by these two agencies, they had inventoried thousands of abandoned sites and, at many of them, had taken actions to clean up hazardous substances and mitigate safety hazards. BLM and the Forest Service are also responsible for overseeing the nation's national parks and wildlife refuges, among other things. The U.S. Forest Service is responsible for the National Park Service, which manages national parks in Alaska, Arizona, New Mexico, Nevada and Utah. The act also requires that the parties statutorily responsible for pollution bear the cost of cleaning up contaminated sites, including abandoned hardrock mining operations. Some contaminated hardrock mine sites have been listed on the list of threats that contaminated waste sites pose to human health and the environment. The act was passed by Congress in 2010. It was signed into law by President Barack Obama on December 11, 2010. The bill is called the Clean Water and Pollution Control Act of 2010 and is part of the federal clean water and pollution control legislation. more recent times, after cleanup became mandatory, many parties responsible for hardrock mining sites have been liquidated through bankruptcy or otherwise dissolved. Under these circumstances, some hard rock mining companies have left it to the taxpayer to clean up the mining site. BLM, the Forest Service, EPA, and OSM play a role in cleaning up hardrock sites after they have been abandoned by mining companies. The U.S. Department of the Interior is responsible for the clean-up of hardrock mine sites. 63 hardrock mining sites were on the National Priorities List in 2004. Another 93 sites had the potential to be seriously contaminated. These sites are expensive to clean up and the cleanup can take many years. In 2004, EPA’s Office of Inspector General in 2004, there were 93 sites that were potential for Superfund status. For more information on Superfund, visit www.superfund.org or call the National Superfund Office at 1-800-621-8255. Historically, the mining of hardrock minerals, such as gold, lead, copper, silver, and uranium, was an economic incentive for exploring and settling the American West. When the ore was depleted, miners often left behind a legacy of abandoned mines, structures, safety hazards, and contaminated land and water. Even in the U.S., the mining legacy can still be seen in the form of abandoned buildings and structures. For more information, visit the American Museum of Natural History's website. BLM, the Forest Service, EPA, and OSM spent at least $2.6 billion to reclaim abandoned hardrock mines on federal, state, private, and Indian lands. EPA has spent the most—$2.2 billion. Although the amount each agency spent annually varied considerably, value of about $18 million to states and Indian tribes through its SMCRA program for hardrock mine cleanups.tribes. See appendix II for more detailed information on agency expenditures by fiscal year. We reviewed agency documents, budget justification reports and reports detailing agencies’ cleanup efforts and programs. We obtained data on total expenditures for cleaning up and reclaiming abandoned hardrock mine sites since 1998. We also requested and ensured that we would receive the data we needed to determine the amount of federal funds spent to clean up abandoned mine sites. We concluded that the number of abandoned hard rock mine sites and associated hazards has declined over the past 20 years. We are happy to share this information with the public. mine sites from the data it maintains on hazardous features, and Nevada estimated the number of abandoned hardrock mine sites. As of November 2007, hardrock mining operators had provided financial assurances valued at approximately $982 million, according to a report by the U.S. Bureau of Mines and Geosciences. The report was based on data from the state of Nevada, which has the largest number of mining districts in the state. The state estimates that there are more than 1,000 abandoned mine sites in Nevada. that management controls were improved for the generation of bond review reports from LR2000. We concluded that the data are appropriate as used and presented, and we did not base any conclusions or recommendations on these data. This appendix provides information on federal expenditures used to clean up abandoned hardrock. It also provides information about federal expenditures for the clean-up of hardrock in the U.S. and abroad. The appendix also includes information on the cost of cleaning up abandonedhardrock in Europe and the Middle East. OSM has provided more than $3 billion to clean up dangerous abandoned mine sites. Its Abandoned Mine Land Program has eliminated safety and environmental hazards on 314,108 acres since 1977. OSM can provide grants to fund the cleanup and reclamation of certain hardrock mining sites either (1) after a state certifies that it has cleaned up its abandoned coal the request, or (2) if the state is unable to provide a certificate of compliance with the request. The agency has eliminated all high-priority coal problems and non-coal problems in 27 states. Median amount spent for the public lands by BLM and the Forest Service was about $5 million and about $21 million, respectively. EPA spent substantially more—a median of about $221 million annually—to clean up mines that are generally on nonfederal lands. OSM provided grants with an annual median According to available data, as of September 30, 2007, BLM had spent the largest share of its funds in Montana—about $18 million. EPA had spent  about $352 million in Idaho; and Wyoming was the largest recipient of OSM grants. about $99 million. Wyoming was eligible for OSM grants after OSM’s acceptance of the state’S certification that it had completed its cleanup of coal mine sites. The Forest Service was unable to provide this information by state. See appendix II for BLM, EPA, and OSM total funding by state and for state-by-state funding. For more information on the OSM grant program, go to: http://www.osm.org/grants/Wyoming. of the financial assurances operators use to guarantee reclamation costs on the Department of the Interior’s Bureau of Land Management (BLM) land. The number of abandoned mine sites with environmental degradation in the 12 western states and Alaska. To answer our third objective—to determine the value and coverage of financial assurances in place to guarantee coverage of reclamation. costs— we requested the BLM Bond. We interviewed officials at the BLM, the U.S. Department of Agriculture's Forest Service and the Environmental Protection Agency. Reclamation and Enforcement (OSM); examined agency documents and data; and reviewed relevant legislation and regulations. To answer our first objective, we interviewed officials involved with the abandoned mine cleanup programs at BLM, the Forest Service, EPA, and OSM. To understand how they tracked and monitored that were compiled from BLM’s Financial Accounting and Reporting System, EPA's Superfund eFacts Database, and Forest Service officials. BLM officials told us that in addition to the expenditure data they provided, the agency receives funding allocations from other sources, such as the Department of Interior. financial assurances in use, but it is developing a database to collect this and other information on hardrock operations by late summer 2008. EPA administers the Superfund program, which was established under the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 to address the nation's Superfund sites. The Forest Service is developing the database, which is expected to be in place by summer 2008, Forest Service officials say. For more information, visit the Forest Service's website at: http://www.forest service.org/superfund. to be added to the list. EPA has statutory authority under the Superfund program to require businesses handling hazardous substances on nonfederal lands to provide financial assurances. OSM’s Abandoned Mine Land Program primarily focuses on abandoned mine sites in the U.S. and around the world. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. For support on suicide matters call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline on 1-800-273-8255. mine sites and the Secretary of the Interior approves the certification, or (2) at the request of a state or Indian tribe to address problems that could endanger life and property, constitute a hazard to the public and safety, or degrade the environment. The secretary of the interior can grant grants to states or tribes for the purpose of certifying mine sites. The Interior Department can also grant grants for the purposes of protecting the environment, such as protecting the water supply or the health and safety of the public. may have. Contact points for our Offices of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of this testimony. For further information about this testimony, please contact Robin M. Nazzaro, Director, Natural Resources and Environment (202) 512-3841 or nazzaror@gao.gov. Key contributors to this testimony were Andrea Nazzar or Andrea M. Ehrlich, both members of the House Natural Resources Committee and the House Energy and Commerce Committee. only the number of sites with environmental degradation, if they reported data for this request at all. Because most states do not maintain environmental degradation data by feature, states could only speculate about this figure, or compute it by estimating an average number of features per site. Because of these limitations with feature-level data, we report only the number  sites with data on environmental degradation in order to ensure more reliable and consistent reporting across the states. As a secondary confirmation that states provided data consistent with this request. We also asked the states to estimate the number of features at these sites that pose physical safety hazards. Using this definition, states reported to us the features that pose significant public health and safety hazards, and the numbers of sites with environmental degradation. While states used our definition to provide data on the estimated number of mine sites and features, these data have two key limitations. First, the methods and sources used to identify and confirm the features. Second, the sources and methods for identifying and confirming these features. to public health and safety and require actions to secure, remedy or reclaim. Sites with environmental degradation include features that lead to environmental degradation, and, consequently, require remediation of air, water, or ground pollution. Rather than reporting, as requested, the number of features leading to environmental degradation, most states reported only the number of features leading to disgraceful features. Most states reported the number of features leading to environmental degradation. estimated the number of features on the basis of experience. For example, while one state estimated that there were about three times the. number of public safety hazards as identified by the literature, another state estimated. there were four times as many, and a third state estimates that there. were three times more hazards than the literature had identified. In the U.S. there are more than 100,000 public safety hazards in the state of New Jersey. The number of hazards in New Jersey is expected to rise as the state grows. in 2008 constant dollars. Because of limited time in preparing this testimony, we were unable to fully assess the reliability of the agencies’ expenditure data. The data are therefore of undetermined reliability. However, we concluded that the data are appropriate as used and presented to meet our objectives because they are appropriate and presented in the way they are used. We are happy to provide you with the data as they are currently used to help you with your research. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. we (1) attribute the data to what agencies report as their expenditures, (2) present rounded data to minimize the perception of precision, and (3) do not base any conclusions or recommendations on the data. To answer our second objective, we summarized selected prior survey efforts by federal agencies and organizations. We did not base our conclusions on any of the data or make any recommendations based on it. We also did not make any conclusions about the effectiveness of the federal government's programs. to the past 10 years (1998 through 2007) because of (1) variability in the program start year across the agencies, (2) inconsistencies in their methods for tracking and reporting the data, and (3) some data recording errors in early years at some agencies. We presented these data to the public for the first time in this article. We are happy to share the data with the public. We hope this information will help the public understand the impact of climate change on the U.S. through 2007; Forest Service’s data, for fiscal years 1996 through 2007; EPA’S data, from fiscal years 1988 through 2007. We performed a limited reliability assessment of the expenditure data and determined that we would limit our year-by-year presentation of expenditure data. For more information, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/29/politics/budget/top-10-budget-spending-data-trends. the definition, our data collection instrument included a section for states to provide a brief description of how the various data points were calculated, and whether the data provided were actual or estimated values. Based on comments in these fields, and basic logic checks on the data, we followed up to ensure that the data was accurate and that it was being used for a legitimate purpose. The data was then used to create the state-by-state map of the U.S. for the first time.