Congress appropriated $38.346 billion for all versions of the MRAP. The full FY2011 DOD budget request of $3.4 billion was authorized by the Ike Skelton National Defense Authorization Act for FY2011 ( P.L. 111-383 ). In the President's FY2012 DOD budget proposal, there was no request for procurement funds for the MR AP program. Citing an operational requirement for 27,344 MRAPS to support CENTCOM operations, DOD requested $3,195 for theMRAP vehicle program for FY2012. budget request. The House Committee on Appropriations recommended fully funding the FY2012 OCO budget request. Many older MRAPs shipped to Afghanistan are reportedly not being used because their size and weight severely limit their effectiveness. If a large number of MRAPS are, in fact, not being use, this could be a problem for the military's ability to reach its goals in the war-torn country. The U.S. government has not confirmed that the MRAP program is in any way in jeopardy. The House and Senate Armed Services Committees recommended fully funding the FY2012 OCO. The recommendations include $.765 billion for survivability and mobility upgrades; and $.03 billion for automotive and ballistic testing. The proposal was approved by both houses of Congress on a vote of 50-0. The Senate version of this article originally stated that the House of Representatives had approved the funding. We are happy to clarify that the Senate voted to approve the funding, and that it was not the House that approved it. Pentagon agreed to loan 300 MRAPs in Afghanistan for one year to 15 allied nations currently fighting in Afghanistan. Approximately 85 MR APs are already out on loan to Poland, Romania, Georgia, and the Czech Republic. All countries that are loaned MRAP's can request an extension on the loan and the borrowing countries are responsible for the costs associated with maintaining these vehicles. If these vehicles are not being used, is there a better use for them elsewhere or are they to be left in country after the eventual departure of U.S. forces? then a fundamental question is, why were they shipped to Afghanistan in the first place? Were these vehicles shipped to. Afghanistan, as some say, for symbolic as opposed to operational reasons and, if. so, what is the total cost for these unused vehicles to be shipped and maintained in. theater? If so, how much does it cost to maintain and maintain these vehicles in Afghanistan? What is the cost of maintaining and maintaining these vehicles? How much is it to maintain them in Afghanistan and beyond? I vehicles, capable of carrying up to 7 personnel and intended for urban operations. Category II vehicles, able to carry up to 11 personnel, intended for a variety of missions such as supporting security, convoy escort, troop or cargo transport, medical, explosive ordnance disposal, or combat engineer operations. I and II vehicles can also be equipped with a cargo hold for up to 12 people. I vehicles can be equipped to carry a cargo of up to 1,000 pounds of cargo. II vehicles have a cargo capacity of 1,500 pounds, which can be used to transport up to 2,500 tonnes of cargo and equipment. coalition partners could not only help to reduce allied casualties but can also help to recoup some of the associated procurement costs of these vehicles. In August 2009 briefings to the House Armed Services Committee Air and Land Forces, and Seapower and Expeditionary Forces Subcommittees, the Government Accountability Office (GAO) said the U.S. could help recoup the costs of the vehicles. The GAO said the cost of the military vehicles could be in the region of $1.5 billion. DOD officials have stated that the casualty rate for MRAPs is 6%, making it "the most survivable vehicle we have in our arsenal" The M-1 Abrams main battle tank was said to have a casualty rate of 15%, and the up-armored HMMWV, a 22% casualty rate. Ashton Carter, Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics, has approved an acquisition objective of 25,700 MRAP vehicles for all services. The MRAP has a reputation for providing superior protection for their crews. MRAPs have proven to be 10 times safer than HMMWVs in protecting soldiers during IED attacks. Pentagon's Joint Program Office for MRAPs also reportedly estimated that as many as 40,000 lives had been saved. 10,000 in Iraq and 30,000  in Afghanistan were reportedly saved by MRAP's, according to the Pentagon's MRAP Program Office. The MRAP program office was set up by former U.S. Dept.of Defense Robert Gates. based on estimates derived from numbers of attacks and troops inside of the vehicles. Some defense experts suggest that the Joint Program Office's estimates seem too high. Secretary Gates also noted the morale value of the MRAP to service members in terms of both soldier survival as well as knowing where they are in the event of an attack. The MRAP has been used by the U.S. military in Afghanistan, Iraq, and other countries since the 1980s. It has also been used in the Middle East in the 1990s and 2000s. Mine-Resistant, Ambush-Protected (MRAP) vehicles are a family of vehicles produced by a variety of domestic and international companies. They generally incorporate a "V"-shaped hull and armor plating designed to provide protection against mines and improvised explosive devices (IEDs) DOD originally intended to procure three types of MRAPs. These included Category 1, Category 2, and Category 3 vehicles. The MRAP family has been used by the U.S. military since the 1980s. The Army and Marines first employed MRAPs in limited numbers in Iraq and Afghanistan in 2003. They were primarily used for route clearance and explosive ordnance disposal (EOD) operations. These route clearance MR APs are Category III vehicles. They are capable of carrying up to 13 personnel and can be armed with machine guns, grenade launchers, mortars and other weapons. They can also be used to clear mines and IEDs, and to transport wounded personnel. The vehicles can be fitted with a range of weapons and equipment. used, as they are considered too large and bulky for tactical missions. As U.S. forces began drawing down in Iraq, the Army and Marines had planned to put the majority of the earlier versions of the MRAPs into prepositioned stocks at various overseas locations. The Marines are reportedly still developing their ground vehicle strategy and have previously suggested that MR APs have deployability limitations under the concept of a sea-based, expeditionary Marine force. In an interview with outgoing Secretary of Defense Chuck Hagel, he said the Marines are still working on their ground vehicles strategy. Of the almost 15,000 Army MRAPs, about 5,750 will be assigned to infantry brigade combat teams, according to a June 2010 Army briefing. About 1,000 MR APs will be used for home station and institutional training, and approximately 1,500 will be placed into logistics and route clearance units. However, with the increase of U.S. forces deploying to Afghanistan and Secretary of Defense requirements to make better use of MRAP's, these plans have been adjusted. Of this total, 8,100 will be the new MRAP-All Terrain Vehicle (M-ATV) designed to better handle the rugged terrain of Afghanistan. DOD officials have indicated that this requirement may increase depending upon the operational needs in Afghanistan. Reports in September 2010 suggested that DOD was actively discussing a new follow-on that the U.S. government would spare no expense in protecting them from IEDs. This new vehicle—designated the MR AP-All-Terrain Vehicle—would be lighter-weight, all-terrain capable. contract for additional M-ATVs over and above the original 8,100 and that new variants might also be developed. According to DOD, as of July 21, 2011, 14,749 MRAPs had been delivered to Afghanistan, including 6,980 M- ATVs. Reports suggest that many of the older model MR APs deployed to Afghanistan are not (M-ATV) and have better off-road mobility, while providing adequate armor protection. Congress might wish to explore the performance characteristics of these modified M-atVs in greater detail with DOD to ensure a proper balance between protection and operational utility is reached. of M-ATVs, resulting in increased U.S. casualties. In response to the enhanced IED threat, two additional layers of Israeli-made armor plates are being installed. New padding and crew harnesses inside the vehicle reportedly will enable the M- ATVs to withstand explosions twice as large as armor and interior improvements. There are concerns that additional armor might have an adverse impact on vehicle mobility, which was the prime consideration for the development of theM-ATV. For more information on MRAPs, go to: http://www.rt.com/news/features/m-atVs-and-m-army-reconciliation. DOD reportedly concluded a $245 million dollar contract with Oshkosh to acquire 5,100 sets of armor. Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology & Logistics Ashton Carter supposedly intends to outfit all of the almost 7,000 M-ATVs in Afghanistan with these armor kits. Their current classified capability. While additional additional armor kits are possible, they are not expected to be as large as the 5,000 that are currently being acquired by the U.S. and NATO forces. noted that "the introduction of MRAP, M-ATV and eventually the JLTV creates a potential risk of unplanned overlap in capabilities," a risk that needs to be managed. Defense officials have also been asked if there is a need for the MRAP/M-ATVs and JL TV programs, as these programs share as many as 250 requirements. Some analysts question the need for three distinct tactical wheeled vehicle programs, particularly in light of anticipated defense budget cuts. look for "the next best thing" in terms of tactical wheeled vehicles instead of committing to the M-ATV and JLTV programs. They could run the risk of significant redundancies and not being able to afford recapitalizing and replacing the HMMWV fleet. The use of larger and more lethal IEDs by the U.S. military could be increased by the use of these vehicles. The U.N. Security Council has called for a review of U.K. military operations in Iraq and Afghanistan.