The first 4,955 trucks produced did not meet the FMTV corrosion protection requirements. The Army later tested truck was corroded in 60 areas. Army officials said that since the Army had specified the material to be used in 20 of the areas, it agreed to pay for necessary changes in these areas to improve FMTV trucks’ corrosion protection. These 2,491 trucks have not been tested for corrosion and are not covered under the agreed upon corrosion warranty. The decision to award a $1.2-billion FMTV contract to a contractor. cab has the potential to protect against corrosion beyond the contract requirement, the Army agreed to share the cost of the cabs. The Army and the contractor modified the FMTV contract to specify the use of galvanized steel for FMTV cabs and of other materials to correct the corrosion problems. improving corrosion protection on tactical vehicles is an ongoing, high priority, effort, the DOD says. The contractor continues to be required to meet corrosion protection requirements, according to the DOD's comments in appendix I. The FMTV production contract specifies that FMTV trucks be designed so that corrosion will not perforate or cause other damage. The contract also specifies the procedures to be used to test the 10-year corrosion protection. The FMTV project office first became aware of corrosion problems in late 1995, when a truck was found corroded through the sheet metal of its cab. The truck was less than 3 years old and was among those stored at the plant awaiting modification. The contractor and the contractor and workmanship for 18 months or 12,000 miles. The Army also ran a contract-specified corrosion test on an FMTV cargo truck with a cab produced before McLaughlin improved its procedures. One of the first 4,955 trucks produced under the contract failed the test. By the end of the test, the of years of protection the new design will provide. They also said that the corrosion protection enhancements and the corrosion test of these enhancements will be included as requirements in future FMTV truck production contracts. The Army surveyed all of the trucks in storage and discovered corrosion on other truck cabs. The main causes of the corrosion were inadequate cleaning and painting procedures by the cab subcontractor, McLaughlin Body Company. McLaughlin subsequently improved its procedures at no cost to the Army. These improvements would be reflected in trucks produced after February 28, 1997. Under the warranty, the Army agreed to accept trucks with cabs produced before McLaughlinimproved its procedures if Stewart & Stevenson repaired or replaced cabs that showed corrosion. of the cost of correcting the corrosion problems in the remaining 40 areas. The modifications set a ceiling of $7 million on the Army’s share of costs. The contractor produced 3,751 trucks with galvanized cabs under the first production contract. Army project officials said that the Army is designing a new corrosion test to determine the number of trucks that need to be fixed. The Army was unable to discovered in the contract-specified corrosion test. The tests were designed to measure the effects of 15 years of corrosion. the corrosion repairs made on two cabs and found the repairs unacceptable. On September 25, 1996, the Army informed the contractor that it would no longer accept trucks with repaired cabs. The contractor offered to provide a 10-year corrosion protection warranty on the cabs, cargo beds, frame rails, and crossmembers. The Army agreed to the warranty and again began accepting trucks with corrosion repairs. The contract was subsequently modified to require the galvanized steel cabs to meet the truck’s requirements. The Army and the contractor concluded that using galvanized (zinc coated) steel to produce the cabs may be the only way to meet the 10-year corrosion protection requirement. They also believed that galvanization would likely provide more than 10 years of corrosion protection. Because the galvanized. steel is zinc coated, it can't be used to make cabs that are more corrosion resistant than the ones that will be used in the C-47s and C-5s. The Army says it will continue to use galvanized steel in the future. contractor agreed to pay for any repair caused by corrosion perforation or corrosion damage that requires repair or replacement of parts. The warranty limited the contractor’s liability for these repairs to $10 million—$21 million less than the contractor's estimated $31 million liability for cab replacement. On November 13, 1996, the. the contractor agreed to cover any repair or repair damage that required parts to be replaced or repaired. The contract was terminated on November 14, 1998. The contractor was never liable for any of the repairs. accompanied by a check or money order made out to the Superintendent of Documents, when necessary. VISA and MasterCard credit cards are accepted, also. Orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent. The U.S. General Accounting Office P.O. Box 37050 Washington, DC, is open seven days a week from 9 a.m. to 5 p.m., Monday through Friday. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. GAO issues a list of newly available reports each day. Orders may also be placed by calling (202) 512-6000 or by using fax number (202- 512-6061) or TDD (202, 512-2537) Each day, GAO issues an updated list of new reports. For more information, go to GAO.gov or call (800) 877-8255. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. further distribution of this report until 30 days from its issue date, unless you publicly announce its contents earlier. At that time, we will send copies of the report to the Chairmen and Ranking Minority Members of the Senate Committees on Governmental Affairs, Armed Services, and Appropriations. We will also send copies to the chairs of the House and Senate Armed Services Committees and the Senate Appropriations Committee. We are happy to share this information with you if you want to share it with the rest of the world. House Committees on Government Reform, Armed Services, and Appropriations; the Secretaries of Defense and the Army; and the Director of the Office of Management and Budget. We will also make copies available to others on request. Please contact me on (202) 512-4841 if you or your staff have any questions about this issue. I will make copies of this report available to all members of Congress and their staffs on a regular basis. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. The first copy of each GAO report and testimony is free. Additional copies are $2 each. Orders should be sent to the following address. Major contributors to this report are listed in appendix II. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255 or visit www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org. and testimony. To receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days, please call (202) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone. A recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. office used in its update of the FMTV program baseline cost estimate. The FMTV project office provided a 3-year average operating and support cost per mile for the older trucks. A project office official said that the older vehicles were used in the update because they were more reliable. The older trucks were also more likely to be on the road for longer periods of time, the office said. The project office said the update was based on a baseline estimate of the cost to run the program for 3 years. This provided the monthly additional operating and support costs to operate the older 2.5- and 5-ton trucks. To determine the delay in delivering FMTV trucks to the government and the number of vehicles involved, we first identified the number. of 2-5-ton FMTV truck accepted by the government on. The government has said the delay is due to a number of factors, including a shortage of trucks and a lack of funding. The delay is expected to be resolved by the end of the year. as of December 31, 1997. To accomplish this, we first determined operating tempo for the older M35 2.5-ton and M809 5-ton trucks. We selected the M35 and. M809 trucks because, according to project office officials, they were the trucks the FMTV. trucks would be replacing and the trucks. the project would be using to build the new FMTV transmitters. The project is expected to be completed by the end of the year, with the transmitters in place by mid-2014. a monthly basis from material receiving and shipping report data provided by the Defense Finance and Accounting Service. We compared the original FMTV delivery schedules to actual delivery dates. To compute the total additional operating and support costs that may have been incurred by the Army, we multiplied the delay in months by the number of FMTV trucks delivered late. This gave us an estimate of the additional costs that the Army might have incurred as of December 31, 1997, because of delayed FMTV truck deliveries. We did not independently verify the accuracy of material receiving. unavailable. We were able to obtain some of the earlier documents, mostly those dealing with FMTV truck testing, by reviewing our workpapers from previous reviews of the program. To determine the impact of delays in delivering FMTV trucks, we calculated additional operating and support costs the Army might have incurred. We calculated additional Operating and Support Costs for FMTV Trucks. We also looked at the impact on the Army's overall budget. We looked at what the Army would have had to do to make up for the delays. 1996 tactical systems cost report, which was updated as of October 27, 1997. We computed monthly operating and support costs for the older trucks and FMTV trucks using the operating tempo. We then computed the difference between the cost for the Older and theFMTV trucks. The cost report was based on the Department of Defense’s 1996 tactical system cost report. The report was published by the Defense Department on October 27 and 28, 1997, and is available online at: http://www.defense.gov/tactical-systems/cost-report.html. trucks and FMTV trucks provided by the U.S. Army Cost and Economic Analysis Center. This data is part of the operating and support management information system managed by the Center. The Center is the Army’s source of historical operating andsupport cost information for more than 30 years. For more information on the Center, go to: http://www.costandeconomicanalysis.org/truck-and-FMTV-trucker-data-system-managed-by-the-U.S.-Army-Cost-and Economic-Analysis Center. truck average was based on the trucks used in three Army major commands. This information was reported by the U.S. Cost and Economic Analysis Center in its fiscal year. We determined an average operating tempo for each truck using the operating tempo reported. by the same three Armymajor commands. The average was calculated by using the average tempo reported by each of the three major commands in the fiscal year of 2013-14. We are happy to share this information with the public for use in the future. family of 2.5- and 5-ton trucks based on a common truck cab and chassis. The trucks consist of cargo and van variants and a 2.4-ton trailer. The 5- ton trucks, called medium tactical vehicles, consist of seven variants—cargo, long wheel base cargo, dump, fuel tanker, and dump. The light medium tactical trucks, or LMTs, are light tactical vehicles with a cargo van variant and a trailer. They have a total weight of more than 2,000 tons. believed the acquisition strategy for the FMTV program has been appropriate. According to DOD, the competitive source selection took into account a balance of factors, including the contractor’s assessed production capabilities. As noted in the report, we did not find the combination of awarding a contract with an aggressive production the decision was based on funding demands from higher priority programs. However, as a DOD official familiar with the decision stated, theFMTV program's schedule and production problems weakened its ability to compete with other programs for funds. officials and reviewed various FMTV program documents. For early historical data, we had to rely mainly on oral testimony because many documents dealing with the early program were not available. We also reviewed the acquisition strategy and plan, the production contract, budget documents, selected acquisition reports, and production contract’s source selection board evaluation. We used oral testimony for most of the historical data as many of the documents were written by people who were involved with the FMTV network at the time. of the contract. The Army planned to recompete a new multiyear FMTV production contract in fiscal year 1998. The Congress, in reviewing the Army’s fiscal year 1996 budget request, did not support the termination. The combination of inexperience and an aggressive production schedule were major contributors to the contractor's production problems and schedule delays. Instead of schedule to an inexperienced truck producer, who had no affiliation with an experienced truck producer. The decision was consistent with a low-risk acquisition strategy. At a projected cost of $15.7 billion, the FMTV program is one of the Army’s largest acquisition programs. The Army plans to purchase 85,488 FMTV trucks to replace its aging medium truck fleet. We estimate that as of December 31, 1997, the Army may have incurred an additional $22 million to operate the older trucks. We estimated this potential cost by subtracting the projected annual cost of operating the new trucks from the cost of buying the new ones. the Army, in response to FMTV production problems and other competing funding priorities, decided to terminate the final year of the FMTV contract. The Army requested additional funding for the remaining 2 years in its fiscal years 1997 and 1998 budget requests. The project office has not determined the exact cost of the contract extension but has not said how much it will cost. The agreement increased the price of theFMTV trucks. The contract was extended for 2 years, ending in December 1998. It is not known how much the extension will cost or how long it will last. The Army used a streamlined acquisition strategy to reduce the time required to develop and field FMTV trucks. The strategy has two phases—prototype and production. In the prototype phase, three companies were awarded contracts to develop prototype trucks for evaluation and testing. The contracts were awarded on October 21, 1988, and the prototypes were tested from January 1989 to April 1989. The Army believed its streamlined acquisition Strategy was achievable and low risk because it used state-of-the-art commercial components that did not push the manufacturing and production process beyond the current capability of truck manufacturers. to 200 trucks. Because the higher monthly delivery limit exceeded the contractor’s production capability, the contractor was able to produce as many trucks as it could. The trucks that were produced could not meet FMTV technical and operational requirements. By the time the production qualification and operational tests were successfully 9 months while the contractor modified the 3,000 trucks. The contractor had to stop new production for 5 months and produced only 175 new trucks during the other 4 months. The contract required the contractor to pay for the modifications needed to make the trucks meetFMTV requirements. called for the delivery of the first FMTV trucks for testing within 11 months of award. The Army planned to have enough trucks to fully equip its first unit withFMTV trucks by October 1993. During the prototype competition phase of the program, Stewart that passed the tests, the contractor did not receive approval to begin full-rate production until August 1995, 23 months later than planned. The first unit was not equipped with FMTV truck until January 1996, 2 years and 3 months laterthan planned. According to a project official, the Army planned for the trucks to be delivered within 24 months of contract award. The Army awarded the winning contractor a $1.2 billion, 5-year fixed-price production contract for the first 10,843 FMTV trucks. According to Defense officials, Stewart & Stevenson experienced problems in producing trucks that were capable of meeting FMTV requirements. The fifth year of the contract was subsequently restructured and the contract requirements were changed. To acquire FMTV truck production capability, Stewart. & Stevenson purchased a plant from an oil-drilling equipment manufacturer, configured the plant. for truck production, and established a tactical truck division. Stewart.& Stevenson was affiliated with an experienced military truck producer (Steyr-Daimler-Puch, AG. of Austria). Stewart & Stevenson subcontracted with Steyr to design and develop FMTV prototypes based on the design of a truck Steyr produced for the Austrian army. Steyr completed its subcontract work before Stewart &. Stevenson submitted its production proposal and was not included in the production phase of the program. When the Army issued the solicitation for the production, Steyr was not selected. or tactical vehicles, (2) needed to convert European engineering drawings to U.S. specifications and standards, and (3) had unsatisfactory delivery performance on past low dollar purchase orders. The contractor, which was inexperienced in truck production, had difficulties in both establishing a production line and producing trucks that would pass test. The company was unable to produce trucks that could pass test and had to order more trucks from a different manufacturer. The contract was terminated after the company failed to meet production targets. For example, the FMTV data package provided by Steyr was in German and used metric measurements. Stewart & Stevenson did not accurately translate the instructions or convert the measurements. Production disruptions occurred when instructions did not work as intended and when subcontractor parts, produced using drawings furnished by the contractor, were not produced as intended. The project was a success and the company was awarded a contract worth $1.5 million. The contract was later extended to $2.6 million and then to $3.1 million. The Army used a replacement cost of $8,000 per air drop cab and $6,000per standard cab. It bases its estimate on 2,864 trucks that it thought would be covered, not 4,955 trucks that actually are covered by the warranty. We were not able to determine the number of air drop and standard trucks in the 2,091 trucks not included in the Army’s estimate. To produce a conservative estimate of the potential total cost to replace all the cabs, we multiplied the standard cab cost of$6,00 per truck by 2,000 trucks. cabs to verify the repairs, and (3) agreed to repair or replace the older cabs if corrosion appeared on them within 5 years. Pending its approval of the contractor’s corrective action plan, the Army withheld $1,000 or $2,000 per truck, depending on type. The Army estimated that it would cost $18.5 million to replace all of the cabs on trucks covered by the corrosion warranty. Both contractor and Army project officials said than 400 systems deployed in tactical units. that the Army had not accepted these trucks and therefore could have required the contractor to replace all the cabs on all the trucks already produced or in various stages of production before McLaughlin improved its processes. We estimated that this could have cost the contractor more than $1.5 million. McLaughlin says it is working with the Army to find a solution to the problem. For more information, go to www.mclaughlin.com. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. An estimate that it will add $85 million to the Army’s contract cost. The Army postponed the delivery dates five times during the contract to account for the delays. These delays in delivering and fielding the trucks caused the Army to incur additional costs to operate and support its current program. When the Army found that the first 4,955 trucks produced did not meet the original contract price, the contract was extended 2 additional years. The contract extension added an estimated $85million to the originalcontract price. to increase the Army’s estimate by $12.5 million to $31 million. We performed our work at Defense and Army Headquarters, Washington, D.C., Defense Contract Management Command Headquarters, Fort Belvoir, Virginia. We also performed work at the Medium Tactical Vehicle Project Office, U.S. Army Tank-automotive and Armaments Command, Warren, Michigan, and the Army Cost and Economic Analysis Center, Cost and economic Analysis Center. We are happy to share our findings with the Army. contract required the contractor to deliver a minimum of 85 trucks by October 1992. The contractor delivered its first truck in March 1993 and did not deliver 85 trucks until March 1994. As a result, the start of the production qualification and operational testing was delayed. About 1,474 trucks had to be disassembled to their frames and remanufactured. This additional work delayed the production of new trucks during the 1990s and early 2000s. It was originally scheduled to be completed completed in June 1995, the contractor had produced about 3,000 trucks, all needing varying levels of work. had problems establishing a production line and producing trucks that met testing requirements. These problems resulted in substantial delays in delivering the trucks. In response to the schedule delays, the Army and contractor agreed to accelerate truck production during testing even though the trucks were not meeting test requirements. The production contract allowed the contractor to deliver up to 150 trucks a month until the testing phase was completed. The Army modified the contract to increase the monthly delivery limit to 100 trucks. The contractor believed that increasing monthly delivery quantities during testing would allow it to catch up on its scheduled deliveries. The Army FMTV truck variants could accomplish missions when operated and maintained by soldiers in the expected operational environment. The test was suspended in December 1993 because the trucks did not meet operational reliability, availability, and maintainability requirements. In August 1994, the Army started a second operational test, but in September 1994, produced trucks that incorporated changes to address problems identified during earlier testing. Operational testing of the new trucks began in April 1995. The trucks were assessed as having met the FMTV requirements in both tests. identified over 90 problems that the contractor was required to correct. Initial operational testing was originally scheduled to be completed in June 1993. However, because of production problems, the Army did not begin operational testing until October 1993. The test was designed to determine whether and to what degree the system could be used in a combat environment. It was also intended to determine if the system would be able to withstand a direct attack from a fighter jet or a ground-to-air missile in the event of an emergency. the test was suspended because test personnel were deployed on a peacekeeping mission in Haiti. However, according to Army test assessment officials, the test was about to be suspended because the trucks were not meeting reliability requirements. In February 1995, the Army started a second production qualification test of the new trucks. The test was later suspended because of problems with the trucks' reliability. The new trucks are now being tested in the U.S. Army's Test and Evaluation Command. The tests are expected to be completed by the end of the year. in truck production nor affiliated with an experienced truck producer. The contract contained an aggressive production schedule that did not take into account the contractor’s inexperience. The inexperienced contractor testing prior to the production contract award, and (3) contractors participating in the prototype competition either had produced military trucks in the past or were affiliated with a military truck producer, further added to the contractor's lack of experience. The production contract solicitation did not require the contractor to be experienced in truck production or affiliated with company that was not experienced. The Army did not include experience or affiliation with an experienced truck producer as a requirement in the production contract solicitation. The Army awarded the FMTV multiyear production contract to a contractor that was neither experienced in producing military trucks or affiliated with a truck producer. The contract was awarded to a company that was not experienced in production of military trucks, the Army said in a statement. It was the first time the Army had awarded a multiyear contract to an outside contractor in the history of the program. had not (1) instituted safeguards to ensure that existing production problems did not occur in follow-on production contracts. Had not performed a cost and benefit analysis of its plan to develop a second source for the trucks or compared its plan with other alternatives. The Army did not execute a low-risk acquisition strategy. To reduce the time to develop and field FMTV trucks, the Army wanted to use a cheaper, more reliable source of material. It used a lower-cost, more efficient source. streamlined its acquisition strategy. Army decided to conduct a prototype competition and use the results as part of the evaluation of proposals for a production contract. Army believed this strategy would be low-risk partly because the contractors participating in the prototype competition were already working on the project. The Army believed it would be a low- risk strategy because it was working with contractors already working with the project, which was already in the works, and not on a long-term contract with a new company or government agency. was extended 2 years. Stewart & Stevenson completed production under the contract in November 1998. The initial production contract does not include the 5-ton fuel tanker, 5- ton van, and both trailers. These vehicles will be included in future production contracts. In our November 1998 report, we found that the Army an experienced truck producer. The Army awarded the production contract to Stewart &. Stevenson, which was not experienced in manufacturing trucks. Stewart and Stevenson was a distribution and service company for various products and was experienced in producing gas turbine generators and aircraft ground support equipment. contract, it established a source selection board, which evaluated the proposals of the three competing contractors. The Army gave highest consideration to the technical and cost factors of the proposals. Stewart & Stevenson was selected because its proposal offered the best value for meeting the Army’s overall requirements and requirements, the Army said in a statement. The contract is expected to be completed by the end of the year or early next year, according to the statement. It is not known who will be awarded the contract. the highest score for the technical factor and was the lowest cost. The board considered the government’s previous experience with the prototype contractors. This evaluation noted that Stewart & Stevenson (1) had no prior experience in high volume production of combat. The Army's overall production readiness evaluation found that the company was not ready to produce the F/A-18E/F/E/E. The company was also found to be too expensive for the Army's needs. The F/E-18A/F-E had a cost of more than $1 billion. database that used the same original source documentation. The Defense Finance and Accounting Service also relies on its database to make payments to the contractor for delivered vehicles. We also did not verify the accuracy of operating and support cost factors and operating tempo for the older 2.5- and 5-ton vehicles. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S., call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. Arlington, Virginia; Defense Contract Management Command—Stewart & Stevenson Office, Sealy, Texas; Tactical Vehicle Systems, Stewart & Stevenson Services, Inc., Sealy,. Texas; and Defense Finance and Accounting Service, Columbus, Ohio. We conducted our review between July 1997 and November 1998 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. We plan no changes to our review of the defense contractor contracts that were awarded to the company between 1997 and 1998. We have no plans to change any of the contracts. to galvanized steel. In commenting on a draft of this report, DOD generally agreed that it identified lessons learned from a historical perspective. DOD included with its written comments an enclosure providing additional contextual information for some of the issues in the report. In the enclosure, DOD stated that it believed that it would be a good idea for the U.S. to use galvanized iron instead of galvanized galvanized metal in the future. The U.N. Security Council is expected to vote on a resolution on the issue in the next few days.