Under current law, appropriations for loan repayments remain available until the end of the from entering into a loan repayment contract with individuals unless they have substantial amounts of educational loans relative to income as determined by the NIH Director. The provision would also retain authorization for current topics eligible for extramural loan repayment (contraception and infertility, infertility, and so on) and allow amounts appropriated for new loan repayment contracts to remain available after they are appropriated. If passed, the bill would extend the current loan repayment program through the second fiscal year. Section 3 of S. 2014 would similarly amend the NIH's extramural loan repayment program. It would increase loan repayment amounts to a maximum of $50,000 per year. The bill would also prohibit the NIH Director from entering into a loan repayment contract with individuals unless they have substantial amounts of educational loans that could be repaid under existing loan repayment programs from $35,000 to $50,.000 and would, unlike the Senate bill, authorize the HHS Secretary to adjust these amounts annually for inflation beginning in FY2017. H.R. 6 would repeal existing authorizations for NIH loan repayment programs. It would require a GAO report on NIH efforts to attract, emerging scientists. The Senate bill would create a new extramural NIH loan repay program that would provide not more than $50,000 of loan repayment benefits annually to researchers investigating areas identified as NIH scientific or workforce needs. The bill would also increase the amounts of loan repayments that could be given to scientists and scientists' spouses, spouses, and children.  NIH funds seven loan repayment programs for researchers. Three of these are intramural programs that provide educational loan repayment benefits to researchers in exchange for undertaking research while employed by NIH. NIH also funds four programs to assist in the repayment of extramural researchers' educational loans. These funds are awarded competitively to researchers who are employed by a qualifying educational institution. Specific programs are available to researchers from disadvantaged backgrounds, those who are investigating AIDS, and those undertaking general research (including general research by physicians during their fellowship training) The NIH Director would be authorized to amend the categories eligible for intramural loan repayment as scientific and workforce priorities change. The provision would prohibit the NIH Director pediatric research, minority health disparities, clinical research, and clinical research conducted by individuals from disadvantaged backgrounds. It would also make eligible for loan repayment benefits extramural researchers who are conducting research in an area of emerging scientific or workforce need, in addition to individuals who conduct research on AIDS, and Clinical researchers from disadvantaged Backgrounds. The bill was passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate. to extramural researchers investigating health disparities, undertaking contraception and infertility research, engaging in clinical research, and examining pediatric-related topics. Researchers may receive up to $35,000 per year in loan repayment benefits under each of these programs. The regulations that govern the National Health Service Corps Loan Repayment program regarding participant participation can be found at: http://www.healthservicecorps.org/loan-repayment-regulations-for-extramural-researchers. The Federal Demonstration Partnership (FDP) is "a cooperative initiative among 10 federal agencies and 119 institutional recipients of federal funds" The FDP is sponsored by the National Academies, with a purpose of reducing biomedical and behavioral research costs. It provides details of all the research activities conducted or supported by the ICs of NIH. It also provides information on the funding sources for these research activities. It is designed to reduce the cost of biomedical and behavioural research, as well as funding for other types of research. the administrative burdens associated with federal research grants and contracts. In 2005 and 2012, FDP conducted surveys of principal investigators of federally funded projects to determine the impact of federal regulations and requirements on the research process. In both surveys, researchers reported spending 57% of their time engaged in research. For more information, visit FDP's website or go to: http://www.fDP.org/research-and-innovative-technologies/ research-and innovations. retain, and develop emerging scientists, including underrepresented individuals in the sciences. (2) report on the research areas where individuals are receiving increased loan repayment amounts. (3) analyze the impact of changes included in this act on addressing workforce shortages. Subtitle C of H.R. 6 titled "Supporting Young Emerging Scientists" is titled " supporting young emerging scientists" The bill is expected to be signed into law by the end of the year. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. required to post on their website an annual report on scientific meeting attendance and related travel spending for each fiscal year, including details as specified. The NIH travel (Title I, Subtitle B, Section 1025) and the enabling FDA scientific engagement (Title II, Sub Title P, Section 2282) provisions in H.R. 6 apply to the NIH travel and scientific engagement provisions in the bill. The full text of the bill is available online at: http://www.house.gov/legislation/2013/09/07/090700/travel-and-scientific-engagement-proclamations. every six years thereafter, the NIH Director, in consultation with the Institute and Center (IC) Directors, would develop and submit to the appropriate committees of Congress, and post on the NIH website, a six-year NIH Strategic Plan. The initial strategic plan would be completed not later than 270 days after enactment. The NIH Strategic plan would provide direction to the biomedical research investments made which describes a Research Strategic Plan for NIH. The plan would also be used to identify research opportunities and be required to ensure that maintaining the biomedical workforce, including the participation of scientists from traditionally underrepresented groups, would remain a priority. The NIH Strategic Plan would identify research priorities, such as advancement of treatment, cure and prevention of health conditions. The research strategy would address the disease burden in the United States, including rare diseases, and the many factors that contribute to health disparities. Rare and pediatric diseases would remain a priority. Mission Priority Focus Areas would be identified that best serve the goals of preventing or eliminating the burden of a disease and scientifically merit focused research over the next five years. The biomedical research.by NIH, facilitate IC collaboration, leverage scientific opportunity, and advance biomedicine. develop individual strategic plans for each IC's research activities. The IC plans would have a common template and identify strategic focus areas. The plans would consider and identify the return on investment to the U.S. public of such biomedical research. They would also identify contributions to improving U.s. public health through biomedical research through the ICs' research. For more information, visit the National Institutes of Health's biomedical research website, or go to: http://www.nh.gov/bio/biomedicalresearch. Both the House and the Senate are considering legislation to support medical innovation. The Senate's medical innovation package is that chamber's companion effort to the House's 21 st Century Cures initiative. The bills would change some aspects of how the FDA executes its regulatory oversight mission with regard to the review and approval of new drugs, biologics, and medical devices. They would also reform the National Institutes of Health and changes to the drug, biologic and device approval pathways at the Food and Drug Administration. Second fiscal year after they are appropriated. S. 2014 includes two provisions that would create programs designed to develop and retain the biomedical workforce funded or employed by the NIH. The Senate bill would amend Section 402 of the PHS Act by adding a new subsection (m), which describes a strategic plan for NIH. Within two years of enactment, and once once the bill is passed, the NIH would be required to submit a plan to Congress for consideration. The bill would also require the NIH to publish a report on the state of the biomedical research enterprise. measures to reduce the administrative burden on NIH-funded researchers. Not later than two years following enactment, the NIH Director would be required to submit a report to Congress on the measures that have been implemented. The Increasing Accountability at the National Institute of Health provision in H.R. 6 Section 1022 is comparable to Section 10 of S. 2742, according to the bill's sponsor. The bill is expected to be signed into law by the end of the year. It is expected that the bill will be referred to the House of Representatives for further consideration. The Departments of Labor, Health and Human Services, and Education, and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 2016 ( P.L. 114-113 , Division H), instructed the NIH Director to enter into a contract with the National Academy of Sciences (NAS) to conduct a comprehensive study of the policies affecting the next generation of researchers. Not later than two years after completion of the NAS study, the NIH director would be required to submit a report to specified congressional committees regarding any actions taken by NIH. to avoid duplication of effort and minimize burden to funding recipients. Within two years of enactment, the Secretary would have to complete a review of regulations and policies for the care and use of laboratory NIH research from the requirements of the PRA. Through various amendments to the FFDCA, Congress has required the Secretary (sometimes through the delegation of authority to FDA) to submit specified reports to Congress or to contract with other entities (e.g., the Institute of Medicine [IOM]), to conduct specified studies. it require a report to Congress. It would require the working group to consider various specified factors, including, for example, preclinical and clinical experiment design, and methods of statistical analysis. The bill would also require the Director of NIH, not later than 18 months after enactment, to consider the reproducibility of scientific research funded by the NIH. The Senate bill would not and reproduce the results of any scientific research that is funded by NIH. It also would not require the director of NIH to consider whether or not the research is reproducible.  NIH provides access to many of its strategic plans on the agency's website. Life expectancy in the U.S., as measured by life expectancy, is ranked 24 th of the 30 countries. "An agency devoted to current health would do well to focus on tobacco control, exercise, nutrition, sanitation, and more cost-effective delivery of health care," the authors say. "Despite its name, NIH's mission has not generally been current health, per se, but rather research for tomorrow's health," they say. The NIH Common Fund, within the Office of the NIH Director, supports the High-Risk, High-Reward Research Program. This program has "four unique funding opportunities for exceptionally creative scientists who propose highly innovative approaches to major challenges in biomedical research" These awards are intended "to encourage creative, private-sector partnerships with private industry," the NIH says. The program is intended to encourage "innovative approaches" to major problems in the field of biomedical research. It is funded by the National Institutes of Health, which is part of the federal government. to reduce the time between when young investigators complete their training and when they receive their first independent NIH research grant. The NIH has created a number of initiatives that strive to shorten this time, in part, to attempt to better retain young investigators in biomedical research. To learn more about these initiatives, visit NIH.gov/research-initiatives. For more information on the NIH's research-in-the-works program, visit the NIH.org/Research-In-The-works. S. 2742 contains several provisions aimed at streamlining and improving administrative matters at NIH. Section 7 would require the Secretary, acting through the Director of NIH, to convene a working group to make recommendations for a formal policy to enhance the rigor of clinical trials. The NIH National Institute on Minority Health and Health Disparities "should include within its strategic plan ways to increase representation of underrepresented communities in clinical trials," the bill says. The IC strategic plans would have to include details of such objectives. Among other things, the NIH Director would have to coordinate with relevant agencies, professional associations, and academic institutions to improve and update information on the biomedical workforce. The NIH Director also would be required to foster collaboration between the ICs that conduct research on human subjects, allow for an increase in the number of subjects studied, and utilize a diverse study population with special consideration of the determinants that contribute to health disparities. The Secretary, in collaboration with theNIH Director, would also have to continue to support research for the development of appropriate measures. Section 202 of the Labor/HHS/ED Appropriations Act, 1993 ( P.L. 102-394 ), states at the end of the section that the payment of compensation to be deemed to be appointed for a five-year term as of the date of enactment. The NIH Director would be able to terminate the appointment of an IC Director prior to the. end of a five year term. The compensation limitations in Section 202 are set out in the Act. The President and the Directors of the other NIH Institutes are appointed by the Secretary. Each NIH Institute Director reports directly to the NIH Director. Section 1042 of H.R. 6 would require the NIH Director to submit to Congress a report on NIH efforts "to attract, retain and develop the recommendations and develop or update policies as appropriate" Section 8 would require a report to the Secretary and Congress, not later than two years after enactment, regarding the recommendations, and any subsequent policy changes. S. 2014 included two provisions that are similar, but less comprehensive, than those included in S.2014. The bill is expected to be signed into law by the end of the year. of the PHSA establishes numerous reporting requirements for the NIH Director related to the activities of the agency. Section 2 of S. 2742 would amend Section 403(a) to replace the biennial reporting requirement of the NIH director with a triennial requirement. This section also would require the Secretary, acting through the NIHDirector, to submit to Congress a report that "describes education and outreach, guidance, enforcement, and other activities undertaken to encourage compliance with Section 402(j) of thePHSA" related to time-limited appointments of consultants and individual scientists, would not apply to directors appointed under this new authority. The Reducing Administrative Burdens of Researchers provision in H.R. 6 Section 1023 is comparable to Section 3 of S. 2742. The House provision would require the NIH Director to implement. Although they use slightly different language, they achieve the same goals. The provision would remove compensation limitations for consultants andindividual scientists (not just NIH IC Directors) as stipulated by Section 202 of the Labor/HHS/ED Appropriations Act. the PHSA by adding a new Section 404M to establish within the office of the NIH Director the Next Generation of Researchers Initiative (the Initiative) The Initiative would coordinate all NIH policies and programs focused on promoting and providing opportunities for new researchers. individual IC strategic plans would be required to be prepared regularly and informed by the NIH Strategic Plan. The NIH Research Strategic Plan provision in H.R. 6 Section 1021 is comparable to S. 2745 . The House provision would add a new subsection (m) to Section 402 of the PHSA, Section 10 of S. 2742 would amend Section 405 of the PHSA. It would require that Directors of ICs be appointed by the NIH Director, with the exception of the Director of the National Cancer Institute (who would continue to be appointed) It would also require the National Institute on Nursing Research to publish a biennial report on the state of nursing research in the U.S. The proposal was introduced in the House of Representatives this week. The Senate is expected to vote on the bill in the coming weeks. grants to such an entity. Reporting requirements for IC advisory councils under Section 492B of the PHS Act would change from biennial to triennial. Each such triennial report would have to include specified data on the number of women and members of minority groups included in clinical research projects conducted by the IC. The report would also have to show that the IC had made progress on a number of key issues relating to the health of the nation's women and minorities. The bill was passed by the House of Representatives in May. least one other IC. This information would be included in the triennial report required by Section 403(a), as amended by Section 2 of S. 2742. Section 5 also would eliminate an annual reporting requirement regarding the number of experts and consultants whose services are used by NIH; (2) eliminate an annually reporting requirement about the number and types of experts used by the NIH. The changes would take effect in the fall of 2015. The bill would also eliminate an requirement regarding how much money NIH spends on consultants. requirements, including a description of intra-NIH activities and funding made available for conducting and supporting research that involves collaboration between an IC and one or more other ICs. Section 3 of S. 2742 includes a series of requirements that would address the administrative burden on researchers funded by NIH and eliminate a number of different NIH reporting requirements. Within two years of enactment, it would require the heads of each IC to submit to the NIH Director a report on the amount of funding made Available for conducting or supporting research. recipients of NIH grants or agreements to share data. Add a new PHSA Section 402(m) to allow the NIH Director to approve requests by institute and center directors to engage in transactions other than grants and agreements with the NIH. The new rule will apply to all applicable federal law (§5) and will take effect on January 1, 2015. The rule will take into account the impact of the change in federal law on the NIH's grant and agreement process. It will also apply to the grant and contract process with other federal agencies. the NIH Director to implement measures to reduce the administrative burdens experienced by primary NIH grant awardees related to monitoring grant sub-recipients. Third, the Secretary, in consultation with the NIH Director, would be required to evaluate financial expenditure reporting procedures and requirements for NIH funding recipients and take appropriate action, according to the bill. The bill was passed by the House of Representatives in September. It was signed by President Barack Obama on October 1, 2013. The Senate passed the bill on October 2, 2013, and the House passed it on October 3, 2014. Section 4.4 would amend Section 492B of the PHSA, adding that the IC Directors must consult at least once annually with the Director of the National Institute on Minority Health and Health Disparities. Within two years of enactment, the Secretary would have to disseminate and make public such measures. Section 6 would amend Sections 464z-3 and 464Z-3, adding the Director may foster partnerships between the ICs and the NIMH. The legislation is expected to be signed into law by President Barack Obama on Friday. NAS recommendations. Section 3 of S. 2014 would consolidate existing NIH intramural and extramural loan repayment programs. Section 5 would amend Part A of Title IV of the PHSA, adding a new Section 404M, "Research Related to Sexual and Gender Minority Populations" It would require the NIH Director to encourage efforts to improve research related to the health of sexual and gender minority populations. S. 2745 Section 5(a) also would add a new PHSA Section 404m, " research Related to sexual and Gender minority populations" include women and minorities in NIH-funded clinical research and to conduct or support outreach to recruit minorities and women into clinical research. Section 3 would amend Section 402(b) of the PHSA. The NIH Director, in assessing research conduct outreach in developing (and updating) the policies, among other requirements. The section would require the Director of NIH to update the guidelines established under PHSA Section 492B(d) to reflect the science regarding sex differences and improve adherence to the requirements. working group established under Section 7 of this bill, to develop policies for basic research to assess relevant biological variables, including sex. It also would require the Director of NIH to consult with outside groups and outside groups for outside groups. It would require NIH to consider differences between male and female cells, tissues, or animals may be studied. The bill would also require the director of the NIH to consult with outside groups, including outside groups such as the National Institutes of Health and the National Institute of Health. experiments, demonstrations, and studies relating to the causes, diagnosis, treatment, control, and prevention of physical and mental diseases and impairments of man. As part of these authorities, the Secretary is authorized to make available substances and living organisms for biomedical and behavioral research. Section 4 would amend Section 301(a) of the National Institutes of Health Act of 1973. It would allow the Secretary of Health and Human Services to use the NIH's research funds to conduct research on mental and physical health. the Center, the Coordinating Committee, and the Advisory Board—is required to develop, and periodically revise and update, a comprehensive plan for medical rehabilitation research. S. 800 would amend Section 452 of the PHSA instructing the Director of the Center to develop and, not less than every five years, revise andupdate the plan. The research plan would have to include goals and objectives for such research. Prior to revising and updating the research plan, the director of the center would have been required to submit a report to Congress. report to the coordinating committee and the advisory board on the progress made toward achieving the research goals and objectives. Within 30 days of revising and updating the plan, the Director of the Center would be required to transmit the plan to the Coordinating Committee and the Advisory Board. The Director would also have to provide recommendations for revising the plan. The plan would be due back to the Center within 30 days after the plan is submitted to the Committee and advisory board. The Center would then have to make a decision on whether to proceed with the plan or not. the Stature and Visibility of Medical Rehabilitation Research at NIH Act. S. 849, Advancing Research for Neurological Diseases Act of 2015; S. 2511, Improving Health Information Technology Act. The Medical Electronic Data Technology Enhancement for Consumers at NIH. It also required the NIH Director to create a Medical rehabilitation Coordinating Committee and a National Advisory Board on Medical rehabilitation Research. The Director of the Institute will conduct and support research, and disseminate information, on the rehabilitation of individuals with physical disabilities. the exception for treatment of a rare disease or condition through the end of Phase III (instead of Phase IIB) Section 452 of the PHSA established the National Center for Medical Rehabilitation Research (the Center) within the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (the Institute) The Center is a part of the Institute's Child Health & Human Development Program. The Center's goal is to develop treatments for children with rare diseases or conditions. It is located at the National Institutes of Health in Washington, D.C. actions such as entering into interagency agreements. The bill would define medical rehabilitation research as "the science of mechanisms and interventions that prevent, improve, restore, or replace lost, underdeveloped, or deteriorating function" There are no comparable provisions in H.R. 6. The PHSA does not explicitly authorize or require such research. The legislation would also require the federal government to provide funding for research into the treatment of mental health conditions such as depression, bipolar disorder, and schizophrenia. It would require the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services to publish a report on the results of the research. that connects to the phone). Under the FFDCA, the FDA has regulatory authority over software that meets the statutory definition of a medical device. Software that is "intended for use in the diagnosis of disease or other conditions, or in the cure, mitigation, treatment, or prevention of disease" FDA released a certain types of health software from the definition of medical device, including products that provide a variety of administrative and health management functions. software that interprets and analyzes patient data to help make clinical diagnosis or. Health care facilities are using computer systems for routine administrative and financial transactions. One area that is undergoing especially rapid growth and innovation is mobile health. The number of health-related mobile apps being developed, downloaded, and used is increasing at an almost exponential rate. Some apps simply access stored medical records, such as electronic health records. Review of combination products.review of combination product. review of combinationProducts. review. of combination Products. Review. of combinations of products. reviewing. combinationProduct.review. Regulators are particularly interested in mobile apps that could pose a risk to patients. Many apps now provide clinical decision support (CDS) using algorithms that use clinical information to generate customized (i.e., patient-specific) diagnosis and treatment recommendations. Some apps capture and input patient data into an electronic health record (EHR), while others capture and enter the data into the EHR. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. Apps that transform a mobile platform into a medical device pose a significant risk to patient safety if they do not function as intended. Examples include apps that connect to an existing device for the purpose of controlling its operation, function, or energy source. Apps that are used in active patient monitoring or analyzing patient-specific data pose a risk to patients if they malfunction, according to the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID) The NIAID is a non-profit, independent organization that promotes health and safety in the United States. mobile medical apps. The agency provided examples of mobile apps that do not meet the statutory definition of a medical device and so are not subject to its regulatory authority. They include apps used to automate general office operations in health care settings. These apps meet the definition of 'medical device' The agency also gave examples of apps that are the focus of the agency's regulatory oversight. This includes apps intended for individuals to log, track, or make decisions related to general wellness (e.g., Fitbit) nonbinding guidance document on mobile medical apps in September 2013. FDA stated its intention to focus on the functionality of the mobile health product, not the mobile platform itself. In February 2015, FDA released updated guidance on its risk-based approach to regulating mobile apps. The agency does not plan to regulate smartphone or tablet manufacturers, according to the new guidance. It will apply its regulatory oversight to "only those mobile apps that are medical devices," the agency said in the guidance. The guidance was released in response to a request for comment from CNN. medical device data from a connected device; and apps that transform a mobile platform into a regulated medical device. The updated guidance did not address regulation of CDS software. That topic remains under consideration. S. 1101, the Medical Electronic Data Technology Enhancement for Consumers' Health (MEDTECH) Act, would exclude treatment decisions (including CDS tools) In general, this would preclude FDA from regulating these products as medical devices. But it creates an exception allowing FDA to exercise regulatory authority if the agency determines the use of the software "would be reasonably likely to have serious adverse health consequences" H.R. 6 would create a narrower exception for CDS software that the agency determines "poses a significant risk to patient safety" This risk-based approach broadly reflects the agency's current guidance on regulating mobile medical apps. The Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health (HITECH) Act of 2009 authorized Medicare and Medicaid to use CDS technology for health care. The bill would also ban certain types of software applications from the FDA's regulatory.analytic tools. It is similar to those in S. 1101, the Senate bill. based on four specified criteria. One of the criteria is the likelihood and severity of patient harm if the software were not to perform as intended. The exception would apply to EHR systems (and other software that simply creates, stores, transfers, and displays data), as well as CDS and other CDS. It would also apply to CDSs that simply create, store, transfer, and display data, such as EHRs and CDS systems. It is not clear if the exception would be extended to other types of software. The House bill also would establish a risk-based exception allowing FDA to exert regulatory authority. Excluded applications include software that creates, stores, transfers, and displays patient information. The bill would also bar products that provide both general health information and patient-specific information (i.e., CDS). The bill was introduced by Rep. Peter Roskam, R-Illinois, and passed by the House Committee on Health, Human Services, and Public Health on a bipartisan basis. It is expected to be voted on in the next few days.  ONC released a report to Congress on health information blocking in April 2015. The report defined information blocking as knowingly and unreasonably interfering with the exchange or use of electronic health information. Developers, exchanges, and networks found to have engaged in information blocking would be subject to civil monetary penalties. Health care providers found to be blocking information would be penalized as well. The ONC report also provided recommendations for achieving the goals of the health information-blocking legislation in the U.S. and around the world. The report identified gaps in authority that limit the ability of ONC and other federal agencies to effectively target, deter, and remedy such conduct. It also detailed the actions that ONC is taking, in coordination with other federal agency, to address information blocking. MACRA requires eligible hospitals and other institutions to provide evidence to the ONC. The report was released to coincide with the 10th anniversary of the enactment of MACRA. The ONC will release a second report on information blocking in the coming months. subject to incentives and disincentives to change their behavior. ONC would be authorized to refer instances of information blocking to the Office for Civil Rights if a HIPAA privacy consultation would resolve the matter. S. 2511 would require ONC to convene stakeholders to develop a trusted exchange framework and data from, clinician-led (and other) registries. It would extend federal privilege and confidentiality protections to HIT developers who report and analyze patient safety information related to HIT use. (§6) S.2511 would facilitate patients' access to their electronic health information. S. 2511 would require ONC to reduce the regulatory and administrative burdens of using EHR technology. ONC also would be required to encourage the certification of HIT for use in medical specialties and sites of service, and to adopt HIT. S.2511 would also relieve physicians of EHR documentation requirements specified in HHS regulations. The bill is expected to become law by the end of the year or early next year. For more information, visit the HHS Office of the National Coordinator for Health Information Technology's website. a common agreement among existing networks to exchange electronic health information (i.e., a "network of networks") The Secretary would be required to establish a digital contact directory for health care professionals, practices, and facilities. (§5) S. 2511 would require certified HIT to be capable of transmitting data to, and receiving data from, other HITs. The Secretary of Health and Human Services would have the power to require HITs to be able to send and receive electronic health data. information networks, health care providers, and other stakeholders to offer access through secure, user-friendly software. ONC and OCR would be required to develop policies that support dynamic technology solutions for health care exchanges. They would: (2) educate providers on using exchanges to provide patient access; and (3) issue guidance to exchanges on providing patient access. The proposal is expected to be completed by the end of the year, and could be implemented by the beginning of 2015. For more information, visit the ONC's website. optional); address; phone numbers (home, business, cell); and sex. The Improving Health Information Technology Act ( S. 2511 ) includes multiple provisions to promote HIT interoperability, penalize information blocking, reduce the administrative and other burdens of using EHR technology, and increase patient access to electronic health information. In broad terms, the act aims to improve the quality of health care by improving the efficiency of the health care delivery system. It also aims to reduce the burden of care on the taxpayer. of certified EHR technology by the end of 2018. The law defines interoperability as the ability of health information systems to not only exchange clinical information but to also use the information based on common standards. In addition, MACRA instructed the Secretary, within one year of enactment, to submit a report to Congress on ways to help health care providers compare and select certified Ehr technology. If that objective is not met by December 31, 2018, the Secretary will have until December 31 of 2019, to identify the barriers to widespread interoperability. challenge is overcoming legal and governance barriers to trusted information exchange. MACRA declared it a national objective to achieve widespread interoperability. The aim is to get stakeholders to agree to and follow a common set of standards, services, policies, and practices that facilitate exchange and use of electronic health information without limiting competition. The goal is to have a common standard for electronic health records by the end of the year, according to MACRA's goals. The national objective is for the standard to be in place by end of 2015. HIT Standards Committee and require the Secretary to contract directly with standards development organizations. Beginning in 2020, hospitals and physicians demonstrating EHR meaningful use would have to attest that they are not engaged in information blocking. H.R. 6 would repeal the interoperability provisions in MACRA. Unlike the bill, the bill would not require the secretary of health and human services to sign off on any changes to EHR standards. The bill is expected to be signed into law by the end of the year. updated vocabulary and content standards for structured health information. Common clinical data set composed of standardized data elements. Improved the testing of the ability of HIT systems to transmit, receive, and use standardized clinical documents. ONC released a national interoperability roadmap in October 2015. The roadmap was developed over an year and a half and includes a number of steps to help HIT systems communicate with each other more easily and securely. It also includes a set of standards for the use of standardized clinical data elements in HIT systems. and health care providers along the care continuum to be able to send, receive, find, and use core clinical data. The roadmap discusses the payment and regulatory drivers for promoting interoperability, as well as the central policy and technical components of a fully interoperable nationwide health information infrastructure. A key part of the roadmap is the development of a single-payer health care system for the U.S. and Europe. The U.K. and France are among the countries that have signed on to the roadmap. 18-month period with input from numerous stakeholders—to coordinate efforts around achieving HIT interoperability. ONC expects the roadmap to evolve in partnership with the public and private sectors as technology and policy dictate. The roadmap establishes interoperability goals for the next 10 years, with 2017 set as the deadline for individuals to meet them. The goal is to achieve interoperability by the end of 2017, with the goal of reaching 100 per cent by 2018, ONC says. For more information, visit ONC's HIT Interoperability roadmap. S. 2511 would establish a program and methodology for calculating and awarding a star rating to each certified HIT product. HIT developers would be required to report on these criteria for each of their certified products. The rating program's methodology and criteria would be posted online, as would each HIT product's star rating (the rating system must use at least three stars). Each developer of an HIT product that received a star would have to post the star rating on their website. The star rating system would be based on criteria such as the product's security, user-centered design, interoperability, and conformance to certification testing. certification program. The 2015 Edition final rule for the certification program established new transparency requirements for HIT developers. The program will be able to certify health information technology (HIT) products with a different combination of capabilities and functionalities that meet the needs of other types of health care providers and settings that are not eligible to participate in the EHR incentive program. It also seeks to improve interoperability, for example, by requiring certified HIT products to adopt new and more advanced features and capabilities. It will be available in the U.S. in 2015. The 2015 Edition final rule for the certification program requires EHR developers to publish programming instructions to enable other software application developers to produce apps giving individuals access to their clinical data. ONC released a report on the state of the EHR industry in the U.S. in 2013. The report was published by the Center for Health Information Technology (CHIT) on October 31, 2013. For more information on the CHIT report, visit: www.chit.org/2013/01/31/chit-report. incentive payments to acute-care hospitals and physicians who attest to being meaningful users of certified electronic health record (EHR) technology. The law instructed the Secretary to make the measures of meaningful use more stringent over time, which CMS has done in stages. Stage 1 ofmeaning use requires eligible hospitals to have certified EHR technology. Stage 2 requires eligible doctors to have certification of meaningful EHR use. Stage 3 requires eligible physicians to have verified EHR usage. Stage 4 requires eligible nurses to have EHR certification. they face in making EHR technology work. For example, CMS eliminated several clinical documentation objectives, and instead focused on a few objectives that capture more advanced uses of the technology. CMS also published an accompanying final rule (the 2015 Edition final rule) that expands the EHR's use in the health care system. For more information on CMS' EHR rules, visit the agency's website or go to: http://www.cms.org/ehr/en/rules-and-procedures. rule in October 2015 modifying the meaningful use Stage 2 objectives and establishing the objectives for Stage 3, which hospitals and physicians must meet by 2018. The agency made significant changes to the meaningfulUse program in response to the concerns of health care providers about the challenges and burdens of the program. The changes were made to meet the needs of hospitals, doctors and patients in the U.S. and around the world. For more information, go to: http://www.nhs.gov/meaningfuluse. patient data during transitions of care (e.g., a hospital discharge to a rehabilitation facility, or a physician referral) Beginning in 2015, hospitals and physicians that are not meaningful EHR users are subject to a Medicare payment adjustment (i.e., penalty) unless they qualify for a hardship exception. CMS published a final report on EHR standards on June 6. The final report was published on June 7. The full report can be found at: http://www.census.gov/en/news/press-releases/2013/09/07/13/14/15/1313/EHR-Rules-Review.html. a one-star rating would have to develop and implement a plan to improve the rating. Hospitals and physicians would be exempted from the Medicare EHR payment adjustment if their EHR technology was decertified. (§3) S. 2511 would give the HHS Office of Inspector General the power to decertify EHRs that don't meet certain standards. The agency would also have the ability to fine hospitals and physicians that fail to comply with the standards, if they have a history of failing to meet them. Hospitals and physicians must use EHR technology that has been tested and certified as having the capability to perform these functions. Testing individuals the right of access to inspect, obtain a copy of, and transmit to a third party their health information. One of the meaningful use objectives that must be met by hospitals and physicians using certified EHRTechnology is to provide individuals with the ability to view, view and transmit their health data. For more information on EHR testing, go to: http://www.healthtechtesting.org/test-health-information. physicians, beginning April 2016, to indicate through meaningful use attestation (or some other process specified by the Secretary) that they have not knowingly and willfully taken any action to limit or restrict the interoperability of their certified EHR technology. The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) Privacy Rule gives doctors the right to opt out of the requirement to use EHRs that are approved by the Department of Health and Human Services. For more information, go to www.healthinsurance.gov. on patient identification and matching (i.e., linking patient records with the correct individual) in February 2014. It recommended standardizing patient attributes for the purpose of information exchange, coordinating activities among organizations, and introducing EHR certification criteria for capturing patient identification standards. Patient matching was addressed in the 2015 Edition final final recommendations for the EHR standardization process. It was recommended that EHR standards be developed to capture patient attributes. The EHR Standard for Patient Identification and Matching was published in February 2015. rule for the HIT certification program. Certified EHR systems must be able to create a summary-of-care document that includes the following standardized patient data: first name; last name; previous name; middle name (including middle initial); suffix; date of birth (year, month, and day are required fields; hours and minutes are required) For more information on HIT certification, visit www.hitsafety.org or www.healthcare.gov/HIT-Certification. The Pandemic and All-Hazards Preparedness Reauthorization Act of 2013 (PAHPRA, P.L. 113-5 ) established new authorities and programs in the Department of Health and Human Services to support the development and procurement of new CBRN medical countermeasures. Section 2 of S. 2055 would require the HHS Secretary to provide "timely and accurate recommended" guidelines for using the medical countermeasure. Under current law, the HHS secretary must provide the guidelines. contracts with companies to develop and commercialize potential countermeasures. These contracts specify development activities for the company to perform and may extend multiple years. The Medical Countermeasures Innovation Act of 2016, as reported, has several provisions that would change the manner in which CBRN countermeasure advanced development and commercialization is supported. The Act is titled: Medical Countermeasure Advanced Development and Commercialization of CBRN Countermeasures. It is also known as the Medical Counter Measures Innovation Act, and it is being referred to as S.S. 2055, which is a bill that would make changes to the CBRN anti-countermeasure program. The Public Health and Emergency Medical Countermeasure Enterprise (PHEMCE) is responsible for coordinating these activities to ensure federal countermeasure needs are addressed efficiently. The PHEMCE is headed by the HHS Assistant Secretary for Preparedness and Response (ASPR) and includes representatives from the HHS, CDC, and other federal agencies. The group is made up of representatives from several separate agencies, including the CDC, the Department of Health and Human Services, and the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases. partner could provide business advice and use venture capital practices to invest in companies developing medical countermeasures. The U.S. intelligence community has successfully used a similar strategic investor model to address its unmet technology needs through In-Q-Tel. This bill would establish certain criteria for the partner, including prior experience in the intelligence community. The bill would also require the partner to have a certain number of years of experience in intelligence and national security, among other things. It is expected to be voted on by the House of Representatives in the coming weeks. not required to reduce the number of employees serving in other HHS employment systems to offset the new employees in the Service. The provision would require the Secretary to appoint experts to agencies within HHS, "taking into account the need for the expertise of such expert" It would also require the HHS Secretary to report on the HHS website regarding the changes to the Service and whether they "have improved the ability of the [FDA] to hire" The House bill would also mandate that the Secretary report to Congress on the effectiveness of the changes. The House bill would allow the HHS Secretary to determine pay (not to exceed the annual rate of pay of the President) for the purposes of retaining qualified employees, notwithstanding certain General Schedule pay rate requirements. Like the Senate bill, the House provision would give the Secretary the power to set pay for qualified employees. The bill would also give the secretary the ability to set the salary for qualified health care workers. The House bill was passed by the Senate with a vote of 98-0. The Senate bill is expected to be voted on in the coming days. technology innovation and successful partnering with the federal government. The HHS Secretary acting through the BARDA Director would provide the entity with the government needs and requirements and a description of the work to be done under the agreement. The entity would be required to provide regular reports on the success of the partnership. The agreement would be in the form of a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) to be signed by the Secretary of HHS and the Director of BARDA. The MOU would be subject to the approval of the HHS Secretary and would be for a maximum of five years. animals and make appropriate revisions to reduce administrative burden on investigators. Fifth, the Secretary would be required to clarify the applicability of OMB Uniform Guidance requirements regarding documentation of personnel expenses for entities receiving HHS grants. Finally, within one year of enactment, the OMB Director would be needed to establish an office for the Office of the Director of the HHS Inspector General to oversee the inspector general’s investigation of animal abuse and mistreatment in the Department of Health and Human Services. than a contract, grant, or agreement with respect to projects for high-impact, cutting-edge research, as specified. This provision would require the Secretary to submit a report to Congress evaluating the activities under this new subsection by September 30, 2020 (§6). Title II, Subtitle C, Section 2041, of H.R. 6 addresses the issue of funding for research projects in the National Institutes of Health (NIH) The bill would also require the NIH to provide more information about how it will fund research in the future. spending of funds provided by HHS and on progress meeting the identified needs. The bill would require the Government Accountability Office to evaluate this partnership four years after enactment. This authority would sunset on September 30, 2022. Section 6 would remove the current need for the President to approve use of the funds provided to the Department of Health and Human Services. It would also remove the need for HHS to report back to Congress on the progress made on the program's goals and objectives. It is expected to become law by the end of the year. institute is being implemented. This provision also would allow the Secretary to terminate any such institute if the Secretary determines that it is no longer benefitting the public health. No comparable provision in H.R. 6 . Following allegations of misspent funds during a 2010 General Services Administration meeting held in Washington, D.C., the bill was passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate on a bipartisan basis. The Senate version of the bill passed on a party-line vote and the House passed it on a vote-by-vote vote. allowing the HHS Secretary to more easily investigate outbreaks or other circumstances germane to the emergency response. There is no comparable provision in H.R. 6 . There are no comparable provisions in the Senate version of the bill that would allow the Secretary to conduct an investigation of an outbreak or other emergency situation in the event of a national emergency. The bill is expected to be signed into law by the end of the year. It would allow for the Secretary of Health and Human Services to investigate outbreaks and other circumstances that are relevant to an emergency. not established through rulemaking, and identifying each specific statutory provision or regulation being interpreted in the guidance document. There is no comparable provision in H.R. 6 . PHSA Section 319 authorizes the HHS Secretary to determine the existence of a public health care program in the U.S. It is not clear if the HHS secretary will be able to do this. The HHS Secretary will have to decide if the public health program is in the public's best interests, or if it would be better if it was in the private sector. The budget plan would also need to consider the development of countermeasures and products for emerging infectious diseases that may present "a threat to the nation" Section 5 would allow the HHS Secretary to partner with the Department of Health and Human Services. It would be made publically available in "a manner that does not compromise national security," according to the budget plan. The budget plan is expected to be released later this year or early next year. It is not yet clear if the White House will approve the plan. The provision also would require HHS to report to Congress on ways to promote innovation in the development of vaccines against infectious diseases. The Secretary may consult with specified stakeholders, including vaccine developers, in producing new vaccines. The provision would take effect in 2017, if approved by the Senate and the House of Representatives. The bill is expected to pass both houses of Congress in the coming weeks. It would also require the Secretary of Health and Human Services to consult with vaccine developers on vaccine development plans and other matters. On February 3, 2015 Senators Lamar Alexander and Patty Murray, chairman and ranking Member of the Committee on Health, Education, Labor and Pensions, announced the start of a bipartisan initiative to "examine the process for getting safe treatments, devices and cures to patients and the public" Senators Alexander and Murray said the initiative would look at "how we get safe treatments and devices to patients, the public, and our health care system" The bipartisan initiative is now in its second year of existence. issue, or issues, addressed by the bill including a summary of relevant current law. In some cases, the House and Senate legislation address the same topic in H.R. 6. The bill also includes a. summary of the bill's provisions; and (3) where applicable, identification of. comparable provisions in the bill that address theSame topic in the House bill and in the Senate bill. The House bill is expected to be passed by the end of the month. The Senate bill is scheduled to be introduced in the next few weeks. an entirely different way. In other cases, the House and Senate legislation address the topic in a similar way but with key substantive differences. For a summary of all the provisions in H.R. 6 , see the full text of the bill at: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/27/politics/h-r-6-bipartisan-bailout-bill-text.html. For more information on the bill, visit: http:www. cnn.org/2013 /01/25/politics-bruce-breeze-baucus-baptism-bill. H.R. 6 would require HIT developers to attest to a series of requirements as a condition of product certification. Senate bill would not establish a star rating program for certified HIT products, nor would it address patient access to electronic health information, patient record matching, the regulatory and administrative burdens of using EHR technology, or the development of trusted relationships between existing HIT networks. Following the terrorist attack on September 11, 2001, the U.S. House of Representatives passed a bill to investigate claims of HIT developers engaged in information blocking. H.R. 6 would extend federal privilege and confidentiality protections to HIT developers. It would require ONC to publish guidance on the HIPAA privacy rule and its relationship to information blocking. The House bill includes extensive language on the development of new interoperability standards. It also would eliminate the requirement that HIT developers report and analyze patient safety information related to HIT use. The Senate bill addresses a number of areas not covered by the House bill. The bill would also eliminate the need for a public hearing on the issue. Other provisions in H.R. 6 have no counterpart in the Senate bill. Several of the topics addressed in S. 2511 are not covered in the House bill. The House bill would give the HHS Office of Inspector General new enforcement authority. The Senate bill would allow the inspector general to issue subpoenas for violations of the Affordable Care Act and other federal laws. The bill would also allow the Inspector General to issue fines for violations, but not for violations that occur outside the HHS inspector general's purview. product not have received a tropical disease priority review voucher. Like S. 1878 , the House provision also would require that GAO study the voucher program. Congress has had a long-standing interest in developing the future biomedical research workforce. Recent concerns have focused on ways to reduce the cost of tropical disease research. The House bill would also require GAO to report on the effectiveness of the priority review vouchers program. There is no comparable provision in the House bill. The Senate bill would require the GAO report by December 31, 2017, against such agent. roles of the [FDA] and the [NIH] in that process." This initiative culminated in a package of 19 bipartisan bills that were reported out of the Senate Health, Labor, Education, and Pensions (HELP) Committee in a series of three executive sessions held on February 9, 2016, March 9, 2015 and March 10, 2015. The bills were passed by the HELP Committee in three separate executive sessions in February, March, and April of last year. One of these 19 bills was passed by both chambers and signed into law on April 19, 2016 (P.L. 114-146) The remaining 18 bills that comprise the Senate's medical innovation legislative effort are as follows: S. 2512, S. 2612, and S. 2712. The bill to add the virus to the FDA Priority Review Voucher Program Act was passed on April 6, 2016, and signed on April 7, 2016. S. 2412, the bill to include the virus in the FDA's priority review program, was passed April 8, 2016 and signed by President Obama on April 9. indication for use of a drug. Also similar to the Senate bill, the House provision would require the sponsor to submit the full data sets used to develop the qualified data summaries. House provision adds the exception "unless the Secretary determines that the fullData sets are not required" Unlike the House bill, it would state a sense of Congress that the new streamlined data review program "should enable the Food and Drug Administration to make approval decisions for certain supplemental applications based on qualifiedData summaries" pathway proposed in the House bill are comparable to those in the Senate bill, for example. The Secretary could consider limited data sets and non-clinical data as substantial evidence of safety and effectiveness. The smaller populations available for study of an LPAD drug, and the different balance of benefit, could also be considered in the bill. The bill would also require the Secretary to report back to Congress by the end of the year on the progress made on the bill in that year's legislative session. the House provision would require the Secretary to submit a report to Congress on workforce planning and certain specified elements with regard to the FDA. Senate bill would require that the FDA Commissioner issue implementation guidance for the streamlined data review program and would allow the Commissioner to issue regulations for implementation. House bill would not require a GAO study with regardto the FDA workforce. FDA regulatory authority over medical product Senate bill, the House bill, would require FDA to take several actions regarding medical product safety and effectiveness. The Food and Drug Administration Amendments Act of 2007 (FDAAA, P.L. 110-85 ) required FDA to taking several actions. a study of FDA's ability "to hire, train, and retain qualified scientific, technical, and professional staff ... necessary to fulfill the mission of the Food and Drug Administration to protect and promote public health" The House bill contains a comparable study of the FDA workforce with regard to scientific and technical staff. The Senate bill also contains a similar study, but the House version is more comprehensive. The House version of the bill is more focused on the FDA's scientific andtechnical staff. It also includes a study of its ability to recruit, train and retain scientists and engineers. The current requirement is that funds received from the Treasury be held in separate accounts. The provision would change the requirement, so that funds from theTreasury would be kept in the same account as other funds. The bill would also change the language regarding separation of funds from other sources, including private entities. The proposal would also amend the language on separation of money from other government agencies. The measure would also include a provision on the separation of revenue and expenses, which would also be amended to include a change in the language about separation of funding from other agencies. "managed as individual programmatic funds, according to best accounting practices." The House bill provision ( H.R. 6 , Title II, Subtitle P, Section 2283, "Reagan-Udall Foundation for the Food and Drug Administration") is the same as the Senate bill. The Paperwork Reduction Act (PRA, 44 U.S.C. Chapter 35), enacted in 1996, is the basis for the House bill's provision. The Senate bill is the source of the House provision. to the President, the Senate Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions, and the House Committee on Energy and Commerce. In addition, S. 800 would require the Secretary, with the other federal agencies, to review their medical rehabilitation research programs and take action to avoid duplication among those programs. S.800 would also require the Department of Health and Human Services to conduct a review of its medical rehabilitation programs to ensure that they are not duplicated or duplicated among federal agencies. Research and Biomedical Product Assessment Service, with a similar stated purpose as the Senate bill. House bill would eliminate the mention of a specific number of authorized Servicemembers. Senate bill would clarify that the Secretary is not required to reduce the number of servicemen and women in the armed forces. The House bill is expected to be voted on by the end of the month or early next month, depending on the outcome of a vote on the Senate's version of the bill on Thursday. to S. 1622 . The House provision would also require the Secretary, within 12 months of enactment, to revise or issue regulations or guidance, as necessary, to carry out these amendments. The Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments (CLIA) of 1988 provide the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) with authority to make changes to lab testing procedures. The CLIA was passed by Congress in 1988 and remains in effect today. The Senate is expected to vote on the bill in the coming days. of Section 492B of the PHSA, among other things. Section 1029 of H.R. 6 is "The Sense of Congress on Increased Inclusion of Underrepresented Communities in Clinical Trials," is broadly comparable to Sections 3 through 6 of S. 2745. The House provision would express the sense of Congress that Congress that underrepresented communities should be included in clinical trials. The provision would be similar to Section 3 through 4 of S 2745, but with a different language. Other transaction (OT) authority is a special vehicle used by certain federal agencies for obtaining or advancing research and development (R&D) An OT is not a contract, grant, or cooperative agreement, and there is no statutory or regulatory definition of "other transaction" Only those agencies that have been provided OT authority may engage in other transactions. Generally, OT authority is created because the government needs to obtain leading-edge R&D from commercial sources, but some companies are unwilling or unable to comply with the government's procurement regulations. of Sciences, and five from candidates provided by "patient and consumer advocacy groups, professional scientific and medical societies, and trade organizations" Section 770 specifies the number of members to be appointed representing each type of group and requires that the ex officio members ensure specific expertise among the members. The ex officia members must also ensure that the members of each group have specific expertise in their areas of expertise. The members must be appointed by the president of the U.S. and serve a maximum of five years. It would limit to 30% of the membership "representatives of the general pharmaceutical, device, food, cosmetic, and biotechnology industries" The obligation to ensure specific expertise among the members would be broadened to rest with all members of the board, not only ex officio appointees. That broader group would also decide what the board would do. The board would also have the power to make changes to the board's bylaws, if necessary. It would also be able to issue new bylaws if needed. and industry; holding meetings and publishing information and data for use by FDA and others; and taking action to obtain patents and licensing of inventions, among others. It is led by a Board of Directors, four of whom are ex officio members, nine from candidates provided by the National Academy. The board is made up of nine members, including four members from the Academy, and four members who are ex-officio members. It also has a secretariat, which is based in Washington, D.C. provision would amend FFDCA Section 770 to change the membership of the Board of Directors. It would allow the voting members of the board to increase the size of theBoard and appoint new members by majority vote, without regard to the balance of expertise and affiliation required by current law. The proposal would also allow the Board to appoint members by the majority vote. The bill is expected to be voted on by the House of Representatives in the coming weeks. The Senate is also expected to vote on the measure. drugs "without regard to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service" The provision would add a new FFDCA Section 714A, "Hiring Authority for Scientific, Technical, and Professional Personnel" Like the Senate bill, the House provision would allow the Secretary to "appoint qualified candidates to scientific, technical, or professional positions" The House bill would also allow the secretary to appoint "outstanding and qualified candidates" to scientific and technical positions. other technical workers, for whom federal agencies such as FDA compete with the private sector and nonfederal public employers. For example, FFDCA Section 714 authorizes the Secretary to appoint employees to positions in FDA to perform, administer, or support activities related to review of medical device applications and human generic applications. For. example, the Secretary of the FDA can appoint. employees to. positions in the FDA to. perform or administer activities related. to review, administer and support activities. related to medical device application review. suggested that such pilots could also be done in other areas (e.g., cardiology, neurology, and infectious disease) This provision would add a new FFDCA Section 1014, "Food and Drug Administration Intercenter Institutes" This provisionwould require the Secretary to establish one or more "Intercenter Institutes," for a major disease area(s) It would also require the FDA to establish a "Drug Safety Board," which would have the power to approve new drugs for certain diseases. professional positions that support the development, review, and regulation of medical products" within the competitive service. The FDA Commissioner would be allowed to determine pay (not to exceed the annual rate of pay positions) in thecompetitive service. Unlike the Senate bill, the House provision specifies that these positions would be within FDA's Center for Drug Evaluation and Research, Center for Biologics evaluation and research, and Center for Clinical Trials. The House bill also includes a provision that would allow the FDA Commissioner to set the salary for certain positions. Many federal employees are hired under alternative government-wide or agency-specific authorities. Title 5 of the U.S. Code provides the broad framework of requirements under which many federal workers are hired. Numerous hiring authorities target scientists and other qualified experts to fulfill obligations specified under user fee agreements. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org for details. For support in the United States, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline on 1-800-273-8255. by the President). It would add a new requirement that the term of office for the director of an IC be five years. Each current IC Director would be given a new five-year term. It would allow the director to be reappointed at the end of a five- year term. There would be no limit to the number of terms served by an IC director. The current IC Directors would be allowed to serve a maximum of five years in office. The director of the IC would also be given an extra five years to serve if the position is vacant. Each board member's term of office would last for four years. Initially appointed board members' terms would expire on a staggered basis, as determined by the ex officio members. This provision would add that for the additional board members appointed pursuant to the bill, the terms would be staggered as well. Other administrative matters would be dealt with in a staggered manner. The bill is expected to be voted on by the House of Representatives in the coming weeks. It would also be passed by the Senate in the fall. to S. 2700 , Section 6, the terms of office for the initially appointed persons can expire on a staggered basis, as determined by the members of the board. The provision would remove the salary cap of the foundation's Executive Director, which is now set at the compensation of the Executive Director. It would also remove the cap on the salary of the executive director, which was previously set at $1.5 million a year. The proposal is expected to be voted on in the coming weeks. The provision would rename the SBRS as the Silvio O. Conte Senior Biomedical Research and Biomedical Product Assessment Service (the Service) It would increase the number of authorized members to 2,000, and would add "biomedical product assessment" as a desired field of expertise. It would clarify that the Secretary is to contribute to a member's preexisting retirement system. Finally, the provision would require GAO to study the changes to the Service and their effects on HHS departments and agencies. SBRS is a special hiring mechanism used by the HHS Secretary to attract and retain accomplished scientists to work in Public Health Service (PHS) agencies. It is not subject to civil service requirements under Title 5 of the U.S. Code. SBRS requirements are as prescribed in law and regulation (42 C.F.R. Part 24). Currently, SBRS is limited to 500 members, who are accomplished doctoral-level scientists in biomedical research or clinical research evaluation. The rate of pay may not exceed $100,000. that for Level I of the Executive Schedule (currently about $206,000 per year) unless approved by the President. The Secretary may contribute up to 10% of a Service member's pay to that person's already established retirement system at the institution of higher education at which the member had been employed. If approved, the Secretary may also contribute to the retirement system of the institution where the Service member had worked for the previous five years. The secretary may also make a contribution to a person's retirement system if that person had worked at a higher education institution for at least five years before joining the military. would authorize the appointment of persons who hold "a master's level degree in engineering, bioinformatics, or a related or emerging field," broadening the current requirement for doctoral-level members. It would increase the upper pay rate limit to that of the President (currently $400,000 per year) but would eliminate the authority to appoint the President's deputies. It also would increase their pay rate to $1 million a year, up from the current $1.2 million. consultants or individual scientists appointed for limited periods of time is "not to exceed the per diem rate equivalent to the maximum rate payable for senior-level positions" This rate is not less than 120% of the minimum rate of basic pay payable for GS–15 of the General Schedule; and ... not ... not more than the maximum pay rate for GS-15 positions. For more information, visit the U.S. National Institutes of Health's website at: http://www.nih.gov. report to "appropriate committees of Congress" within "30 days" when the amount available for Project BioShield procurements (the "special reserve fund") falls below $1.5 billion. This bill would change that requirement to specify the recipients of the report as the Senate Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions. The Blue Ribbon Study Panel on Biodefense recommended this change to streamline the Project Bio shield contracting process. This section would also specify the congressional committees that HHS must notify of a decision to use Project Bio Shield funds as the House Committee on Energy and Commerce and the Senate committee on Health. Section 3 would move contracting authority for Project BioShield and BARDA advanced development from the Appropriations Committee. This report would be required by "March 1 of each year in which" the amount available drops below $1.5 billion. Committee on Appropriations, the House Committee on Energy and Commerce, and the House committee on Appropriations would have to approve the bill by March 1, 2015. Committee of Appropriations, House Committee of Energy and commerce, House committee of Appropriations. Committee for Appropriations, Senate Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs, House panel on Appropriations. that still need up to 10 more years of development. Up to half of the total amount of the Project BioShield contract may be paid out for the company meeting specified developmental milestones. The remaining amount is payable on delivery of the countermeasure to the Strategic National. The contract is worth an estimated $1.5 billion over the next 20 years, with the majority of that to be spent on developing the BioShield system. The project is expected to be completed by the end of 2015. Office of Management and Budget (OMB) imposed restrictions on conference travel for federal employees in memorandum M-12-12. The memorandum directed agencies, beginning in FY2013, to spend at least 30% less than what was spent in FY2010 on travel expenses, and stated that agencies "must maintain this reduced travel expenses" for the rest of the year, according to the OMB report. The report also said that agencies were required to reduce travel expenses by at least 20% for the remainder of the fiscal year. level of spending each year through FY 2016." Senior-level agency approval is required for all conferences sponsored by an agency where the conference expenses to the agency exceed $100,000. Agencies are prohibited from spending more than $500,000 on a single conference. However, this restriction may be waived if the agency is a major sponsor of the conference or has a strong relationship with the conference's organizer. The conference must be held in the U.S. and must be at least two weeks in length. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), then the meetings would not be considered to be conferences for the purposes of federal reporting requirements in annual appropriations acts. Each HHS operating division would be considered a conference under the new rules. The changes would take effect on January 1, 2015. The new rules would apply to all HHS operating divisions, as well as to each HHS division's individual offices. They would also apply to the entire Department of HHS, not just HHS-related divisions. The change would affect all HHS divisions, including HHS-led agencies. head "determines that exceptional circumstances exist whereby spending in excess of $500,000 on a single conference is the most cost-effective option to achieve a compelling purpose" Under the Senate provision, attendance at a scientific meeting is directly related to the professional duties of scientific or medical professionals of the day. Under the provision, if Attendance at a Scientific Meeting is directly Related to the Professional duties of Scientific or Medical Professionals of the Day, Attendance At A Meeting Is Directly related to The Professional Duties of The Day. health emergency, which in turn authorizes certain further actions to enhance response flexibility, such as waivers of requirements for grant-making and hiring. Section 17 would add an additional provision to PHSA Section 319 to waive requirements for voluntary data collection under the Paperwork Reduction Act (PRA) when a public health emergency declaration is in effect. Among other things, the PRA requires review and pre-clearance of federal data collection proposals by the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) The PRA ensures that federal agencies do not overburden the public. 1980 and amended in 1995, established the Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs. Congress required that agencies seek OIRA permission before collecting information from the public. The first of 11 stated purposes was to "minimize the paperwork burden" for individuals. The Office of Management and Budget (OMB) is part of the Department of the Treasury, which oversees the federal government's budget and spending. The OB is under the control of the White House Office of Personnel Management (HHS), which is responsible for the federal budget. The PRA requires that federal agencies receive clearance from OIRA before requesting most types of information from the public. PRA clearance is required when standardized information is collected from 10 or more respondents within a certain time period. The PRA also requires that agencies obtain clearance before requesting certain types of data from a specific group of people. The information comes from the "Collection of Information by and for the Federal Government" and from "other persons resulting from the collection of information" by the federal government. among private individuals, researchers, and the federal government has, at times, prompted concerns that the information could be subject to public release. FOIA, however, specifies nine categories of information that may be of Confidentiality. This requirement can help promote participation in research by adding an additional layer of privacy protection. In contrast to compelled disclosure of research data by FOIA, FOIA protects investigators from being compelled to disclose information that would identify research subjects in any civil, criminal, administrative, legislative, or other proceeding. exempted from the rule of disclosure, allowing agencies to withhold applicable records. Exemption 3 allows agencies to withheld applicable records if the data are specifically exempted from disclosure by a statute other than FOIA. These types of Exempt 3 statutes are called Exemption 2 statutes. The data are exempt from disclosure if that statute meets criteria laid out in FOIA. The records are exempt if the records are not subject to the FOIA exemption, which is not required by law. The information is exempt from the FOIA if it does not contain any information that is relevant to the case at hand. often referred to as b(3) exemptions because they are authorized in 5 U.S.C. §552(b)(3) As a mechanism for addressing compelled disclosure of research data, NIH currently issues Certificates of Confidentiality pursuant to §301(d) of the Public Health Service Act. A Certificate would not apply to the collection of information during the conduct of NIH research. The Exemption for the National Institutes of Health from the Paperwork Reduction Act Requirements provision (Title I, Subtitle B, Section 1024) is comparable to S. 2700. the carrying out of the PMI as well as identifying requirements of the initiative (§2) Amend PHSA Section 301(d) to require the Secretary to issue a Certificate of Confidentiality to research investigators of federally funded research in which sensitive, identifiable information is collected to protect the privacy of research participants. The provision would prohibit the individual with the certificate from disclosing sensitive information about the research participants, with certain exceptions, as specified, and would make this type of information immune from the legal process. The Secretary would be required to make each such exemption available in writing and to the public, upon request (§4). Amend PHSA Section 402(b) to allow the Secretary to require that biomedical information that identifies an individual or that has an associated risk that the information may be reidentified be made available. The Secretary would also have to make such information available to the public in writing and upon request. For more information, go to: http://www.phsa.gov. S. 849 would add a new PHSA Section 399S-1, "Advancing Research for Neurological Diseases" It would require the Secretary of Health and Human Services to establish a Neurological Disease Surveillance Program. The bill is similar to the Senate bill, but it would provide more authority to the CDC Director, not the HHS Secretary. The Senate bill would have provided more authority for the Secretary to conduct surveillance of certain specified neurological disorders, such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and autism spectrum disorder. Diseases." It would authorize the HHS Secretary to improve the collection of data on neurological diseases. The Secretary would be explicitly authorized to establish a new registry, using existing data sources. Required and optional data elements are the same as in the Senate bill. The secretary would be required to make information and analysis in the surveillance system available, subject to HIPAA privacy. The bill would require the National Neurological Diseases Surveillance System to track the epidemiology of neurological diseases, including multiple sclerosis and Parkinson's disease. of the Public Health Service through the Secretary of Health and Human Services. It requires the Secretary to "conduct in the Service, and encourage, cooperate with, and render assistance to other appropriate public authorities, scientific institutions, and scientists in the conduct of, and promote the coordination of, research, investigations, and other activities" It also requires him to "encourage, cooperate" with other public authorities and scientific institutions to conduct research, investigate, and conduct other activities in the public health service. private nonprofit entities to implement this provision. The Secretary would be required to make information and analysis obtained from the system available to other federal health agencies and state and local agencies, and, subject to applicable laws, to make data available to researchers. The secretary would berequired to report on the progress of the system to Congress and the public. The bill would also require the Secretary to report to Congress on the effectiveness of the program and the progress it has made in reducing the number of Americans with cancer. impact of a disease or a therapy on patients' lives. The new subsection would also require the Secretary to issue implementation guidance after holding several methodological workshops and a public meeting. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), each year in the United States, at least 2 people are killed by disease or therapy in the U.S. Each year, the CDC says, the number of people who die from disease or treatment is at or above the national average of 2,000. major disease area, and streamlining the review of medical products related to that major disease area. This provision would require the Secretary to establish at least one institute within one year of enactment of H.R. 2700. The Secretary would be required to provide a public comment period while each institute is established. The provision would also require the secretary to provide the public a chance to comment on the institute within a year of its establishment. The bill is expected to be signed into law within the next few weeks. focus on up to five of the most prevalent or burdensome diseases (as determined by the Secretary), to collect and manage information in order to facilitate research, and to consult with specified experts. The Secretary would be required to include information on demographics, relevant risk factors, and diagnostic and progression. The secretary would also have to include a list of specified experts, such as doctors, nurses, researchers, and other health care professionals. The list would also include a set of specific goals and targets for each disease. S. 185 would require the Secretary to report to Congress at least every two years on the number of requests for approval. It also would require GAO to report on the coordination of monitoring activities required by S. 185. It would also require the extent to the extent of monitoring that is required by the bill. The bill is expected to be introduced in the next few days in the House of Representatives and the Senate will vote on it later this month or early next week in a joint session of both houses. of the President) for the purposes of retaining qualified employees, notwithstanding certain General Schedule pay rate requirements. This provision would require the Secretary to submit a report to Congress on workforce planning and certain specified elements with regard to the FDA workforce. It would also require GAO to conduct a review of the FDA's hiring practices. The bill is expected to be signed into law by the end of the year, if not before then in the spring of 2015. It is currently under consideration by the House and the Senate. the PHSA to allow the Secretary, where research substances and living organisms are made available to researchers through contractors, to direct the contractors to collect payments for the costs incurred to make available these substances and organisms. These amounts would be credited to the appropriations accounts that incurred the costs. The Secretary of the Department of Health and Human Services would have the power to approve or disapprove of the payments to the contractors. The PHSA would have to approve the payments or reject the payments, depending on the circumstances. and security protections, to the public, including researchers. The Secretary would be required to report to Congress regarding the system within four years of enactment. The provision would authorize the appropriation of $5 million for each of fiscal years 2016 through 2020. The Silvio O. Conte Senior Biomedical Research Service would be funded by the Department of Health and Human Services. The service would be based in Washington, D.C. and would be open to researchers, doctors, nurses and other health care workers. and 43% of their time in completing pre- and post-award requirements. The most commonly experienced administrative responsibilities included those related to federal project finances, personnel, and effort reporting. These were also among the most time-consuming responsibilities. For researchers engaged in projects that required human or animal subjects, the related Institutional Institutional requirements were also the most difficult to complete. The study was published in the journal Proceedings of the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine (PNAS). The bill would require the Secretary to lead a review by research funding agencies of all financial conflict-of-interest regulations and policies. Second, it would require federal agencies to harmonize the policies and reduce the administrative burden on researchers, as appropriate. The bill would take effect within two years of the bill's enactment. It would also require a review of federal agencies by the Secretary of Health and Human Services in two years after its enactment, and a review in five years if the Secretary is still in office. regulations and policies to minimize administrative burden across federal research agencies. Within two years of enactment, and once thereafter, the board would have to submit a report to specified offices in OMB, the heads of relevant federal departments and agencies, and specified House and Senate committees. The report would provide information on how to reduce the administrative burden of research agencies across the federal government. The board would also have to provide information about how to minimize the burden on research agencies in the future, if necessary. a Research Policy Board, consisting of up to10 federal and 9 to 12 non-federal members, as specified, to provide the NIH Director and other members of the federal government with information on the effects of regulations related to federal research requirements. The board would have to make recommendations on harmonizing harmonizing regulations. The NIH Director would be able to appoint up to 10 members to the board, with up to 12 members being required to be from outside the U.S. for the first two years. recommendations on scientific research policy, including regulatory benefits and burdens. The board would sunset on September 30, 2020. Within four years of enactment, GAO would be required to conduct an evaluation of board activities regarding its purpose and responsibilities and submit a report to Congress. Section 5 would modify or modify or alter the board's recommendations on scientificResearch policy, such as regulatory benefits, burdens, and costs. The bill was passed by the House of Representatives on a vote of 419-3, and the Senate passed it on a voice vote. commonly referred to as the Common Rule because the same requirements have been adopted by many other federal departments and agencies, which apply the regulations to the research they fund. Research protocols must be approved by an Institutional Review Board (IRB) to ensure that the rights of the research subjects are protected. Under the Common rule, research protocols are approved by the IRB before they can be used for research. The Common Rule applies to research funded by the federal government, as well as state and local governments. two years after the compliance date of the final rule implementing Section 402(j) of the PHSA. Two follow-up reports would be required, which include information on actions taken to enforce compliance with the ClinicalTrials.gov reporting requirements. Section 1101 and Section 1121 of H.R. 6 are comparable to S. 2742 in that they are similar to the requirements of Section 402 (j) and Section 1102 of S. 1101 of the Affordable Care Act. 12-month period. PRA does not apply to certain types of scientific research, including collections that are neither sponsored nor conducted by the agency and those that are subject to a clinical exception. The provision would amend Section 301 of the PHS Act by adding a subsection stating that the PRA doesn't apply to some types of research. It would also add a section saying that PRA only applies to scientific research conducted in the United States. The bill is expected to be introduced in the House of Representatives next week. to Congress within one year of the establishment of any registry under this section, and biennially thereafter. The bill does not include an authorization of appropriations. Section 1122 would be required to report to Congress on all activities under thisSection not later than four years after enactment. It would also require the government to report back to Congress within four years of the enactment of this section. It is not known if the bill will be approved by the Senate or the House of Representatives, which would need to vote on it. procedures addressing post market safety issues. Section 505A(p), which required the Secretary to contract with the IOM, not later than three years after the enactment of the Best Pharmaceuticals for Children Act of 2007, to conduct a study, which was further specified in this section. Section 523(d), whichrequired the Secretary, not earlier than January, to report to Congress regarding the pediatric studies conducted pursuant to this section or precursor regulations. The study was required to be completed within three years of the Pediatric Research Equity Act. than 90 days after enactment, to establish a Task Force on Research Specific to Pregnant and Lactating Women. It specifies the duties, membership, meeting schedule, and reporting requirements of the task force, which would be terminated two years after its establishment, with an option for a two-year extension. The section of the bill was passed by the House of Commons with a vote of 98-0. The bill was then referred to the Senate, where it was passed with a voice vote. would require the Secretary, not later than two years after enactment, to update regulations and guidance, as appropriate, regarding the inclusion of pregnant women and lactating women in research. Section 9 would require the Director of NIH, within two years of enactment and taking into consideration the findings of the findings, to make a recommendation to the Secretary of the NIH on how to move forward with the proposed legislation. The bill is expected to be signed into law by the end of the year or early next year. regarding orphan-drug and expedited-approval programs. For a precision drug or biological product application where the product is for the treatment of a serious or life-threatening disease or condition and has been designated as an orphan drug, allow the Secretary to consider the application for expedited review programs. Under FFDCA Section 526 as a drug for a rare disease and condition, the product application can be submitted to the Secretary for consideration. The Secretary can rely on previously submitted information about the drug. additional targeted therapies would need to be developed. Targeted therapies, because they may be treating small subsets of patients, sometimes qualify as "orphan drugs" Such drugs are called orphan drugs because firms may lack the financial incentives to sponsor products to treat small patient populations. Orphan drugs receive their designation from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA), which has the power to grant orphan drug status to certain drugs. The FDA has the authority to grant or reject orphan drug applications. drugs to address an unmet medical need in one or more patient subgroups, including subgroups of patients with different mutations of a gene. This legislation would authorize the Secretary to allow the sponsor of a new drug application to submit an application. It would also allow the secretary to approve a drug application for rare diseases or conditions that are serious or life-threatening. The bill was introduced by Sen. Cory Booker, D-New Jersey, and Sen. Marco Rubio, R-Florida. identical provision ( H.R. 6 , Title II, Subtitle E, Section 2083, "Finalizing Draft Guidance on Expanded Access"). The Orphan Drug Act of 1983 ( P.L. 97-414 ) was signed into law to incentivize development of drugs to treat rare diseases, which affect fewer than 200,000 individuals in the United the Public Health Service Act. This provision would broaden the use of grants made by the Secretary to assist in "defraying the costs of developing drugs for rare diseases or conditions" Incentives for sponsors of orphan drugs include seven years of market exclusivity, tax credits for clinical trial expenses, user fee waivers, and federal grants to cover costs of qualified clinical testing expenses. Since the law's passage, FDA has approved over 400 new orphan drugs and biological products. The FFDCA market, certain pediatric uses of approved drugs, and new qualified infectious disease products. During the period of exclusivity,. FDA does not grant marketing approval to another manufacturer's product. Section 5 of the Orphan Drug Act allows the Secretary to make grants and enter into contracts with certain. states. individuals based on specific patient characteristics. This approach relies on companion diagnostics to target drugs and biological products to specific subsets of patients. Rare diseases often have genetic origins, and advances in medicine have resulted in the development of new treatments that work by targeting genetic mutations that cause the disease. It is inherently difficult to develop drugs for rare diseases because of the small patient population available to conduct clinical trials, so targeted therapies are generally first developed for patients with the most frequent disease-causing mutations. S. 2030 would define genetically targeted drugs, genetically targeted technology, and variant protein-targeted drugs. New Section 529A should not be construed to limit the Secretary's product approval authorities, or to entitle sponsors to obtain information in another sponsor's application without permission of the other sponsor. The Advancing Targeted Therapies for Rare Diseases Act of 2015 would add a new section to the FFDCA to facilitate the development, review, and approval of such drugs. The Act would also require the Secretary of Health and Human Services to report back to Congress on the progress made in the fight against rare diseases. for a genetically targeted drug or a variant protein-targeted drug to rely on data and information that has been previously developed and submitted. For a drug that incorporates or utilizes the same or similar genetically targeted technology or for a drug using the same technology or similar technology. For data and data that have been previously submitted and submitted, either by the same. or a different sponsor (with permission), for a drugs that incorporates the same, or similar, technology. for a gene-targeting drug to use the same genetic or gene-based targeting technology. least 90 days after the enactment of the Prescription Drug User Fee Amendments of 2012 and on or before the date of enactment of S. 1878. The bill would extend the authority to award such priority review vouchers until September 30, 2022. A new drug application or a biologics license application would remain eligible to receive a priority review voucher even if approval comes after September 30,. 2022, provided the application is approved before September 30. 2027, and is designated as a drug for a drug. Under the Prescription Drug User Fee Act of 1992 (PDUFA), FDA agreed to specific goals for improving the drug review time. FDA created a two-tiered system of review times: Standard Review and Priority Review. Compared with the amount of time standard review generally takes (approximately 10 months), a Priority Review generally takes less than a year. For more information on the Priority Review process, visit the FDA's Priority Review website or go to http://www.fda.gov/priorityreview. FDASIA ( P.L. 112-144 ) added a new FFDCA Section 529, creating the pediatric priority review voucher program. This voucher program, funded by user fees, provides a transferable voucher, under specified conditions, to a sponsor of an approved cost or lack of market opportunities. Section 7 of this bill would add a newFFDCA section 565A, "Priority Review to Encourage Treatments for Agents that Present National Security Threats" This section would establish a new priority review vouchers program,funded by user Fees. FDA's goal is to take action on an application within 6 months. Currently, FDA has two authorized priority review voucher programs. The purpose of the priority review drug voucher programs is to incentivize development of new treatment for diseases that may otherwise not attract development interest from companies due to either the lack of funding or the high cost of the drugs in the U.S. The rare pediatric disease priority review program is funded by user fees, which provide a transferable voucher to a sponsor of an approved new drug or biological product. awards the third-priority voucher and required the GAO, beginning on the date of the third voucher award, to study and then report on the effectiveness of the voucher program. The third voucher was awarded in March 2015, triggering a GAO study. The GAO will study the voucher's effectiveness in the development of products that prevent or treat rare pediatric diseases. It will also report on whether the vouchers have had a positive effect on the market for those products. The report will be released in April 2015. New drug or biological product for a rare pediatric disease to be used for the priority review of another application. The term "rare pediatric disease" refers to a disease that affects fewer than 200,000 persons in the United States. The House provision would add to the list of characteristics of a pediatric rare disease product application that the drug or product could be used in a priority review. The bill also would amend the definition of a "rares pediatric diseaseProduct application" to mean a human drug disease in which the serious or life-threatening manifestations primarily affect individuals aged from birth to 18 years. the March 2016 sunset of this authority. This authority was extended until September 30, 2016, by the Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2016 ( P.L. 114-113 ). S. 1878 would amend the definition of "rare pediatric disease" in FFDCA Section 529(a) by adding the following words in italics: "The disease is a rare pediatric disease." It would also add the words "the disease is rare" to the definition. It would be the first time this has been done. pursuant to FFDCA Section 526(a), a designation that was created by the Orphan Drug Act ( P.L. 97-414 ) to encourage firms to develop pharmaceuticals to treat rare diseases and conditions. The designation provides an extended period of market exclusivity for the drug. Section 5 26(a) defines "rare disease or condition" as any disease or. condition that has no known cure or effective treatment. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. A new drug application or a biologics license application submitted to FDA after the enactment of H.R. 6 and before December 31, 2018, would remain eligible to receive a priority review voucher. Similar to S. 1878 , the House provision also would amend the definition of "rare pediatric disease" by adding the following words in italics: "The disease is a serious or life-threatening" The House provision would extend the authority to award rare pediatric disease priority review vouchers until December 2018. S. 1878 would amend FFDCA Section 529(b)(4) by adding the requirement that the sponsor of a rare pediatric disease product application that intends to request a voucher notify the Secretary of such intent. It would also extend eligibility for a rare. pediatric disease priority review voucher, to a sponsor of an unapproved. application, as specified, that is approved after the enactment of S.1878. It also would require that GAO study the voucher program and report to the Senate. In 1986, in order to stabilize the pediatric vaccine market, Congress waived the liability of manufacturers (in most cases) There is no comparable provision in H.R. 6. A vaccine may be both a commercial product and a public good, and Congress has established several federal payment mechanisms. There are no comparable provisions in the bill. The bill does not address the issue of making the substances and organisms available. It also does not provide for the payment of compensation to those who are injured by a vaccine. Secretary may not add additional vaccine types. An exception is made under current law for new vaccines that are routinely recommended by CDC for use in children. In 2013, the Advisory Commission on Childhood Vaccines (ACCV) informed the Secretary that current VICP authority may discourage the growing use of vaccines for pregnant women. The law does not allow for addition of such vaccines to the Injury Table if they are not also recommended for children, and does not clearly cover injury to an infant born to a pregnant woman. a woman who was vaccinated during pregnancy. Section 6 of S. 2742 would require the Secretary to incorporate into the list of covered vaccines any vaccine recommended by CDC for routine use in pregnant women. It also would clarify the rulemaking process to establish covered injuries and related matters. The bill is expected to be signed into law by the end of the year, if not early next year. It would be the first of its kind in the U.S. since the Affordable Care Act was passed in 2010. Initially, the list of covered vaccine types and associated compensable injuries and time frames was provided in law (PHSA Title XXI, Subtitle 2) The Secretary may, through rulemaking, create or modify listed compensable injured and time frame for vaccines on the Injury Table, but the list has not been changed. The list of vaccine types is called the "Injury Table" and is available at www.vaccines.gov/InjuryTable. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. as FDA, in making vaccine use and licensing decisions. Section 7 of S. 2742 does not explicitly require that CDC personnel meet with vaccine developers. It does, however, require the CDC Director to ensure that CDC centers and offices coordinate their vaccine program and policy efforts. The stated purpose is for CDC to share with developers information about epidemiology and related matters that could be of use to them in developing new vaccines. This report was updated on November 14, 2013, to reflect changes in the law. and health insurance coverage requirements to support the production and use of vaccines in the United States. Some of these incentives are tied to recommendations of CDC and/or its Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) In contrast to FDA, which licenses vaccines when they are shown to be safe and effective for individuals, ACIP and CDC also consider epidemiology and vaccine availability, and may recommend routine use of a vaccine for only a subset of the population for whom FDA has licensed its use. Vaccine manufacturers have an interest in understanding the factors considered by ACIP. Section 2142 would require the CDC Director to review ACIP processes, evaluation criteria, and consistency in issuing recommendations. H.R. 6 also includes a provision (Section 2141) that would expedite ACIP's consideration of certain vaccines. There is no comparable provision in S. 2742 . Sponsors of clinical trials for drugs, biologics, and vaccines would have to inform the sponsor's vaccine research and development plan. The section specifies types of information that may be shared, deadlines, representation at meetings. The White House hosted a Precision Medicine Initiative (PMI) Summit to mark the one year anniversary of the initiative's launch. Precision medicine would tailor medical treatment to individual patients, thus aiming to improve health outcomes and save health care costs. The mission of the PMI is "(t)o enable a new era of medicine through research, technology, and policies that empower patients, researchers, and providers to work together toward development of individualized care" The PMI was first announced in the State of the Union address. In the first year, the PMI's three key agencies—National Institutes of Health (NIH), Food and Drug Administration (FDA), and the Office of the National Coordinator for Health Information Technology (ONC)—began work in this area. The FY2017 President's budget requests a total of $309 million for the PMi: $4 million to the ONC. The PMI will be funded by a combination of federal, state, and local sources, as well as private funding. FDA, $5 million to ONC, and the remaining $300 million to NIH. Precision medicine research efforts rely on the collection of large amounts of health data. Access to this data may be a concern in the context of this type of research. The sharing of genetic and genomic data request, sharing of genomic data generated by NIH-funded research is a priority of NIH. The agency has established a comprehensive policy for the sharing of genome data that applies to all NIH- funded research that generates large-scale human or non-human genomic data. Precision medicine is a relatively new term for what has traditionally been called personalized medicine (or targeted medicine) The idea of providing health care to individuals based on specific patient characteristics. Currently, medical care is generally provided to children in a limited population use pathway. The program's effectiveness as an incentive for developing drugs that treat or prevent rare pediatric diseases and that would not otherwise have been developed. If deemed beneficial by the assessment above, the program can be expanded to the general population. If the program is deemed beneficial, it can be extended to the entire population. subsequent research." This policy requires investigators to outline their data-sharing plans as part of their funding applications. If investigators fail to submit the required data, NIH may withhold funding. Precision medicine research will often be considered to be highly innovative, risky, and potentially high-reward, and will also often require close of NIH-supported research data in certain circumstances. Codify the President's Precision Medicine Initiative (PMI) by encouraging the Secretary to establish and carry out the PMI. S. 2713 would codify the PMI and require Certificates of Confidentiality to investigators of federally funded research. It would also, for a precision drug or biological product, require the Secretary to issue and periodically update guidance to help sponsors develop a Precision Medicine product. The Advancing Precision Medicine Act of 2016 is not comparable to S. 27 13 in its approach to precision medicine but is similar in some ways, the authors say. They say it would also protect identifiable, sensitive information from release under FOIA. for secure patient matching and report its findings to Congress within two years. (§8) Section 3001 of the 21 st Century Cures Act ("Ensuring Interoperability of Health Information Technology") includes a series of HIT interoperability provisions. While a few of these provisions are comparable—though by no means identical—to the language in the HIT Act, they are not identical to the language used in the Act. For more on this story, visit CNN.com/Cures. Radiological Health programs. According to the FY2017 Congressional Justification, "With the continued development of companion diagnostic tests and the use of combinations of drugs and biologics to treat cancer using methods developed through the science of precision medicine, to most benefit those affected, FDA needs to take an integrated approach" The FDA is working with the National Institutes of Health to develop new diagnostic tests for cancer patients. The agency is also working to develop companion diagnostic test for other types of cancer, such as lung cancer. One such proposal is the so-called Limited Population Antibacterial Drug (LPAD) approval pathway for new antibacterial drugs. Such a pathway would involve smaller clinical trials in a limited population of patients that have serious or life-threatening infections and unmet medical needs. Products approved using this pathway must carry prominent labeling noting the intended use for a limited and specific population of Patients. Sponsors must submit promotional materials for products approved using theLPAD pathway. TheLPAD approval pathway is being considered by the FDA. million people become infected with bacteria that are resistant to antibiotics. At least 23,000 of them die from these infections. Antibiotics are intended for short-term use, making the development of new ones potentially less attractive to drug developers. Addressing barriers to antibiotic drug approval may help counter this problem, experts say. The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services has launched a new task force to tackle the problem of antibiotic resistance. The task force will focus on developing new drugs that can be used for a longer period of time. "an independent, non-profit entity" to "foster and accelerate the development of medical countermeasures" This includes novel antimicrobials for multidrug resistant organisms. This includes "multiuse platform technologies for diagnostics, prophylaxis, vaccines, and therapeutics" This also includes "new and promising [countermeasure] technologies; ... [and] address unmet public health needs ... such as novel anti-microbial technologies" This is an independent,non-profit organization. biologics) intended for use in limited, defined populations of patients that have severe, life-threatening infections for which current treatment options may be limited or absent. For which the benefits of a product could outweigh harms that would not be acceptable in broader population use. Some elements of the review were published in the New England Journal of Medicine on November 14, 2013. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org.  FDASIA terminated the authority to award such vouchers one year after the Secretary condition that affects fewer than 200,000 persons in the United States or affects more than200,000 people in the U.S. The condition is that there is no reasonable expectation that the cost of developing and making the drug available in the US will be recovered from U. S. sales. The drug must be available to those who need it for life-threatening or life-changing conditions. It must also be available for those who have a medical condition that requires them to take the drug for at least 12 months. annual progress reviews for each strategic focus area in the IC plans. The plans would be reviewed and updated every five years. Minorities traditionally have been underrepresented in clinical trials. For example, according to a 2011 report from an FDA-sponsored conference, "African Americans represent 12% of the U.S. population but less than 10% of clinical trials participants" in the United States. For more information, visit the IC's website or go to: www.ic.org. only 5% of clinical trial participants and Hispanics make up 16% of the population. There can be biological differences in how people process or respond to medical products, based on, for example, genetic differences. This could make a treatment less effective or perhaps perhaps not as effective as the original version of this article. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. U.S. health care spending is more than 2.5 times the OECD average. Yet, the health literature is poor, according to academic literature. The U.S., however, spends more on health care than any of the other 30 countries that make up the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), according to the World Health Organization. The health literature, however, is poor and the health care literature has been poor, says the World health Organization, which is the world's largest provider of health care. include the following: S. 1878, The Advancing Hope Act of 2015; S. 1622, The FDA Device Accountability Act of 2014. S. 2503, Preventing Superbugs and Protecting Patients Act, S. 2030, Theadvancing Targeted Therapies for Rare Diseases Act, and S. 2713, Advancing Precision Medicine Act of 2016. The Enhancing Health Act, The Combination Products Innovation Act and The Promise for Antibiotics and Therapeutics for Health Act are also included. H.R. 6 is the result of a series of hearings and roundtable meetings hosted by the House Energy and Commerce Committee. Other than the provisions relating to Food and Drug Administration priority review (discussed elsewhere in this report), the 21 st Century Cures Act contains no comparable provisions to S. 2055 as reported. The bill was passed on July 10, 2015, on a vote of 344 to 77. The House passed the bill in a voice vote, and the Senate passed it in a vote on July 14, 2015. Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions, by January 31, 2022, on the program's effectiveness as an incentive for developing drugs that treat or prevent rare pediatric diseases. H.R. 6 contains a comparable provision. House Committee on Energy and Commerce has a similar provision in its bill, which is expected to be voted on in the next few days. The Senate version of the bill is scheduled for a vote later this month. The House version is expected in the coming weeks. Section 1028 of H.R. 6 (Title I, Subtitle B) addresses high-risk, high-reward research. Section 1028 has a similar focus as the Senate bill provision. However, it would not establish OT authority, nor would would it establish OT funding. More information on S. 2030 can be found at: http://www.cnn.com/2015/01/30/health/features/health-drug-drugs-targets-rare-diseases. H.R. 6 is primarily focused on efforts to increase strategic investments in health care. The hearings and roundtables focused on a broad range of topics, including modernizing clinical trials, incorporating patient perspectives into medical research and regulatory processes, precision/personalized medicine, digital health care, and more. While consisting of many different provisions, the bill is primarily aimed at increasing investments in the health care industry. The bill is expected to be passed by the end of the year and become law in 2015. FDA's Human Drugs, Biologics, and Devices and the Center for Devices and Radiological Health reviews premarket approval applications for approval and 510(k) notifications for clearance. As part of the Vice President's Cancer Moonshot Initiative, the Obama Administration has proposed an Oncology Center of Excellence to streamline collaboration across FDA's human drugs, biologics and devices. The center will be based in Washington, D.C. and will focus on cancer treatment and prevention. in its evaluation of products for the prevention, screening, diagnosis, and treatment of cancer. Although the Administration's proposed center of excellence is specific to cancer, there has arguably also been an increase in the number and complexity of diagnostics and therapeutics for other diseases as well, and some groups have begun to look at cancer as one of their areas of focus. In the U.S., there are currently more than 1,000 cancer-related deaths a year, according to the National Institutes of Health. Such institutes would be responsible for coordinating activities applicable to specific disease area(s) between the Center for Drug Evaluation Research, Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research, and Center for Devices and Radiological Health. For example, coordinating staff from the three centers with diverse product expertise relevant to a specific product area would be a key task. Such institutes could coordinate activities between the Centers for Drug evaluation and research, Biologic evaluation, and Devices and radiological health, for example. Review Board (IRB) and Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) requirements were by far the most time-consuming. Other areas viewed as particularly time- consuming were those involving clinical trials, subcontracts, and cross-agency differences. Section 405 of the PHSA specifies that the Director of the National Cancer Institute is appointed by the Secretary of Health and Human Services. The Secretary of HHS is responsible for appointing the director of the Cancer Institute. The Director is also responsible for overseeing the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases. annual "coordinated 5-year budget plan" for countermeasure basic and advanced research, development, and procurement activities. The Pandemic and All-Hazards Preparedness Act ( P.L. 109-417 ) established the Biomedical Advanced Research and Development Authority (BARDA) to develop and procure medical countermeasures against CBRN agents, pandemic influenza, and emerging infectious diseases. BARDA has a budget of $1.2 billion for research and development activities. ASPR to BARDA. Such a move was recommended by the Blue Ribbon Panel on Biodefense to "reduce unnecessary bureaucratic delays" Section 4 would require ASPR to provide additional information in its "coordinated 5-year budget plan" and require that the ASPR provide more information to the White House about what it is doing to fight climate change. It would also require that ASPR report back to White House on the progress it has made in the fight against global warming. The Pandemic and All-Hazards Preparedness Reauthorization Act of 2013 ( P.L. 113-5 ) requires the ASPR to develop an all-hazard preparedness plan. The ASPR is responsible for preparing for and responding to pandemics, all-hazards, and other natural disasters. The bill also requires the agency to develop a plan to respond to an outbreak of a major disease or illness. The act also requires that the agency develop an emergency plan to deal with an outbreak. This streamlined approach would result in more uncertainty about potential risks posed by the product, and therefore a greater need for post-market scrutiny. Section 2 would amend PHSA Section 319E to require the HHS Secretary to (1) encourage and assist in reporting of antibacterial drug use, drug resistance, and antibiotic facilities; (4) assist states with their antibacterial resistance prevention activities; and (5) establish a mechanism for facilities to report antibiotic stewardship activities and drug resistance. This would apply to drugs approved under the LPAD pathway established in the Act. requiring the HHS Secretary to establish a monitoring system for the use of antibacterial and antifungal drugs, including products approved under the LPAD pathway. The Secretary would be required to make summaries of data from this system publicly available. Changes in bacterial and fungal resistance to drugs would also be monitored by the system. The system would be expected to be in place by the end of the first quarter of this year, according to the bill. The bill would also require the Secretary to make the data from the system publiclyavailable. stewardship programs in health care facilities of the Indian Health Service, Department of Veterans Affairs (VA), and Department of Defense (DOD) Report annually on antibacterial drug resistance trends, stewardship programs, and other matters; (3) provide guidance and other informational materials about antibiotic stewardship for residential and ambulatory health care. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org for details.  Phase II trials include more participants (about 100-300) who have the disease or condition that the product potentially could treat. In Phase III trials, the drug is studied in a larger number of participants with the disease (approximately 1,000-3,000) This phase of the drug's development is known as the Phase III trial period. The drug is then moved to the Phase IV phase, where it is tested on a larger group of patients. This phase is called the Phase II clinical trials. FDA uses the data from clinical trials to determine whether to approve a manufacturer's application for marketing a medical product. Clinical trials are conducted in three phases. Phase I trials try to determine dosing, document how a drug is metabolized and compare it to standard treatments or to no treatment. Phase II trials document how the drug is administered and how it is administered. Phase III trials document the effects of the drug on the body and the body's immune system. Phase IV trials determine whether the product is safe and effective. The National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences (NCATS) may develop and provide infrastructure and resources for all phases of clinical trials research. It may support clinical trial activities only through the end of Phase IIA, with specific exceptions. NCATS ensures that support of the clinical trial Activities in Phase IIB will not increase the federal government's liability beyond the award value of the center's center's facilities and services. The center may not support clinical trials beyond Phase IIC if the organization has timely plans to further the clinical trials activities. Section 11 of S. 2742 would extend NCATS's authority to support clinical trial activities through the end of Phase IIB. The Senate and House provision would extend the exception for treatment of a rare disease or condition. The NDCATS Phase IIb Restriction provision in H.R. 6 Section 1027 is comparable to S.2742 . The House provision is similar to H.S. 6 section 1027 of the House bill, which would extend Phase IIA through Phase III (instead of PhaseIIB) make a minor modification to the doctoral degree reporting requirement. change the NCATS annual report to a biennial report. eliminate the report on Centers of Excellence; (6) eliminate the periodic reports on rapid HIV testing; and (7) eliminate a report on centers of excellence. make a technical correction to a vaccine reporting requirement; (4) change the annual report of NCATS to aBiennial report; (5) eliminate an annual report on Center of Excellence, and (6), eliminate a periodic report on HIV testing. bill would add material to the NCATS annual/biennial report regarding methods and tools developed since the last report. The next NCATS report, following enactment, would include a complete list of all such methods, according to the bill. The bill would also ask if such methods are being used by the FDA to support medical product reviews. It would be the first time such a report would have been published, the bill says. The legislation is expected to be voted on by the House of Representatives this week. FDA guidance recommends ways to demonstrate that a test is both "simple" and has "an insignificant risk of an erroneous result" Demonstrating the test is simple is one way to prove that it is for home use or that it has "a simple laboratory examinations and procedures that have an insignificant risk" of an error. The guidance is available on the FDA's website at www.fda.gov/guidance. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. further tests the product's effectiveness, monitors side effects and, in some cases, compares the product to a standard treatment, if one is already available. As more and more participants are tested over longer periods of time, the less common side effects are more likely to be revealed. Under current current rules, side effects can only be revealed after a person has been given the drug for a certain period of time. In some cases this can be as little as a few days. In other cases, such as in the U.S., the drug can be given to people as early as the first few days of treatment. manufacturers to consider study designs to shorten the length of the study. Such study designs include the use of "surrogate endpoints and statistical methods, such as Bayesian analyses" FDA allows for substitution of laboratory data in certain circumstances, but not in most cases. For more information, go to www.fda.gov/medicine and www.nhs.uk/medication/disease-and-health-risk-risk/risk-assessment-risk. the absence of problems in laboratory testing may not always predict what happens to a device over time in the human body. For example, "the malfunction of [Medtronic and St. Jude Medical] implantable cardioverter-defibrillator leads, which resulted in the death of a patient," the report says. "The forces that cannot be replicated in lab testing act upon the device," the study says. The study was published in the Journal of the American College of Cardiology. entities to assist in "defraying the costs of qualified clinical testing expenses incurred in connection with the development of drugs for rare diseases and conditions" Section 5 defines "qualified testing" as human clinical testing (i) which is carried out under an exemption for a drug for a rare disease or to qualified testing expenses. This provision also would expand the definition of qualified testing to include "prospectively planned and designed observational studies and other analyses conducted to assist" in the understanding of the natural history of a rare condition. FDA is responsible for categorizing clinical laboratory tests according to their level of complexity. Laboratories that perform only low-complexity tests (called waived tests) receive a certificate of waiver (COW) from CMS. Conversely, only laboratories certified to do so may perform moderate- and high- Complexity tests. FDA determines whether a test is waived (i.e., low- complexity) or not based on information submitted about the test by the manufacturer, and FDA has issued guidance to support the manufacturer's submission of this information. CLIA requires laboratories to receive certification before they are allowed to carry out clinical laboratory testing on a human sample. CLIA certification is based on the level of complexity of testing that is being carried out. To see more from the CLIA website, visit: http://www.clia.org.uk/clinical-labels/clia-certification-for-human-samples.html. To read more about CLIA, click here: http:www.CLIA.org/clIA-Certification-For-Human-Samples. The provision would amend Section 520(g) of the FFDCA, regarding IDEs. It would remove the word "local" in all references to local IRBs. The use of non-local IRBs for review of IDEs and HDEs provision in H.R. 6 is comparable to the use of local IRB review of HDEs, the provision says. The provision would also remove the stipulation that an approved humanitarian use device may be used in a facility only after a localIRB has approved such use, except in certain emergency situations. of funding for the research. All clinical evaluations of investigational devices (unless exempt) must have an investigational device exemption (IDE) before the clinical study is initiated. An IDE allows an unapproved device (most commonly an invasive or life-sustaining device) to be used in a clinical study to collect the data. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255.  humanitarian device exemption (HDE) are for diagnosing or treating diseases or conditions that affect fewer than 4,000 individuals in the United States each year. An HDE application is similar to a PMA, but it is exempt from the effectiveness requirements. Such devices may be used in a facility only and may not be sold to the general public. For more information on the HDE exemption, visit the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services' Humanitarian Device Exemptions website. individuals, whichever is later, a summary analysis of the adverse drug reaction reports received for the drug, including identification of any new risks not previously identified. The FDAAA also named the risk-management process "risk evaluation and mitigation strategies" (REMS), which includes the drug's manufacturer, manufacturer, distributor, and distributor. The drug company's website says the FDAAA will provide a " summary analysis" of adverse drug reactions for each drug, as well as a risk evaluation of the drug and its manufacturer. and expanded the risk-management authority of FDA. A REMS may include "an elements to assure safe use" (ETASU), which is a restriction on distribution or use that is intended to (1) allow access to those who could benefit from the drug while minimizing their risk of adverse events, and (2) allow them to have access to the drug in a way that minimizes the risk of harm to them. The FDA has expanded its risk- management authority to include REMSs. specified conditions, to a sponsor of an approved new human drug product application for a material threat medical countermeasure to be used for the priority review of another application. This section defines a "material threat medicalcountermeasure application" as, among other things, a human drug application "to prevent or treat" a "threat of terrorism" or "drugs of mass destruction" or a "drug of war" or an "antidote to terrorism or drug of mass murder" or both. harm from a biological, chemical, radiological, or nuclear agent identified as a material threat" under the Public Health Service Act. "To mitigate, prevent, or treat harm from a condition that may result in adverse health consequences or death and may be caused by administering a drug, or biological product," according to the act. The act also defines "harm" as "to mitigate, preventing, or treating harm" from "a condition" under which "adverse health consequences" or "death" are possible. attacks of 2001, the federal government determined that it needed additional medical countermeasures to respond to an attack using chemical, biological, radiological, or nuclear (CBRN) agents. The Project BioShield Act ( P.L. 108-276 ), the Pandemic and All-Hazards Preparedness Act (PAHPA, ) and other measures were passed in response to the attacks. The Act was signed into law by President George W. Bush on September 11, 2001. Regenerative medicine is defined by NIH as "the process of creating living, functional tissues to repair or replace tissue or organ function lost due to age, disease, damage, or congenital defects" The regulation of cells or tissues intended for implantation or infusion into a human patient is the responsibility of the patient. The NIH defines regenerative medicine as "creating living,functional tissues to Repair or Replacement of Tissue or Organ Function Lost due to Age, Disease, Damage, or Congenital defects." therapies through a transparent public process. After the development of such standards, the Secretary would update relevant regulations and guidance. The term "regenerative medicine and advanced therapies" is defined as including cell therapy, gene therapy and gene-modified cell therapy. It also includes therapeutic tissue engineering products, human cell and human cell treatment. The Secretary of State for Health will make the announcement at a press conference on Wednesday. The press conference will be followed by a statement from the Department of Health and Social Services. the FDA Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research (CBER). FDA refers to such cells as HCT/Ps, which stands for human cells, tissue, and cellular and tissue-based products. CBER held a public workshop on standards development for cellular therapies and regenerative medicine products. Stem cells are one example of HCT-P cells that can be used in regenerative treatments. The FDA is developing new standards for stem cell therapy and other regenerative therapies. For more information, visit www.fda.gov/cber. in a widespread recall, and the hazards posed by particles shed from [DePuy] metal-on-metal hip replacements were not predictable based on engineering insights or in vitro studies. The 2002 FDA guidance states, "[r]eliance on postmarket controls (e.g., ... postmarket surveillance and the Medical Device Reporting requirements) should be considered as part of the medical device reporting requirements" The FDA has not issued a recall for DePuy's hip replacements since the 2002 recall. other things, "(m)anufacturers seeking to bring to market certain reusable devices" should submit to the FDA for review their data validating the effectiveness of their reprocessing methods and instructions. Under Section 604 of the Food and Drug Administration Safety and Innovation Act (FDASIA), the FDA is required to review data from manufacturers of reusable devices such as duodenoscopes, bronchoscopes and endoscopes. The FDA is also expected to review the data of manufacturers of disposable medical devices. usually not required. Reusable medical devices are those devices that may be reprocessed and used on multiple patients. In March of 2015, FDA released final guidance on the reprocessing of reusable medical devices: Reprocessing Medical Devices in Health Care Settings: Validation Methods and Labeling. This guidance states that, among other things, reprocession of reusable devices is not required in health care settings. The FDA has not issued any new guidance on this issue since it was released in March 2015. as passed by the House. For an explanation of how the bill would change current law, see CRS Report R44071, H.R. 6: The 21st Century Cures Act. The HHS Human Subject Regulations are a core set of federal standards for protecting human subjects in HHS-sponsored research. These regulations are the basis for the 21st century cures bill. For more information on the bill, see the CRS website. The bill's sponsor, Rep. Lamar Smith, R-Texas, says the bill is needed to protect human subjects. and welfare of research subjects are protected. FDA has issued its own set of Human Subject Regulations, which are similar, but not identical, to the Common Rule. FDA applies these regulations to all the research it regulates, including clinical trials of new drugs and medical devices, regardless of the source. The regulations are similar to those issued by the European Union and the U.S. European Union have issued their own sets of human subject regulations. The European Union has issued a set of human Subject Regulations that is similar to that of the United States. tissue products, and combination products using any such therapies or products. There is no comparable provision in H.R. 6 . Rules (or regulations) generally start with an act of Congress, and they are the means by which statutes are implemented and specific requirements are established. In lieu of or in place of, or in lieu of, the provision described in this article, we are happy to clarify that there is no similar provision in this bill. We are also happy to make clear that the provision was not included in the original version of this article. Section 3 would create new FFDCA Section 506(g), "Limited population pathway for antibacterial drugs" This review pathway would allow the Secretary to approve an antibacterial drug as an LPAD drug if certain conditions are met. The drug is intended to treat a serious or life-threatening infection in a limited population of patients. The House provision also would add a new FF DCA subsection 505(z), "Approval of certain antimicrobial and antifungal drugs" contains a related provision (Section 2151. Extension of Exclusivity Periods for a Drug Approved for a New Indication for a Rare Disease or Condition) Unlike the Senate bill which would broaden the use of grants for development of rare diseases, the House provision would add a new FFDCA Section 505I, which would extend the exclusivity period for drugs approved for a rare disease or condition. The Senate bill would also broaden the uses of grants to develop drugs for rare diseases. provision in the House bill ( H.R. 6 , Title II, Subtitle C, Section 2041, "Precision Medicine Guidance and Other Programs of Food and Drug Administration") would add a new Subchapter J, Precision Medicine, to Chapter V of the FFDCA. This sub chapter would include a new Section 592, " precision medicine" The bill would also add a sub chapter to the FDA's "Drug Safety and effectiveness" section, adding a new sub chapter, "precision medicine Guidance" which this limited pathway has streamlined premarket approval for such antibacterial drugs for limited populations, among other things. Section 4 states that S. 185 should not be construed to alter current prescribing or other medical practices. The House bill contains a comparable provision (Title II, Subtitle G, Section 2121, "Approval" Section 4: "S. 185" Section 5: "This limited pathway ... has streamlined ... premarket ... approval for ... antibacterial ... drugs for ... limited populations" also would amend FFDCA Section 505-1(f)(5)(A), which would expand the authority to evaluate the ETASU for a drug to include "or other advisory committee" Current law designates this responsibility to the Secretary "through the Drug Safety and Risk Management Advisory Committee (or successor committee)" of the FDA. There is no comparable provision in H.R. 6 . Biological products must be licensed by FDA, pursuant to PHSA Section 351, before they can be sold. Section 2228 of H.R. 6 (Title I, Subtitle M) is substantively identical to the Senate legislation. Section 205 of the Food and Drug Administration Modernization Act of 1997 (FDAMA, P.L. 105-115 ) amended Section 513 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (FFDCA) Section 770, as added in 2007, is comparable to S. 2700. Both provisions express the sense of Congress that participation in or sponsorship of scientific conferences and meetings is essential to the mission of NIH and FDA. H.R. 6 would add a new Section 505H to the FFDCA. It would require the Secretary to "establish a streamlined data review program" through which a sponsor could submit a "qualified data summary" The provision would address the data requirements in a supplemental NDA that a sponsor of an approved authorizing the Secretary would rely upon. The Senate bill contains a comparable provision (Title II, Subtitle D, Section 2063, "Streamlined Data Review Program"). The House provision would add the same language to the Senate bill. H.R. 6 would amend FFDCA Section 505 by deleting a clause from Section 505(d) and adding new subsections (x) and (y) The new 505(x) would restate the deleted 505(D) requirement for the Secretary to "implement a structured risk-benefit assessment" The House provision is quite different from the Senate bill and would not require that postmarket information be considered in determining the least burdensome means of demonstrating a reasonable assurance of device safety and effectiveness. agreed to in writing. The Secretary would be required to issue, not later than one year after enactment, guidance on the implementation of the new Section 515B of the FFDCA. In addition, the Secretary would have to issue a report, on January 1, 2017, to the Senate Health, Education, and other committees. This provision would remove from theFFDCA the following: Section 505(k)(5), which required the Secretary to report to Congress not earlier than two years after the enactment of the FDAAA in 2007 on certain FDA. literature, and unpublished scientific papers. (21 C.F.R. 314.50(d)(5)(iv) The clinical data submission must also include an "integrated summary of the data demonstrating substantial evidence of effectiveness for the claimed indications" This provision would amend FFDCA Section 505(c) to permit the Secretary, in reviewing a supplemental NDA submitted by the sponsor March 2014. This section would add a new Section 506G, "Standards for Regenerative Medicine and Advanced Therapies" between May 1, 2008, and February 24, 2015, 88% were inactive, 10% were ongoing, and 2% were complete. Activities related to implementing the least burdensome provision, including training for staff and advisory panels, are posted on FDA's website. S. 1622 , Section 4, would amend FFDCA Section 513 by adding the phrase "at the request of the director of the FDA" to the section's definition of the agency's role in the drug approval process. a new FFDCA Section 569C "Patient Participation in Medical Product Discussion," facilitating increased involvement of patients earlier in the regulatory process for medical product review. S. 1597 would add a new subsection (b), "Statement of Patient Experience," which would require the Secretary, upon approval of a new drug application, to make public any patient experience data and related information submitted and reviewed. It would also require the secretary to consider the minimal, financial interests in the medical products industry. as available supply, perceived liability risk, limited staff and facility resources, and need for data to assess safety and effectiveness. Although FDA reports the number of investigational drug requests it receives, manufacturers do not. The provision would add a new FFDCA Section 561A, "Expanded Access Policy Required for Investigational Drugs" II, Subtitle E, Section 2082, "expanded access policy" The sponsor or clinical investigator must provide the HHS Secretary with information, the bill says. New FFDCA Section 592 would allow the Secretary to do two things. First, as with the Senate bill, the Secretary would be allowed to rely on information about a drug or biological product that has been previously submitted. Second, the provision would require that the final guidance "clearly define how the Secretary of Health and Human Services interprets and uses adverse drug event data reported by investigators in the case of data reported from use under a request submitted under" Section 561(b) any persons (including patients, family members and caregivers of patients, patient advocacy organizations, disease research foundations, researchers, and drug manufacturers); and are intended to provide information about patients' experiences with a disease or condition. Patients' experiences include the impact of such disease and condition, or a related therapy, on patients' lives; and. The information is intended to help patients with the diagnosis, treatment, and care of such a disease, condition or therapy. For more information, visit www.nhs.gov/patients. and nonmanufacturer groups. This provision would define "patient experience data" as data collected by patients, parents, caregivers, patient advocacy organizations, disease research foundations, medical researchers, research sponsors, or other parties determined appropriate by the Secretary. It is intended to facilitate or enhance the Secretary's risk-benefit assessments, including information about the patient's experience. It would also allow the Secretary to use the data to make decisions about the care provided to patients and their families. The bill is expected to be signed into law by the end of the year. perspectives of patients during regulatory discussions. Fostering participation of a patient representative who may serve as a special government employee in appropriate agency meetings with medical product sponsors and investigators. exploring means to provide for identification of patient representatives who do not have any, or have no. or don't have a representative. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. guidance, over a period of five years, regarding the collection of patient experience data. This section describes the content of those required guidance documents. "patient experience data" is data that are collected by respect to the review of patient data and information on patient-focused drug development tools as part of approved applications. H.R. 6 also contains a provision related to patient experienceData to enhance the Structured Risk-Benefit Assessment Framework (RBAF) The RBAF is a risk-based risk assessment tool that assesses the safety and effectiveness of drugs. available and acceptable to the Secretary, and all data used to develop the qualified data summaries are submitted as part of the supplemental drug application. This section defines qualified data summary as a "summary of clinical data that demonstrates the safety and effectiveness of a drug with respect to a the Secretary regarding the safety of the drug developed for one or more indications" of the approved drug. The definition of "qualified data summary" in the House provision is similar to the Senate bill: "a summary of clinicalData intended to demonstrate safety and. effectiveness" as part of the application. "Data and information" refers to patient experience data, information on patient-focused drug development tools, and other relevant information, as determined by the Secretary. S. 1597 would require the Secretary, acting through the FDA Commissioner, to develop a plan to issue draft and final versions of the proposed drug applications. In addition, the Secretary would have to decide whether the drug would be approved for sale in the U.S., and if so, what form it would take. The Secretary would be allowed to, as appropriate, "coordinate with the sponsor regarding early agreement on a data development plan" The Secretary would also be able to ensure that clinical trial design is as efficient as practicable. The House provision adds specific details regarding efficient clinical trialDesign. The adoption of shorter or smaller clinical trials, application of surrogate endpoints, and use of adaptive trial.such external experts" would be among the provisions. The sponsor would be given an opportunity to recommend such external experts. terminologies and code sets are used, to the extent possible, to facilitate electronic data matching. The House provision would strike subparagraph 402(j)(2)(B) Within 90 days of enactment, the Secretary would be required to seek the advice of relevant stakeholders and experts on enhancements to the clinical trial registry data bank. The Secretary would have to provide a description of the system the eligible entity will use to store and maintain such data. The eligible entity would also have to certify that it will allow only registered users to access and use de-identified clinical trial data. Section 1121 of H.R. 6 would instruct the Secretary to enter into a seven-year cooperative agreement, contract, or grant. The Secretary would be required to begin implementation of the provision within 18 months of enactment. That would be the Clinical Trial Data System Agreement.that are necessary to implement the provision. That agreement would be known as the Clinical trial data system Agreement (CTDSA) and would be used to track clinical trials in the U.S. It would be available to the public for seven years. eligible entities (i.e., tax-exempt academic institutions) to implement a pilot program to enable registered users to conduct further research on reported clinical trial data. Eligible entities seeking funding would have to submit an application that contains certain specified information, including, among other things, information demonstrating that the eligible entity is a tax- exempt academic institution. The pilot program would be available to registered users for up to three years. It would be funded by a combination of federal and state grants, as well as private funding. Those responsible for specified clinical trials of FDA-regulated products have been required to submit registration information to ClinicalTrials.gov since December 2007. Subparagraph 402(j)(2)(B) requires the NIH Director to ensure that the data bank is easy to use, and that its entries are easily compared. Under Section 402(i)-(j) of the PHSA, the NIH must ensure that as deemed necessary and that the entries are easy-to-use. The NIH must also ensure that all entries in the Data Bank are easy to compare. In November 2014, HHS published a proposed rule to clarify and expand requirements for the submission of clinical trial registration and results information to ClinicalTrials.gov. Section 8 of S. 2742 would amend Section 402(j)(2)(D) of the PHSA, regarding posting of data, by adding new language. Section 1101 of H.R. 6 would add new language to Section 402('Expanded Clinical Trial Registry Data Bank') requiring the NIH to post the data bank. The two provisions are as follows: Section 513(a)(3)(D)(ii) Any clinical data, including one or more well-controlled investigations, specified in writing by the Secretary for demonstrating a reasonable assurance of device effectiveness shall be specified. The regulations direct the applicant to submit, in addition to descriptions and analysis of controlled and uncontrolled clinical studies, (iv) A description andAnalysis of any other data or information relevant to an evaluation of the device. Sections 314.50 and 314.54 describe the required contents of those applications. for use and (2) validation data regarding cleaning, disinfection, and sterilization. Reports issued after the publication of this list would be required to include instructions for use and validation data, as specified by the Secretary. S. 2503 also would require the Secretary, acting through the FDA Commissioner and not later, to report on the use of the drug. The drug was approved by the Food and Drug Administration in May. The FDA is expected to issue a final decision on the drug in the coming months. public may, in addition to keyword searching, search the entries in the data bank by various specified criteria. These criteria include the disease or condition being studied, the name of the drug or device under investigation, and the location of the clinical trial. The NIH Director is instructed to add search categories to the search engine's search function. The search function is available to the public through the National Institutes of Health (NIH) website. It is available in English, Spanish, German, French and Italian. Director to ensure that the registry and results data bank is easily used by the public. Data is submitted to the registry in a standardized format, including certain specified data. Data bank entries are easily compared; and information is submitted in a standard format. Director to ensure the registry is easily accessible to the public, and is easily compared to other data bank entries. The registry is open to the general public, as well as private companies and individuals. It is available in English and Spanish, with a limited number of languages available. priorities, would be required to assemble accurate data on study populations in clinical research. The data would have to be disaggregated by research area, condition, and disease categories and made publically available on the Internet. The proposal would also have to specify the inclusion of women, members of minority groups, relevant age categories, and other demographic variables. It would be made available to the public in a form that would be available to all people in the U.S. for the first time.  optional data elements would include information about the epidemiology, natural history, prevention, detection, management, and treatment approaches for the diseases. The bill also would authorize the Secretary to furnish grants, contracts, or cooperative agreements with public or private sector agencies. It would also include information on the development of outcomes measures; and any additional matters identified by stakeholders. It is expected to be signed into law by President Barack Obama on Friday. It will be the first of its kind in the U.S. history. For a drug whose active ingredient has never been FDA-approved, the law requires the sponsor to submit a new drug application. Once a product has of drugs and biological products, basing approval or licensure on evidence of the safety and effectiveness for a product's intended uses. Without that approval, a manufacturer may not distribute the product except for use in the clinical trials that will provide evidence to determine that product's safety and efficacy. For a drug that has not yet been approved, the sponsor must submit an application that includes data to provide evidence. of the eligible entity to ensure that registered users disseminate the results of their research. (5) evidence demonstrating that the eligible entities has a proven track record of protecting confidential data. Prior to FDA approval, medical products are tested in a clinical trial using human volunteers to see how they work. The FDA is the world's largest market for medical products. It has a market share of more than 80% in the U.S. and is expected to grow over the next few years. It is the largest market in Europe. applicant would be required to certify any patents that claim the approved drug. The applicant would also be required. to give notice to the holder of the approved application and patent owner. that the patent is invalid or will not be infringed upon. The application would also have to be approved by the FDA before it could be approved for use in the U.S. It would also need to be submitted to the FDA for approval before it was allowed to be used in the United States. require the allocation of a certain percentage of funding for this research. FDA regulatory authority over medical product safety and effectiveness covers drugs, biological products, and medical devices. The agency generally divides responsibilities for the review of marketing applications in its product-centered offices. The Center for Drug Evaluation and Research reviews new drug applications for approval, and the Center for Biologics Evaluation and research reviews biologics license applications for new drugs and devices. For more information, visit the FDA's website or go to www.fda.gov. safety and effectiveness of the drug product obtained or otherwise received by the applicant from any source, foreign or domestic. If there is sufficient evidence of safety and effectiveness to support the drug's use for this person; and if providing access "will not interfere with the ... clinical investigations to support marketing approval" The widespread use of the drugs is not required to be approved for use in the U.S., but it is required for use elsewhere in the world. For more information, visit the FDA's drug approval website. more toxic for individuals with specific genotypes. Therefore, it is important to study in clinical trials the safety and effectiveness of medical products in a broadly representative sample of people who will likely use the products following FDA approval. Section 492B of the PHSA requires the Director of NIH to report back to the FDA on the results of the clinical trials to determine whether the products are safe and effective. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. Under certain circumstances, FDA may permit the sponsor to provide an unapproved or unlicensed product to patients outside that standard regulatory framework. One such mechanism is expanded access to investigational drugs, commonly referred to as "compassionate use" If excluded from a clinical trial because of its enrollment limitations, a person, acting through a physician, may request access to an investigational new drug outside of the trial. FDA does not have the authority to compel a manufacturer to participate in such a trial. an approved new drug application (NDA), FDA requires that the manufacturer submit a supplemental NDA each time the manufacturer wants to change the labeling, the manufacturing process, or the dosing. FDA requires the manufacturer to add to the approval of an approved drug when seeking to add a new indication that is "qualified," to rely upon "qualified data summaries" to support the approval. This provision adds that such supplemental application is eligible only if data demonstrating the safety of the drug are "qualified" adverse events associated with the expanded access use in its assessment of the drug's safety, which could influence whether an NDA is approved. This provision would require that the HHS Secretary finalize the guidance "Expanded Access to Investigational Drugs for Treatment Use—Qs & As" The guidance was issued in draft form in May and would require finalizing it by the end of the year, HHS officials said in a letter to drugmakers on Tuesday. The letter also said the guidance would require the drugmakers to provide more information about the expanded drug access. limited population of patients with unmet needs; (2) the standards for new drug application approval are met; and (3) the Secretary receives a written request from the sponsor to approve the drug as an LPAD drug. This review pathway would include the following elements: It would require that the Secretary's of limited population antibacterial drugs." It would also require the Secretary to provide advice to the sponsor regarding the approval of an LPad drug. If an LP AD drug obtains approval for a broader indication, this legislation would allow the secretary to remove any post-marketing conditions (e.g., labeling requirements). drug would submit when seeking to add to the approval a new indication that is "qualified" (defined in this section as treating cancer or other indications as determined by the Secretary) Note that the Senate provision does not include treating cancer in its definition of "qualified indication" The approach for drug would be the same as the approach for a new drug that has been approved by the Food and Drug Administration. The approach would be similar to the approach that the FDA would take for a drug that had been approved for the first time. Policy would include contact information for the manufacturer or distributor of the drug, request procedures, and anticipated time to acknowledge request receipts. New section would state that posting of policy would not guarantee patients access to an investigational drug. The provision would also allow a manufacturer or Distributor to revise its policy at any time. This provision would require a manufacturer to make its policies on responding to compassionate use requests publicly available. It would also require the manufacturer to provide a list of criteria it will use to evaluate such requests for individual patients. FDASIA ( P.L. 112-144 ) expanded FDA's authorities and strengthened the agency's ability to safeguard and advance public health. FDASIA added that the legislation should not be construed to limit the Secretary's product approval authorities, or to entitle sponsors to obtain information in another sponsor's application without permission of the other sponsor. The legislation was approved by the FDA's Board of Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Manufacturers (FDA) on November 14, 2013. The vote was unanimous. The process must adhere to existing goals and procedures agreed upon by sponsors. FDA may enter into written agreement with the sponsor to define the process and data needed to review the limited population use application. The process could not proceed without such written agreement. The application must be submitted within 30 days of a sponsor's request. It must be approved by the FDA within 60 days of the sponsor's approval. It cannot be submitted before the end of the first quarter of 2015. It can't be submitted after the first three months of the second quarter. condition under section 505(i) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (or regulations issued under such section); (ii) which occurs after the date such drug is designated under section 526 of such Act, and before the date on which an application with respect to such drugs is submitted under such Act; and (B) preclinical testing involving a drug. Preclinical testing involves a drug that has not been approved for use in the United States by the Food and Drug Administration. framework in the new drug approval process. The new 505(y) would require the Secretary to "establish and implement processes under which" entities "seeking to develop patient experience data" could submit ideas and data to the Secretary. The Secretary could request materials from those entities, which could include the manufacturer, for use in drug approval. The process would be similar to that used in the FDA's approval process for new drugs, but with more stringent requirements. The secretary would be able to ask the manufacturer for information about the patient experience. The approval of an application containing such certification would be required to be made effective as specified in FFDCA Section 503(c)(3), among other requirements. An application for a combination product that contains an approved drug constituent would be considered a 505(b)(2) application. The application would have to be filed within 30 days of the FDA's approval of the product. The product would be available in the U.S. and Canada. It would be sold as a combination of two products, one of which would be a pill. which would add six months to the exclusivity period of an approved drug already on the market. FDA approves a supplemental application for that drug for a new indication to prevent, diagnose, or treat a rare disease or condition. The sponsor of a drug that receives the extended exclusivity is the drug's manufacturer or manufacturer of the drug that is approved for the new indication. The drug would be available for six months if approved for that new indication, or for an additional six months in the case of an existing drug. under this provision would be required to notify the Secretary "of any discontinuance of the production of the drug for solely commercial reasons" The six-month extension would not be available for a drug that had already received a six- months extension under this provision. The drug would have to be discontinued "at least one year before such discontinuances," according to the bill. The bill is expected to be signed into law by the end of the year, the White House said on Monday. contains provisions to grant market exclusivity for statutorily defined time periods (in months or years) to the holder of the NDA for a product. For example, a drug used in the treatment of a rare disease or condition, the first generic version of a drug to come to could be the first in the U.S. for a long period of time. The drug could be used to treat a rare condition, such as a rare form of cancer, or to treat an early onset of cancer. The House provision does not specify a deadline on the requirement for FDA guidance on Section 515B of the FFDCA. The agreement on clinical protocols and any subsequent changes must be agreed to in writing, the House provision says. The House provision also does not require that the agreement be made in writing. The Senate provision says the agreement must include "Bayesian statistics" and "designs and Bayesian statistics," but does not say what those are. The bill is expected to be voted on in the next few weeks. and FDA in the Prescription Drug User Fee Amendments of 2012 ( P.L. 112-144 , Title I). In addition, the House provision would require the Secretary to conduct and publish an assessment of the program within 48 months of enactment, and to seek public input. It also would allow the FDA to allow the Secretary of Health and Human Services to ask for public input on the program. The House provision was passed on a party-line vote, with no Democrats joining the GOP. reconsidered if reconsideration is requested within 30 days of the denial and other specified criteria are met. The House provision does not specify the number of business days in which FDA would "disclose to the sponsor, in advance, the topics of any consultation concerning the sponsor's device that [FDA] intends to [sic] intend to [disclose] to [the sponsor] " The provision also does not say how long the FDA would be required to disclose the topics in advance. would become effective on the later of the date that is 60 days after the enactment of S. 2700 or "the first initiation of a phase 2 or phase 3 study ... with respect to such investigational drug" The House bill contains a comparable provision ( H.R. 6 , Title 6 ) that would become effective within 60 days of the bill's enactment. The bill was passed by the House of Representatives and is expected to go to the Senate for consideration. The Senate bill was approved by the Senate on a voice vote. to FDA for review 30 days prior to dissemination. Sponsors may pursue this pathway concurrently with other specified streamlined approval pathways, as applicable. FDA would be required to issue draft implementation guidance within 18 months of enactment. This provision should not be construed to alter current prescribing or other medical practices (such as off-label prescribing). Other elements of the review pathway were found only in the House provision, for example, and were found in the Senate provision, which was not included in the bill. versus harm in these populations. Products approved using this pathway must carry prominent labeling noting the intended use for a limited and specific population of patients. Sponsors must submit promotional materials to FDA for review 30 days prior to dissemination. They may pursue this pathway concurrently with other specified streamlined programs. They must submit these materials to the FDA 30 days before they are distributed to the public. They can also submit promotional material for review prior to release to the general public 30 days in advance of release. of an application. This may be for either a new product, or for a different indication for an existing product. Second, in contrast to the Senate bill, it would allow the Secretary to consider the application for expedited review programs, including accelerated approval. Similar to S. 2030 , new Section of the bill would allow for accelerated approval of new products and new indications for existing products. It would also allow for an accelerated review of existing products and indications for new products, including a new indication for a new or existing indication. The U.S. Pharmacopeia Convention (USP) is a "scientific nonprofit organization that sets standards for the identity, strength, quality, and purity of medicines, food ingredients, and dietary supplements" USP standards "play a role in the adulteration and misbranding provisions of the FFDCA (which apply as well to biologics, a subset of drugs, under the PHS Act)." USP develops and publishes. They are based in Washington, D.C. The FFDCA defines official compendium as "the official United States Pharmacopeia, official Homeopathic pharmacopeia of the United States, official National Formulary, or any supplement to any of them" FDA regulates the U.S. sale of drugs. H.R. 6 adds that the provisions of the FFD CA that refer to an "official compendium" would not apply to biological products regulated under PHS Act Section 351. There is no comparable provision in H.r. 6 . deemed misbranded unless its label bears to the exclusion of any other nonproprietary name the 'established' name. Drugs also must comply with compendial standards for strength, quality, and purity (tests for assay and impurities) The Senate bill would amend Section 351(j) of the PHS. It would add the word "established" to the drug's label to make it clear that it is not a brand name but an established name. The bill would also add the words "quality" and "purity" to its label. FDA issues more than 100 guidances each year. FDA has the authority to promulgate regulations for the enforcement of the FFDCA. The proposal would require the Secretary, when proposing or finalizing a guidance document, to include in that guidance document a statement explaining why the interpretation or policy set forth in such guidance is being provided in a nonbinding guidance document and why it is being developed with public participation. It would also require the secretary to include a statement of the reasons for the development of the guidance document. addition to rulemaking, agencies may issue guidance that, although not legally binding, explains the agency's interpretation of, or policy on, a regulatory or statutory issue. Guidance may be used, among other things, to provide an interpretation of either statute or regulation or to inform regulated entities as to how an issue should be dealt with by the agency. For more information, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/29/technology/guidance/index.html#storylink=cpy. agency intends to implement and enforce a program. Some Members of Congress have expressed concern with FDA's use of guidance documents in lieu of the rulemaking process in certain instances. The agency prepares guidance documents "primarily for industry, but also for other stakeholders and its own staff, and uses them to address such matters as the design, manufacturing, and testing of regulated products," according to its website. The documents are made available to the public both in written form and, as feasible, through electronic means. example, the Food and Drug Administration Amendments Act of 2007 (FDAAA, P.L. 110-85 ) required FDA to take several actions regarding how it informs the public, expert committees, and others about agency actions and plans. As part of the act, FDA was required to share information it has developed or gathered about drug safety and effectiveness with the public and expert committees. The agency has also been required to provide more information to the public about its plans and actions. The act also required the FDA to share more information about how it informed the public of its plans. The Reagan-Udall Foundation for the Food and Drug Administration is a nonprofit organization "to advance the mission" of FDA. Its duties cover activities such as identifying and then prioritizing unmet needs; awarding grants or entering into other agreements with scientists, academic consortia, public-private partnerships, nonprofit organizations, among others. The foundation is funded by donations from individuals, foundations, corporations, foundations and individuals. For more information on the foundation, go to: http://www.reagan-udall.org. CDER reviews new drug applications for approval, the Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research reviews biologics license applications for licensure. The Center for Devices and Radiological Health (CDRH) reviews premarket approval applications for approved and 510(k) notifications for clearance. In 2002, Congress directed FDA to establish an Office of Drug Reviewer (ODR) to review drug applications and premarket applications. The Office of drug Reviewer was established in 2002 to review new drugs for approval. manufacturer whose product is assigned to CDER will have a higher standard of evidence, a potentially higher requirement for supporting data, a higher user fee, and probably a longer premarket review time period. S. 1767 would amend Section 503(g) of the CDER Act. It would also amend the CDRH Act to make it easier for manufacturers to get their products into the hands of the FDA. The bill is expected to be voted on by the House of Representatives in the coming weeks. how it informs the public, expert committees, and others about agency actions and plans. Among other things, the law required biweekly screening of the FDA Adverse Event Reporting System (FAERS) database. This provision would also amend FFDCA Section 505(r)(2)(D) to remove the requirement that the Secretary prepare a summary analysis of the adverse event signals. It would also remove a requirement for the Secretary to report on the FAERS guidelines on the FDA website, with input from experts. This provision would amend FFDCA Section 505(k)(5) to require the Secretary to conduct regular screenings of the FAERS database instead of the bi-weekly screenings required by current law. This provision also would require the secretary to post access to those for whom the potential harm would outweigh potential benefit. It would be the first time in the history of the federal government that such a provision has been added to the law. The bill is expected to be voted on in the next few days. website regarding new safety information or potential signals of a serious risk. The FDAAA also required the development and maintenance of a website with extensive drug safety information. It required the Secretary to "prepare, by 18 months after approval of a drug or after use of the drug by 10,000 drug reaction reports received for a drug" and instead require that the Secretary make publicly available on the FDA website "best practices for drug safety surveillance activities for drugs newly approved under this section or section 351 of the Public Health Service Act" summary results information for clinical trials of approved products since September 2008, and submit adverse events information since September 2009. The Secretary is required, by rulemaking, to expand the requirements for submission of summary results information, and is authorized to use rulemaking to make other changes. The secretary would be required to submit to Congress a report on registered clinical trials, as specified, including activities undertaken by the Secretary to educate responsible persons about compliance with the requirements in Section 402(j) The Secretary would berequired to submit an initial report not later than December 31, 2013. requiring the NIH Director to inform responsible parties of the option to request that information for a medical device clinical trial be publically posted prior to the date of clearance or approval. A clinical trial for a combination product would be considered a drug clinical trial, if the Secretary determines it is necessary. The NIH Director would have the power to approve or disapprove of a clinical trial that is part of a drug or medical device trial. The Secretary would have to approve the clinical trial before it could be conducted. patient preferences with respect to treatment of such disease or condition. S. 1597 would require the Secretary, acting through the FDA Commissioner, to publish, no later than June 1, 2021, 2026, and 2031, a report "assessing the trends of the Food and Drug Administration with regard to patient preferences" The bill would also require the FDA to publish a report on the FDA website on a regular basis on trends in the agency's drug approval process. The bill is expected to be signed into law in the next few days. Section 9 of S. 2742 would require the Secretary, acting. in order to determine how best to review the product. The Secretary would not be permitted to determine that the primary mode of action is that of a drug or a biological product, or a device clinical trial. If the Secretary determines that thePrimary mode ofaction of the product is that. of a device, then the product would be considered a device and not a drug, the bill says. The bill is expected to be signed into law by the end of the year. Combination Products (OCP) to facilitate the timely review and regulation of drug-device, drug-biologic, and device-biologian combination products. Both drugs and devices are defined in the FFDCA as products intended to diagnose, prevent, or treat disease. OCP treats a drug- device combination product as a drug unless the manufacturer can prove that it satisfies the device exclusionary clause; i.e., the product does not rely on chemical action to achieve its primary intended purpose. Unlike a drug, a device "does not achieve its primary intended purposes through chemical action within or on the body ... and is not dependent upon being metabolized" OCP is required to determine the primary mode of.function of the body. The device is not intended to be taken by the user, but to be used by a doctor or other health care provider. It is not meant to be ingested by the patient, but rather to be administered to the doctor or caretaker. It's a medical device, not a drug. FFDCA to require the Secretary to assign a primary center for the regulation of combination products. H.R. 6 section would amend FFDCA Section 503(g)(4)(C) to require that the Secretary "issue final guidance that describes the responsibilities of each agency center" The bill would require the secretary to determine the primary mode of action for a combination product—defined as needed. It would also require premarket review of these products under a single application whenever appropriate, among other things. years after enactment, to issue final guidance on the combination product review process, as specified. The bill would amend FFDCA Section 520(h)(4) to prohibit the use of information contained in an application. It would add reporting requirements to the annual report to Congress on the activities of OCP as specified, and would add requirements for OCP to report back to Congress in the form of an annual letter to the Congress. It also would require the OCP, after the bill is enacted, to report on its activities. bill would not prohibit a sponsor from submitting separate applications for the constituent parts of a combination product. The bill would also require the Secretary to identify, not later than 18 months after enactment, types of combination products that the Secretary proposes may adopt different good manufacturing practices. This list would be required to be published in the Federal Register and updated after 18 months. It would further require OCP to help coordinate timely review of combination product across relevant agency centers and to ensure that or will not be infringed upon. persons are designated in each primary agency center as points of contact for the sponsors of combination products. The bill would specify additional duties for OCP related to communication; facilitating meetings between the agency and the sponsors; and dispute resolution. It would require the Secretary, not later than four years after the bill is passed, to have the OCP in place by the end of the year. It also would require OCP to be in place at least four months before the bill goes into effect. the approved constituent parts. For premarket review of a combination product that contains an approved drug constituent, the applicant would be permitted to rely upon investigational studies not conducted by the applicant and for which the applicant has not obtained a right of reference. In relying upon these studies, the applicants would be required to provide a statement of their rationale for the combination product. For more information, visit the FDA's website at: http://www.nhs.gov/nhs/drugs/combination-drugs. for premarket approval of a class III device from being used in an application for premarket. approval of an approved drug constituent. Unless the applicant provides a patent certification and notifies the holder of the approved application and patent owner that the patent is invalid, the patent will be invalid. The patent will not be allowed to be used if the applicant does not provide a certification of the patent's validity. The application must be filed within 30 days of the application being approved. The applicant must also provide a certificate of its validity. submit a proposed combination product review plan, as specified. The Secretary would be required to provide a written response to the sponsor indicating whether the plan was accepted, accepted in part, or denied. The bill would allow the sponsor, if the plan were to be denied, to request a meeting a relevant scientific issue had been identified since acceptance of the plan. If such a decision was to be issued, the Secretary would have to provide written notice as well as an opportunity for a meeting. For premarket review of a combination product that includes an be able to propose and, subject to an agreement with the Secretary, conduct additional studies to establish the relevance of any chemical action. At any time following the Secretary's determination of the product's primary mode of action, the sponsor would be permitted to approved constituent component (e.g., a drug or device) The Secretary would be allowed to require that a sponsor submit only that information that is necessary to determine the safety of the combination product, including any incremental risks or benefits posed by the product. biologic solely because the combination product has any chemical action within or on the body. If the sponsor of a combination product disagreed with the Secretary's determination and requested an explanation, the Secretary would be required to provide a substantive scientific rationale for the determination. In addition, the sponsor would have to provide an explanation of the combination's safety and effectiveness. The Secretary would also have to explain why the combination was approved for use in the U.S. and why it was not approved in other countries. FDA "estimates that, at least in the early stages, on average, about six devices a year may qualify for the program," a media source says. The estimated six devices would represent about 15% of FDA's total PMA applications in one year. Other comments on the FDA draft guidance questioned whether FDA has sufficient resources to dedicate to the EAP program. S. 1077.product approval if the necessary data are not promptly collected or suggest that the product benefits do not outweigh risks. application, relies on the use of surrogate endpoints and the collection of postmarket data. As part of the EAP program, FDA intends to impose postmarket requirements, including requiring post-approval studies as a condition of approval for devices subject to a PMA when applicable. The extent to which FDA will accept certain data to be collected for an EAP Device in the U.S. is up to FDA. The program features "earlier and more interactive engagement with FDA staff," FDA says. allows the use of non-clinical data in place of clinical data for the approval of PMA devices. FDA allows and review of the device through utilization of timely postmarket data collection. Agreements on clinical protocols would be considered binding, but may be subject to change under certain circumstances. The provision specifies that both the agreement and subsequent changes to the clinical protocol must be approved by the FDA before they can go into effect in the U.S. and other countries in Europe and Asia. It also states that the agreement would be binding but that it could be changed at any time. required to support a premarket approval (PMA) submission. Device can be shipped lawfully for investigation of the device without requiring that the manufacturer comply with other requirements of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (FFDCA), such as registration and listing. Devices approved by FDA via FDA via IDE are subject to the same requirements as devices approved by the FDA via the FDA's Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for drug approval. The IDE permits a device to be shipped legally for investigation without requiring the manufacturer to comply. whose availability is in the best interest of the patients. FDA issued final guidance on April 13, 2015. The guidance focuses on balancing risks versus benefits for patients, drafting a Data Development Plan by the medical device sponsor, and collecting postmarket postmarket data. As indicated in the title, the FDA draft guidance covered only premarket approval (PMA) medical devices. The FDA issued the following draft guidance: Expedited Access for Premarket Approval Medical Devices Intended for Unmet Medical Need for Life Threatening or Irreversibly Debilitating Diseases or Conditions. a mechanism to reduce the premarket burden for 510(k)s and PMAs, while still ensuring the safety and effectiveness of the device. However, the FDA's authority to require postmarket studies of medical devices is limited. A September 2015 GAO study found that of the 392 postmarket surveillance studies ordered by FDA postmarket setting, rather than premarket, is affected by the Agency's current authority to mandate completion of post-approval studies. FDA can withdraw PMA approval for marketed devices for which FDA later determines that there is a lack of a showing of reasonable assurance that the device is safe or effective. FDA intends to withdraw approval for a device if the sponsor fails to adhere to the postmarket requirements, such as data collection. Comments on the April 2014 FDA draft guidance questioned FDA's ability to enforce postmarket study requirements. Comments urged the agency and Congress "to evaluate whether FDA has sufficient authorities" to promptly withdraw approval of a device for a medical device. The draft guidance was released to the public on April 14, 2014, and is available for download on the FDA's Web site. For confidential support, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255. Under FFDCA Section 515(d)(5), in order to provide for more effective treatment or diagnosis of life-threatening or irreversibly debilitating human diseases or conditions, the Secretary shall provide review priority for devices that represent breakthrough technologies for which no approved alternatives exist. The provision in H.R. 6 regarding priority review for breakthrough devices (Title II, Subtitle L, Title II) would add a new section, "Priority Review for Breakthrough Devices," to Chapter V. The new section would require the Secretary to establish a program to provide priority review. summary of any decision made by CDRH on the least burdensome requirements. FFDCA Section 510(k) requires medical device manufacturers to register with the Secretary. S. 2503 would add a new subsection (q), "Reusable Medical Devices," which would require the Secretary, not later than six months after enactment, to identify and publish a list of reusable device types for which reports under Section 510 (k) must include (1) instructions. It would also require manufacturers to report to the Secretary 90 days prior to introducing a device intended for human use into interstate commerce. reasonable assurance of device safety and effectiveness. In addition, the provision would amend FFDCA Section 517A(a), adding that each substantive summary of the scientific and regulatory rationale for any decision made by FDA's Center for Devices and Radiological Health (CDRH) regarding the submission or review of a PMA. This notification requirement is part of the 510(k) premarket approval pathway, a process that is unique to medical devices and if successful results in FDA clearance. There is no comparable provision in H.R. 6 . Secretary was required to withdraw draft guidance, issued by FDA in July 2011, entitled "Guidance for Industry and FDA Staff—510(k) Device Modifications: Deciding When to Submit a 510(k for a Change to an Existing Device" The prior guidance issued in 1997 in effect remained in effect. Although patient and consumer groups a legally marketed device. Any new draft guidance (or proposed regulation) on 510(K) device modification could not be issued before the committees received the report. Final guidance ( or regulation) could not been issued until one year after the committees had received theReport. Section 604 of FDASIA required a report to House and Senate committees on when a 510(k) notification should be submitted for a modification or change. Industry had voiced concerns that the 2011 guidance would slow the device regulatory process. There are no comparable provisions in H.R. 6 . The bill is expected to be signed into law by the end of the year. It is not clear when the legislation will be introduced in the Senate or the House of Representatives. The bill was introduced by Rep. Kevin McCarthy, R-California. The Secretary shall consider, in consultation with the applicant, the least burdensome appropriate means of evaluating device effectiveness that would have a reasonable likelihood of resulting in approval. Section 513(i)(1)(D) Whenever the Secretary requests information to demonstrate that devices with differing technological characteristics are substantially equivalent, the Secretary will consider the method used by the applicant. The Secretary will also consider whether the applicant can demonstrate that the two devices would be substantially equivalent in terms of technology. The secretary will consider whether each device would be able to provide the same amount of computing power. the 510(k) pathway, the manufacturer must demonstrate that a new device is substantially equivalent to a device already on the market (a predicate device) Substantial equivalence is determined by comparing the performance characteristics of a new. device with those of a predicate device. Clinical data demonstrating safety and effectiveness are required to prove effectiveness. The FDA has not yet issued a 510(K) approval for a new drug to be sold in the U.S. to treat high blood pressure or high blood sugar. latter includes showing that a test's accuracy is comparable to a method whose accuracy has already been established and documented. S. 1622 Section 3 would require the Secretary to publish draft guidance that revises Section V of the current guidance. Not later than one year after the comment period for the draft guidance closes, the Secretary would be required to publish the guidance. The draft guidance would provide clarification on the appropriate use of comparable performance between a waived and moderately complex laboratory user to demonstrate accuracy. It would also address approaches to demonstrating accuracy. Secretary would be required to issue draft guidance, no later than 12 months after enactment, that would update the October 4, 2002, final guidance on the least burdensome provisions. In developing the draft guidance,. the Secretary would berequired to hold a meeting of stakeholders "to ensure a full record," according to the bill. The bill is expected to be signed by President Barack Obama in the next few weeks, the White House said on Thursday. The legislation is expected in the Senate next week. to mean "the minimum required information that would support a determination by the Secretary that an application provides a reasonable assurance of the safety and effectiveness of the device" and would state that the role of postmarket information must be considered in determining the least burdensome means of demonstrating a device's effectiveness. To mean "The minimum required info that wouldsupport a determination" and to state that "postmarket information" should be considered. to mean " theminimum required information" and "to be considered" to determine whether a device is safe and effective. The Secretary would be required to "disclose to the sponsor, not less than 5 business days in advance" of any consultation concerning the sponsor's device. The sponsor would be given an opportunity to recommend compliance with the Secretary's plan. The Secretary would have to provide the sponsor with a copy of the plan and the sponsor would have the opportunity to make a recommendation to the Secretary. The secretary would also have to share the plan with external experts or an advisory committee and provide an explanation of how the plan would work. with the Secretary to discuss the information and requirements necessary to make the plan acceptable. A denied plan would be allowed to be resubmitted. With respect to an accepted plan, in whole or part, the Secretary would be required to accept the plan if the Secretary determines the data to be acceptable. The Secretary would then decide whether to accept or reject the plan, depending on what the data is determined to be in the plan. The plan would then be submitted to the Secretary for approval. be collected are appropriate for premarket approval; in addition, a plan, in whole or in part, that has been accepted would be required to remain in effect except with written agreement of the Secretary and the sponsor; and pursuant to a decision by the reviewing primary agency center director that the plan is appropriate for Premarket approval. Be collected areappropriate for preMarket approval;. A plan that is accepted is required to stay in effect, except with Written agreement of Secretary and sponsor, or pursuant to decision by reviewing primaryagency center director. S. 2201) is comparable to S. 1077. The section would allow requests for priority review from device sponsors of PMA medical devices and one other type of regulatory decision. The House provision would allow denied priority review requests to be reviewed by a panel of three people. The panel would also be able to consider requests from manufacturers of both 510(k) devices and PMAMedical devices. The bill would also allow the panel to consider a request from a manufacturer of a medical device that is not a 510(K) device. The section would require the Secretary in 60 days to determine whether the request for priority review would be granted. Such requests would be evaluated by a team of experienced FDA staff and senior managers. All determinations—either approval or denial of priority review—would require a "substantive" review. The expedited review process for a medical device that has received a priority review designation in exchange for lower requirements in the premarket review process, such as less information in the PMA, would begin within 60 days. criteria (i.e., no approved alternatives exist, offer significant advantages over existing approved or cleared alternatives) no longer being met. Each priority review device would be assigned a team of staff, "including a team leader with appropriate subject matter," according to the bill. The bill is expected to be signed into law by the end of the year or early next year, the bill's authors say. It would be the first of its kind in the U.S. and would cover a range of medical devices, including pacemakers and blood pressure monitors. such requirements, including employee training. Under the Senate bill, 18 months after enactment, the FDA ombudsman responsible for device premarket review would be required to conduct an audit of the least burdensome training, including the effectiveness of the training. The audit would be needed to include "interviews of persons who are representatives of the industry regarding their experience" and a list of the measurement tools used to assess the implementation. A summary of the audit findings would berequired to be submitted to the Senate HELP Committee and the Senate. a new subsection (j), "Training and Oversight of Least Burdensome Requirements" The Secretary would be required to ensure that each FDA employee involved in the review of premarket submissions, including supervisors, receives training on the "meaning and implementation of the least burdensome requirements" and to periodically assess the implementation of expertise and experience. Senior FDA personnel would oversee each team to facilitate the efficient development and review of the device. Among other things, the Secretary wouldbe required to "provide for interactive communication with the device sponsor during the review process" commonly referred to as the "Least Burdensome Provisions" The two provisions stipulate that FDA consider the "least burdensome" data or information "necessary" to demonstrate a reasonable assurance of device effectiveness in a premarket approval (PMA) application. S. 1622 would amend FFDCA Section 515(c), adding a new paragraph that would require the Secretary to "consider the least burdensome appropriate means necessary to demonstrate device safety and effectiveness" It would define the term necessary. FDA published final guidance on the least burdensome provisions on October 4, 2002. Under the guidance, FDA may only request information that is necessary to making substantial equivalence determinations. In making such requests, the Secretary shall consider the least. burdensome means of demonstrating substantial equivalences and request information accordingly. The Secretary may only make such requests if the information is needed to make a substantial equivalency determination. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. or an IDE must also include a brief statement on how the least burdensome requirements were considered and applied. H.R. 6 (Title II, Subtitle M, Section 2223) is comparable to S. 1622. Under the House provision, the least-burdensome-appropriate-means must be included in the definition of training and oversight. The House provision is similar to the Senate version of the bill, S.1622. The Senate version has a different definition of "training and oversight"