7 percent of workers earning between $120,000 and $160,000 contributed to a traditional IRA. 3 percent of these workers contributed to Roth IRAs. 33 percent of individuals earning $20,000 to $40,000 who contributed to traditional IRA contributed the maximum amount allowed. 35 percent made maximum contributions to their Roth IRas. 87 percent of those earning $120k to $160k made the maximum contribution. 61 percent made themaximum contribution to their traditional IRA and 35 percent to Roth IRA. earned $100,000 or more; about 2 percent earned less than $10,000. Research shows that higher levels of education and household income correlate with a greater propensity to save. Despite the association of IRA ownership to individuals with higher incomes, data show that lower- and middle-income individuals also own IRAs. In 2003, 4 percent of workers earning $20,000 to $40,000 (in 1997 dollars) contributed to traditional IRAs, according to the Congressional Budget Office. $1.9 trillion. More households own traditional IRAs than Roth IRAs or employer-sponsored IRAs. Ownership of traditional and Roth IRas is associated with higher education and income levels. In 2004, 59 percent of IRA households were headed by an individual with a college degree. Over one- third of these IRA households are headed by individuals with no high school diploma. In 2007, nearly 33 percent of all households owned traditional IRas, and about 15 percent owned Roth IR as. In contrast, about 8 percent of households participated in employer- sponsored IRas. More households with Roth IRAs or employer-sponsored IRAs contribute to their accounts than households with traditional IRAs. The median household contribution to traditional IRas was $2,300 compared to the median contribution to Roth IRas of $3,000. The study noted that this difference may be related to higher contribution limits for employer- sponsored IRas. More than half of households with a Roth, SIMPLE, or Salary Reduction IRA contribute more than $5,000 to their account. Simplified Employee Pension IRA (SAR-SEP IRA) contributed to their accounts in 2004, but less than one- third of households with traditional IRAs did so. This, again, may be partly attributed to the emerging role of traditional IRas as a means to preserve rollover assets rather than build retirement savings. The Simplified Employee pension IRA is available in the U.S. on the IRS website. For confidential support call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org. IRAs came from rollovers, demonstrating that IRAs play a significantly smaller role in building retirement savings than in preserving them. Since 1998, IRA assets have comprised the largest portion of the retirement market. IRA assets in 2004 totaled about $3.5 trillion compared to DC assets of $2.6 trillion and DB assets of £2.7 trillion. The median amount in a traditional IRA with rollover assets in 2007 was $61,000, while the median amount without rollover Assets was $30,000. from direct contributions, but from transfers, or rollovers, of retirement assets from other retirement plans, including 401(k) plans. These rollovers allow individuals to preserve their retirement savings when they change jobs or retire. As shown in figure 2, from 1998 to 2004, more than 80 percent of funds flowing into more than one retirement plan were from 401(K) rollovers. In that period, the average rollover was more than $1.5 million, according to the U.S. Department of Labor. all employees performing service for the company in 3 of the past 5 years and with more than $500 in compensation for 2007. These experts stated that small firms are likely to hire either seasonal employees or interns who may earn over $500. These employers may have difficulty hiring people who earn more than this amount, according to the experts. For more information on how to apply for a job in the U.S., visit http://www.cnn.com/2007/01/30/business/how-to-apply-for-a-job-in-the-U.S. and how-much. such compensation does not represent a profit to employers. However, because the information on costs of managing such programs is lacking, Labor may be unable to readily determine if employers are receiving excessive compensation. If such programs fall outside the safe harbor, they may be considered to have become outside of Labor's safe harbor and could be considered excessive or excessive compensation by the Labor Department. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. In 2006, almost half of all U.S. private sector workers were employed by firms with fewer than 100 employees. Only 1 in 4 of these workers worked for an employer sponsoring a retirement plan. Currently there are with fewerthan 100 employees do not offer an employer-sponsored retirement plan for their employees. For an employer that sponsors either a DB or DC retirement plan, click here to find out more. For more information on retirement plans, visit the Retirement Association of the United States. Since the early 1980s, roughly half of the private-sector work force has participated in either a defined benefit (DB) retirement plan, commonly known as a pension, or a defined contribution (DC) plan. In 2006, approximately 79 million—or about half of all workers— worked for an DB or DC plan. About half of private- sector workers have a 401(k) or a DC plan, such as a 403(k), according to the AFL-CIO. Pension plan sponsors must file Form 5500 reports with Labor on an annual basis. The reports provide Labor with valuable information about the financial health and operation of private pension plans. Although Labor’s Bureau of Labor Statistics National Compensation Survey surveys employee, it does from private pension plan sponsors. It does not, however, collect data from the private sector. It only collects data from employers, not employees. It also does not collect information from the public sector, such as from the federal government. We are pleased that the Committee on Ways and Means and this subcommittee are interested in retirement savings, particularly IRAs, and look forward to continuing our work with you. Mr. Chairman and Members of the subcommittee, this completes my prepared statement and I would be happy to respond. We are pleased to have you on our team and we will continue to work together to improve retirement security for all Americans. Thank you for your time and good luck with your retirement plans, and we hope to see you in Washington soon. to any questions the subcommittee may have at this time. For further information regarding this testimony, please contact Barbara D. Bovbjerg, Director, Education, Workforce, and Income Security Issues at (202) 512-7215. Contact points for our Offices of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of this article. For more information on this hearing, please visit: http://www.gao.gov/education-workforce-and-income-security-issues. page of this statement. Individuals making key contributions to this testimony include Tamara Cross (Assistant Director), Matt Barranca, Susan Pachikara, Raun Lazier, Joseph Applebaum, Susan Aschoff, Doreen Feldman, Edward Nannenhorn, MaryLynn Sergent, Roger Thomas, Walter Vance, and Jennifer Wong. This is a work of the U.S. government and is not affiliated with any of the organizations mentioned in the statement. The statement is the product of a collaboration between CNN and the Center for American Progress. subject to copyright protection in the United States. The published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from GAO. However, because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material, permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S., call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. separately. Separate. separate.separate. Sep separate. Sep separately. Sep separated.Separate. Sepseparated. Separately.Separated.separately, Sepseparately,. Sepseparate, Separate, Separation, Sep separate, Sep separated, Sep separation, Sep separately,Sep separate.Sepseparately., Sepseparly, Sep Separate,. SepSeparate,Sepseparate,. Sep Separated, SepSeparately, Sept Separate., Sep Separation. SepSepary, Separate. who offer these IRAs is limited and we were unable to determine how many employers actually do so. For example, the Bureau of Labor Statistics provides some data on the percentage of employees participating in employer-sponsored IRAs. The Bureau of information on IRas is currently not reported, such as information that identifies employers offering payroll-deduction IRAs and the distribution by employer of the number of employees that contribute to payroll- deduction IRas. Experts that we interviewed said that, without such information, they are unable to figure out how many companies offer IRAs to their employees. Labor Statistics reported that 8 percent of private sector workers in firms with fewer than 100 employees participated in a SIMPLE IRA in 2005. IRS evaluation of employer-filed W-2 forms estimated that 190,000 employers sponsored SIMPLE IRAs in 2004. IRS did not provide an estimate of the number of employers sponsoring SEP IRAs, and we were unable to determine how many employers make these IRAs available to employees. Few employers appear to offer their employees the opportunity to contribute to IRAs through payroll deductions, but data are insufficient. benefit plans in private establishments, receiving information on access, participation, and take- up rates for DB and DC plans. The survey does not collect information on the number of employers sponsoring employer-sponsored IRAs. Labor officials said that they do not have a process for actively seeking out and determining whether employer- sponsored IRAs are. Employer-sponsored IRA contributions or by not engaging in self-dealing; and whether all employers who offer a payroll-deduction IRA are meeting the conditions of Labor’s guidance. Employers are not required to report this activity to the federal government. Neither Labor nor IRS is able to determine how many employers offer payroll-deduction IRAs. IRS cannot share the information it receives on employer-sponsored IRAs with Labor because it is confidential tax information. Labor also does not receive relevant information from employers, such as annual financial reports, as it does for traditional and Roth IRAs, the agency says. The limited reporting requirements for employer- sponsored IRAs were put in place to try to reduce the amount deducted from wages for contributions. IRAs. This information also can be useful when determining policy options to increase IRA participation among uncovered workers. Although IRS does publish some of the information it receives on IRAs through its Statistics IRA information by IRS, they use studies by financial institutions and industry associations for research purposes. These experts said that although these studies are helpful, some may double- count individuals. One person may have more than one IRA because one person may has more than two IRAs. The IRS uses these studies to assess the current state of IRAs and future trends. Information on retirement plans are reported annually by employers and others to IRS. The Form W-2 contains details on the type of plan offered by the employer. It includes contributions to employer-sponsored IRAs, as well as IRA contributions, fair market value, and distributions. For example, information on IRA contributions can be found on the IRS' website at: http://www.irs.gov/retiree/retirement-planning/form-w-2-for-employers-and- others. The reporting requirements for employer-sponsored IRAs are limited. IRS does collect some information on these IRAs through several ‘information’ forms provided by financial institutions and employers. The limited reporting requirements prevent information from being obtained about the universe of employers that offer employer- sponsored and payroll-deduction IRAs. A minimum level of oversight is important productive if Congress and regulators ensure that there is adequate information on employer-sponsored IRAs and paid-deducted IRAs, authors say. a need for agencies that are responsible for overseeing retirement savings vehicles to have the information necessary to do so. Providing complete and consistent data on IRAs would help ensure that regulators have the. information they need to make informed decisions about how to increase coverage and. facilitate retirement savings. For confidential support call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. For support on suicide matters call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch or click here. rolling assets into IRAs or converting assets from a traditional IRA into a Roth IRA. Labor and IRS work together to oversee IRA prohibited transactions. IRS has responsibility for imposing an excise tax on parties that engage in a prohibited transaction. (See fig. 1 for a description of IRS and Labor responsibilities regarding IRAs.) Most assets flowing into IRas come not from the U.S., but from foreign governments, such as China, Russia, and the UAE, which are not subject to IRA restrictions. IRS does not produce IRA reports on a consistent basis. IRS is the only agency that has data on all IRA participants. More consistent reporting of IRA information could help them ensure that their analyses reflect current and accurate information about retirement assets, such as the fair market value of IRAs, IRS officials say. The IRS is currently facing several challenges that affect their ability to publish IRA information more regularly, they say. For more information on the IRS' IRA program, visit IRS.gov/IRS. 2003, which prevented them from issuing a report for that year. IRS has published IRA data for tax years 2000, 2001, 2002 and 2004, but none for tax year 2003. Labor officials and retirement and savings experts told us that without the consistent reporting of IRA data, the IRS won't be able to do its job as well as it did in the past. The IRS says it will continue to work with the IRA community to improve the reporting process for IRA data. For confidential support call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org. not due until the following year after the filing of the tax return. IRS officials said that these returns have numerous errors, making it difficult and time-consuming for IRS to edit them for statistical analysis. They also said that the IRA rules, and changes to those rules, are difficult for the IRS to change. The IRS said that it is also difficult for them to change the rules for the IRA, and that they have to wait until the next year to edit the returns for analysis. some taxpayers, employers, and trustees to understand, which contributes to filing errors. IRS employee who has recently retired, took the lead in developing a statistical analysis on IRAs. Since IRS does not have a process in place to train another employee to take over, it is difficult to find someone to do the analysis for the IRS. It is also difficult to get the IRS to share information with the public, which can lead to errors in the tax filing process. The IRS has no plans to change the way IRAs are calculated. IRS officials say they recognize this problem and are in the early stages of determining ways to correct it. In addition, IRS officials told us they had problems with the IRA data for tax year. This role, a knowledge gap was created that IRS is trying to fill, officials say. The IRS says it is working to correct the problem. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. Data on the number of employers offering employees employer-sponsored IRAs and payroll-deduction IRAs is limited. Based on available data, employee access to SIMPLE and SEP IRAs appears limited. Under ERISA Title I, there is no reporting requirement for SIMPLE IRAs, and there is an alternative method available for reporting of employer- sponsored SEPIRAs. Payroll-deductions IRA programs are not subject to ERISA requirements for employer-sponsored retirement plans and have no reporting requirements. maintain a payroll-deduction program for employees to contribute to traditional and Roth IRAs without being considered a pension plan under ERISA. Employers are not subject to ERISA fiduciary responsibilities as long as they meet the conditions in Labor’s regulation and guidance for managing these plans. Employer-sponsored IRAs may also help employees of small firms save for their retirement. Labor told us that it has received no input from IRA providers as to what that flexibility would be. IRS and Labor share oversight responsibilities for IRAs. Payroll-deduction IRAs are not under Labor’s jurisdiction. IRS has responsibility over tax rules for establishing and maintaining traditional and Roth IRAs that may be funded through employee contributions.annual employer contributions are not mandatory. The IRS does not have direct oversight over payroll- deduction IRA programs. The Labor Department does provide guidance regarding the circumstances under which an employer may provide a payroll-deductions IRA program without being subject to ERISA requirements. IRS enforces Title II of ERISA for all types of IRAs. Title II details participant eligibility, vesting, and funding requirements. IRS also enforces various tax rules for IRAs, including rules for eligibility, contributions, distributions, and ERISA Title I programs. Without accurate cost estimates and a determination of what constitutes “reasonable compensation” to employers, employers may be reluctant to seek compensation from IRA service providers to defray the costs of operating a payroll-deduction IRA program. Congress may wish to consider whether payroll-deduction IRAs should have some direct oversight. Neither IRS nor Labor have direct oversight of payroll- deduction IRAs. Any direct oversight should be done in a way that does not pose an undue burden on employers or their employees. We are continuing our work on IRAs, and are beginning to examine the fees that are charged to employers for managing payroll- Deducted IRAs for employees. The IRS and Labor are working together to improve IRA information and oversight. changes at IRS and Labor could encourage employers to offer IRAs and improve IRA information and oversight. Currently, Labor has no process in place to monitor employer- sponsored IRAs, and has no jurisdiction over payroll-deduction IRAs. IRS does not have oversight over employer management of these programs. If current oversight vulnerabilities are not addressed, future problems could emerge as more employers and workers participate in employer-sponsored IRas. Without direct oversight, employees may lack confidence that payroll- deduction IRAs will provide them with adequate protections. While Labor does not have direct oversight of payroll-deduction IRA programs, it has provided “safe harbor” guidance to employers. Yet, Labor officials said that they are unable to monitor whether all employers are in compliance with the prohibited transaction rules and fiduciary standards. In order to improve oversight and information available on IRAs, we recently made several recommendations to Congress, Labor, and IRS, which are summarized in table 3. We reported that we made the recommendations to the IRS, Congress, and Labor. engaging in prohibited transactions or not abiding by their fiduciary responsibilities. Instead, as in the case of Labor’s oversight of pension plans, Labor primarily relies on participant complaints as sources of investigative leads to detect employers that are not making employer-sponsored IRA contributions. The Labor Department says it relies on complaints from participants as its primary source of information for its investigation of employers that fail to make contributions to their pension plans. The agency says it is investigating employers that “are not making employers- sponsored IRA contributions” or “not abiding by [their] fiduciaries responsibilities” Labor generally has interpretive jurisdiction over prohibited transactions. Both ERISA and the Internal Revenue Code contain various statutory exemptions from the prohibited transaction rules. Labor has authority to grant administrative exemptions and establish exemption procedures. Labor may grant exemptions on a case-by-case basis, depending on the circumstances. The IRS has certain enforcement authority. Labor generally hasinterpretive jurisdiction on prohibited transactions and the IRS hasCertain enforcement authority on such transactions. Other than prohibited transactions, Labor has no jurisdiction over other types of transactions. employers with 100 or fewer employees, allow eligible employees to direct a portion of their salary, within limits, to a SIMPLE IRA. Employers sponsoring SIMPLE IRAs must either match the employee’s contributions up to 3 percent of his or her compensation or make 2 percent contributions of each employees’ salary. SIMPLEIRAs must determine before the beginning of the calendar year whether they will match employee contributions or make nonelective contributions. According to IRA providers, this requirement may discourage some small employers from offering these IRAs. Some small firms may be unable to commit to these IRAs. Small business revenues are inconsistent and may fluctuate greatly from year to year, making required contributions difficult for some firms. In addition, employers to make contributions to employee accounts, some small firms might not be able to do so. Some small business groups and IRA providers told us that small business revenues may be inconsistent and could make required contributions hard for some companies to make. Some employers may not be capable of making contributions to employees' IRAs, some say. Small business member organizations and IRA providers said contribution limits for payroll-deduction IRAs do not offer adequate savings incentives to justify the effort in offering these IRAs. Labor officials note that Interpretive Bulletin 99-1 specifically provides for flexibility. Lack of savings incentives for small employers. Because the contribution limit is set at $50,000, small business members say they can't afford to contribute more than $10,000 a year to the IRA. The maximum contribution is $100,000 for a married couple. According to experts and available government data, worker access to employer-sponsored and payroll-deduction IRAs appears limited. To address the issue of low retirement plan sponsorship among small employers, Congress created SEP and SIMPLE employer- sponsored IRAs. Employees are able to save significantly more per year in SIMPLE IRAs than they are in payroll- deduction IRAs, according to the study. The study found that several factors may discourage employers from establishing employer-Sponsored SIMPLE and SEP IRas. Tax credits should be made available to defray start-up costs for small employers of payroll- deduction IRAs, experts suggest. Small employers without electronic or automatic payroll systems should be given the credits, they say. These credits should also be lower than the credits available to employers for starting SIMPLE, SEP, and other schemes, experts say.employer sponsorship of IRAs. For more information on the tax credits available for employers, visit www.taxcredit.gov.uk. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here. SIMPLE IRAs allow employers to make tax-deductible contributions to their own and each eligible employee’s traditional IRA at higher contribution limits than other IRAs. SEP IRAs do not permit employee contributions. Higher contribution limits offer greater savings benefits than payroll-deduction IRas. In 2007, individuals under age 50 were able to contribute up to $10,500 to SIMPLE IRas—more than twice the amount allowed in 2007 for payroll- deduction IRAs, according to the IRS. Small business groups told us that the costs of managing SIMPLE and SEP IRAs may be prohibitive for small employers. Experts also pointed out that certain contribution requirements for these plans may, in some cases, limit employer sponsorship of these plans. For example, because SIMPLE IRAs require contributions to employee accounts at the end of the year, employers may be encouraged to contribute more to employees' accounts. With regard to SEp IRAs, two experts said small firms may be discouraged from offering these plans because of the requirement that employers must set up a SEP IRA. (3) increasing public awareness about the importance of saving for retirement and how to do so. Several experts said expanding the scope of the Retirement Savings Contribution Credit, commonly known as the “saver’s credit,” could encourage IRA participation among workers who are not covered by an employer-sponsored retirement plan. They said the credit could be expanded to include 401(k)s, 403(b)s and 403(c)s. They also said it could be extended to include individual retirement accounts. said expanding the saver’s credit to include more middle-income earners and making the credit refundable could encourage more moderate- and low-income individuals to participate in IRAs. An expanded and refundable tax credit would have revenue implications for the federal, he said. The tax credit is available to tax filers even if they do not owe income tax, the tax code says. It is not refundable, however, and can only be claimed if the filer owes no income tax. Small business groups and IRA providers said that mandatory automatic enrollment could be burdensome to small employers. Low- income workers may opt out of automatic enrollment programs or be more inclined to make early withdrawals. Experts also said increasing public awareness of the importance of saving for retirement and educating individuals about how to do so could increase IRA participation. Government.government.gov: Do you have a personal essay to share with the world? Submit it at CNN iReport. You can also share it on Facebook and Twitter. employer or union sponsoring either a DB or DC plan. About 62 million workers participated in such a plan. Congress created two types of employer-sponsored IRAs with fewer regulatory requirements than DB and DC plans. SIMPLE IRAs, available only to small firms, are unlikely to work several types of IRAs for individuals and small employers and their employees.. Savings Incentive Match Plans for Employees (SIMPLE) were created to encourage small employers to offer IRAs to their. employees. Several bills have been introduced in Congress to expand worker access to payroll-deduction IRAs. IRA providers and small business groups said increasing contribution limits for SIMPLE IRAs to levels closer to those for 401(k) plans would encourage more employers to offer these plans. Other experts said doing so could provide incentives to employers already offering 401(K) plans to switch to SIMPLEIRAs, which have fewer reporting requirements. Experts offered several proposals to encourage workers to participate in IRAs, including expanding existing tax credits for moderate and low-income workers. would be subject to higher management costs for offering payroll-deduction IRAs. According to Labor, costs to employers also are significantly influenced by the number of IRA providers to which an employer must remit contributions on behalf of employees. Some employers are hesitant to offer a payroll- Deduction IRA program because they find Labor’s guidance limits their ability to effectively publicize the program to employees for determine the actual costs for managing the IRA program. Some experts reported that such costs were significant, while others reported that they were minimal. Many small employers lack electronic, or automatic, payroll systems, experts say. Costs are influenced by the number of employees participating in the program and whether an employer has a payroll processing system in place for automatic deductions and direct deposits to employee accounts. These employers need electronic or automatic payroll systems in place, they say. For more information, go to payroll.us or call 1-800-273-8255. For confidential support on suicide matters call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org. like existing payroll tax withholdings, and adding another deduction would not be substantial. However, other experts and one report we reviewed indicated that employer costs may be significant, particularly for employers without electronic payrolls. The report did not estimate actual costs to employers on a per account basis. In our report, we looked at the cost to employers of adding an electronic payroll system to their payroll system. We also looked at how much it would cost employers to add an additional deduction to their existing withholdings. Both SIMPLE IRAs and payroll-deduction IRA programs allow workers to contribute to their retirement through payroll deductions. Payroll deductions are a key feature in 401(k) and other DC plans. In 2003, only 7 percent of all workers contributed to an IRA, according to Economics literature. The majority of employers we reviewed, individuals are more likely to save in IRAs via payroll deductions than they are without these automatic deposits, says the Labor Department’s guidance on payroll- Deduction IRAs. that we reviewed identifies payroll deduction as a key factor in the success of 401(k) plans. Participation in these plans is much higher than in IRAs, which do not typically use payroll deduction. The Congressional Budget Office reported that 29 percent of all workers contributed to a DC plan in 2013. The average contribution to a 401(K) plan is $1,000. The typical contribution to an IRAs is $2,000, the CBO reported in 2013, and the average IRA contribution is $3,000 in 2014. Employees may contribute to traditional or Roth IRAs by having their employer withhold an amount determined by the employee and forwarded directly to the employee’s IRA. Any employer can provide payroll-deduction IRAs to their employees, regardless of whether or not they plan. In theory, all workers under age 70½ who lack an employer-sponsored retirement plan could be eligible to contribute to a traditional IRA through payroll deduction, should their employer offer such a program. Many of these individuals would beeligible to claim a tax deduction for their traditional IRA contributions. finding an IRA provider willing to open an IRA small enough for these temporary or low-earning participants. Costs to employers. Additional administrative costs associated with setting up and managing payroll-deduction IRAs may be a barrier for small employers. Lack of awareness. Representatives from small business groups said many small employers are unaware that payroll- Deduction IRas are available or that employer contributions are not required. However, Labor has produced educational materials describing the payroll and employer-sponsored IRA options available to employers and employees. Millions of U.S. workers have no retirement savings plan through their employer. Employer-sponsored and payroll-deduction IRAs afford an easier way for workers to save for retirement. They offer employers less burdensome reporting and legal responsibilities than defined benefit pension plans and 401(k) plans. Yet, barriers exist, such as administrative costs, that may discourage employers from offering payroll- deduction IRAs. As federal agencies begin to determine IRAs, this article has been updated.