of the plan’s premium or as a flat fee, for example, determined by the number of enrollees in the plan. More than three quarters of insurers met or exceeded the minimum PPACA MLR standards in 2011 and in 2012. Group market insurers were more likely to meet or exceed the standards than individual insurers. The median PPACAMLR for insurers in the large group market was about 91 percent compared to 86 percent in the individual market and 85 percent for the small group market. following: 85 percent in the large group market, 80 percent in. the small group market and 80 percent of the individual market. A higher MLR standard if specified by law in the state in which the a Department of Health and Human Services (HHS)-approved, adjusted MLR. standard for a particular market is specified. The average MLR is 85 percent for large group markets and 80percent for small group markets. It's 80 percent for the individual markets and 85percent for the large and small groups. meet or exceed the minimum applicable PPACA MLR standards. PPACA requires that private insurers offering group or individual health insurance coverage report annually on the various components that are used to calculate their MLRs. Each of these components must be reported by state and by market. Private insurers first reported this information in 2012, based on their 2011 experience. The markets include large group, small group, and individual. Large and small group employers are defined by the number of their large and small groups employers. in 2016, they must define small employers as having from 1 to 100 employees. The individual market includes policies sold by insurers directly to individuals. Insurers report their MLR data to CMS by entering information on a standardized form that includes multiple data fields that make up the MLR and rebate. In 2015, insurers reported MLR information to CMS on a form that included multiple fields that made up theMLR and Rebate data fields. In 2016, insurers must defineSmall Employers as having between 1 and 100 employees in the individual market.  PPACA gives states the option of continuing to define a small group employer as having 50 or fewer employees. Prior to PPACA, a small employer was defined in federal law as having a maximum of 50 employees. From the time PPACA was passed in 2010 until 2016, states can continue to define small group employers as having between 50 and 50 employees, but starting in 2016 they can change the definition to 100 or fewer. The new definition will apply to all employers with at least 50.employees. Some insurers, such as those with a small number of enrollees, are permitted certain adjustments to their MLRs. These adjustments are referred to as credibility adjustments, and they are added to and thus Credibility adjustments are provided to increase, the insurer’s MLR. Two of these insurers told us that the MLR requirements have generally moderated their premium increases. For example, one insurer that has increased its premium rates in the individual market since 2011 has not increased its MLR since 2011. Insurers with a small number of enrollees calculated their MLRs for 2012 based on their 2011 and 2012 experience combined. All insurers will calculate their MLR for their experience in 2013 and subsequent years based on data from a 3-year period. For each insurer, separate MLRs are calculated for each state and market combination in which it does business. Each MLR is used to calculate an MLR, which is then applied to the data for the 2 prior years. The data is then added to the MLR data from the year for which it is being calculated. The MLR data that insurers report to CMS include the following components, as required by law. Medical claims. Expenses for quality improvement (QI) activities. These include expenses for activities for activities in the QI area. The MLR is based on a formula developed by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) The formula was developed by CMS and developed by a team of experts. For more information on the MLR, visit www.cMS.org. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. Under the PPACA MLR requirements, private insurers must report annually to CMS their MLRs. Insurers must meet a minimum MLR standard, generally 80 percent for the individual and small group markets. When an insurer’s MLR is lower than the minimum standard, the insurer must pay a rebate. We asked insurers about their business practices from 2011, when the requirements took effect, to the present, and analyzed MLR data for that period.. non-claims costs as well as offer more competitive premium rates for their plans. In 2011 and 2012, the percentage of net premiums that insurers spent on their enrollees’ medical claims varied across insurance markets. Five of the eight insurers we interviewed also commented that the 2013 PPACA MLR calculation, which is based on a 3-year period including 2013 and the prior 2 years, will likely reduce some of the effects in the MLR formula of year-to-year variability in enrollees' medical claims. Specifically, insurers in the large group market spent care services. reserved capital. The PPACA MLR is generally calculated by dividing (a) the sum of an insurer’s medical claims and expenses for QI activities (the formula numerator) by (b) the insurers’ premiums, after excluding from them the amount of federal and state taxes and licensing or regulatory fees. The formula is based on the number of people who are insured under the Affordable Care Act (ACA) and how much they pay in premiums for the coverage they receive. markets since the PPACA MLR requirements began, but they did not attribute those decisions to the MLR. One insurer who operated in all 50 states told us that it left the individual market in three states in 2014. The insurer further explained that a low number of enrollees in each market contributed to its decisions to no longer operate in the three states. None of the insurers we interviewed reported that the PP ACA MLR was a factor in their decision to leave the market in those states. from the MLRs in each state for 2011 and 2012.) All eight insurers that we interviewed reported that they increased their premium rates since 2011 due to a variety of factors. Key factors stated that without the PPACA MLR requirements in place the insurer would have likely increased rates further. Two of the eight insurers we interviewed stated that they exited certain insurance companies since 2011. Another insurer explained that if it does not meet the PP ACA MLR standards in its planning, it will adjust its premium rate increases to avoid the associated expense. Insurers can choose to provide rebates in the form of a lump-sum payment or as a premium credit for the following MLR year. Insurers in the individual market must providing rebates to their enrollees while insurers in the small and large group markets may meet this obligation. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255 or visit www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org. by providing rebates to group policyholders, for example, employers. Group policyholders are responsible for allocating the amount of rebate that is proportionate to the total amount of premium paid by enrollees. Agents may retain part of the rebate based on the amount that they contributed to the scheme. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. is calculated and this difference is multiplied by the insurer’s premiums, after federal and state taxes and licensing or regulatory fees are removed. There are different ways in which rebates can be paid out by insurers that depend, in part, on whether rebates are associated with individual or group market the three markets. For example, in both years, the differences between the actual and recalculated rebate amounts were greater, on a percentage basis, in the small group market compared to the individual market. 2011, insurers in the large group market paid 37 percent of this total, or $405 million in rebates. Of the $520 million in total rebates that insurers paid in 2012, insurers paid the largest amount in the small group market (about $207 million) We calculated the average rebate amount by dividing the total amount of rebates insurers paid by the total number of individuals (including dependents) enrolled in their plans. See app. III for a listing of the rebate amounts that insurers pay in each state for 2011 and 2012. One insurer, who paid rebates in 2011, noted that it would not have owed rebates had the MLR formula been based on 3 years of insurers’ experience. Another insurer told us that it will likely owe rebates for 2013 because MLR data it reported in 2011 and 2012 will be averaged into 2013. The insurer added that over time, however, it believes the 3-yearMLR formula should be beneficial for the insurer by reducing its rebates over the next 3 years. rebates in 2012. These amounts would each have decreased by about 75 percent had agents’ and brokers’ fees and commissions been excluded from the MLR and rebate calculations. There was variation in the impact of the recalculated MLRs across changes during this time that would have affected their MLRs. However, if the formula had been different, insurers might have made different business decisions in those years. (See app. IV for a listing of the rebate amounts that insurers would have paid with agents' and brokers' commissions and fees excluded) group market. Our analysis of the data showed that rebates would have been reduced by about 75 percent if agents’ and brokers’ fees and commissions were excluded from the MLR and rebate calculations. (See table 4.) However, these two years of data may not reflect future rebate patterns. We are happy to clarify that this is not the case and that the data is based on two years' worth of data, not just one year's worth of rebate data. For more information, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/30/business/business-insurance-receipts-and-rebates-in-the-group-market. the likelihood of owing rebates. We provided a draft of this product to HHS for comment. HHS responded that it had no general or technical comments. We are sending copies of this report to the Secretary of Health and Human Services and other interested parties. In addition, the report is being sent to the White House and other government agencies for further review and consideration. The report is available online at: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/29/health/health-reform-report-took-a-look-at-the-risk-of-obtaining-rebates-for-government-subsidies. cited for making premium changes included: trends in medical claims, competition with other insurers, the PPACA requirements that insurers offer their plans on a guaranteed-issue basis as well as provide essential health benefits in their plans. One insurer that has increased premiums in the individual market since 2011 stated that its increased premiums were due in part to the increased costs that the insurer told us was associated with it. Three of the eight insurers reported that thePPACA was the reason for their increased premiums. For providing coverage on a Guaranteed Issue basis, as mandated under PPACA.  appendix presents information on the total amount of PPACA medical loss ratio rebates that insurers paid to enrollees and policyholders who paid premiums, by state for all markets combined for 2011 (see table 8) and for 2012. This appendix presents the amount of rebates insurers would have paid to insurers with agents’ and brokers’ commissions and fees excluded from the PPACAmedical loss ratio and rebate calculations (absent from the calculations) for 2011 and 2012. The appendix also presents the rebates paid to insurance companies for enrollees who paid no premiums. GAO staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix V. This appendix presents information on insurers’ median PPACA medical loss ratios by state and insurance market for 2011 (see table 6) and for 2012 (see tables 7 and 8) The appendix also includes information on insurer’s spending as a percent for 2011 and 2012. For more information, visit the GAO website at: http://www.gao.gov/healthcare/2011-12-PPACA-reform. The three categories that made up the largest share of insurers’ spending on non- claims costs were agents’ and brokers’ fees and commissions, other general expenses, and other claims adjustment expenses. Insurers in the small group market spent a higher share of non-claims costs than insurers in the individual and large group markets. In 2012, small group insurers spent about 42 percent of their total non- Claims costs on agents' and brokers' fees and commission. In comparison, large group insurers spend about 23 percent. Insurers in the individual and small group markets spent more than insurers in the large group market on non-claims costs. With regard to premium surplus, there was also variation across the insurance markets in 2011 and in 2012, with insurers in  the individual market having less premium surplus than large group insurers. For example, in 2012 insurers. in the Individual market spent about 16 percent of their net premiums on non. claims compared to the 7 percent that large group. insurers spent. In 2011 and 2012, insurers spent about 89 percent of. their net. premiums on medical claims compared with the 85 percent that on non.-claims. costs. individual market insurers spent and the 84 percent that small group market insurers spend. Three of the six non-claims cost categories generally comprised the largest share of insurers’ spending, and there was more of a mix in variation across markets. We found that insurers' spending all insurers, these two years of data may not reflect future patterns in spending. (See app. II for a listing of insurer’s spending on the MLR components by state for 2011 and 2012.). The remaining amount of premiums that an insurer does not spend on the components of medical claims, QI activities, taxes and fees, and non- claims costs, will be referred to as the insurer’s “premium surplus” Premium surplus includes profit and other premium surplus than insurers in both the small and large group markets. Insurers’ spending on QI expenses did not vary across markets as the PPACA MLR rebates the insurer may have to pay to enrollees. insurers in each market spent about 1 percent of net premiums on QI expenses in 2011 and in 2012. Other influencing factors, such as customer and employer demand for QI programs, competition among insurers, and the goal of improving enrollees’ health outcomes, could lower the use and costs of health. All eight insurers reported other influencing factors in their QI activities since 2011, and all eight reported other factors, including competition and customer demand forQI programs. In 2012, there were some shifts in the percentage of spending on these different components among the different markets. other changes in business practices), compared to the actual amounts that insurers paid, by state for 2011 (see table 12) and for 2012. In addition to the contact named above, Gerardine Brennan, Assistant Director; George Bogart; Romonda McKinney Bumpus; Pamela Dooley; Julianne Flowers; and Laurie Pachter made contact with the CDC. For 2011 and 2012, see table 12 and table 13 for state-by-state breakdowns of what insurers paid. In 2012 there were approximately 337,000 jobs held by insurance sales agents, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics. Agents and brokers sell plans for insurers and perform a variety of functions on behalf of individuals and employers. They may assess an individual’s insurance needs and describe the characteristics of different plans that best meet those needs. They can also provide assistance after an individual has chosen a plan and enrolling in it. They are employed independently as well as those who are employed by an insurer. or employee has enrolled in a plan, for example, by helping enrollees communicate with health plans in trying to resolve disputed medical claims or adding a new family member to a current plan. Insurers who use agents and brokers to sell their plans typically pay them based on a percentage. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. Insurers are also allowed to include expenses for health information technology required to accomplish these activities. Premiums. These include the sum of all funds paid by an enrollee and employer, if and benefits that insurers pay to their employees who sell their plans. Other taxes that may not be excluded from premium revenue; (6) other general and administrative expenses, such as salaries and advertising; and (7) community benefit expenditures, which include activities such as health educational campaigns that increase wellness and health activities. applicable, as a condition of receiving coverage from the insurer. These also include any fees or other contributions associated with the health plan. Federal and state taxes and licensing or regulatory fees. These include federal income taxes, assessments, state insurance, premium and other taxes, and regulatory authority licenses and fees. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. Non-claims costs include expenses beyond medical claims, expenses for QI activities, and federal and state taxes and licensing or regulatory fees. Federal income taxes on investment income and capital gains are excluded. CMS defines non-Claims costs for the following categories: (1) agents’ and brokers’ fees and (2) QI expenses, such as medical claims and other expenses for the QI business, as well as QI-related expenses. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. commissions; (2) cost containment expenses, which reduce the number of health services provided or the costs of such services, but are not related to an activity to improve health care quality. (3) claims adjustment expenses, such as office maintenance and supplies costs, not classified as cost containment. expenses. (4) salaries. The cost of health care in the United States is based on the cost of providing health care to the population. The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services has a budget of $1.2 trillion. that are designed to increase the likelihood of desired health outcomes in ways that can be objectively measured. The activities must be primarily designed to (1) improve health outcomes; (2) prevent hospital readmissions; (3) improve patient safety, reduce medical errors, and lower infection and mortality rates; or (4) implement, promote. For more information, go to www.nhs.org/hhs/hospitals-and-health-care-facilities/hchs-hc-hq. key contributions to this report. For more, go to CNN.com/soulmatestories. For confidential support on suicide matters call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S., call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255 or visit www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org. For support in the UK, call the national suicide prevention line on 0845 90 90 100 or visit the Samaritan's Samaritans. available at no charge on the GAO website at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staff have any questions about this report, please contact me at (202) 512-7114. Contact points for our Offices of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of this report. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. For support in the U.S., call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255.