Proposed Section 4011 would list Permit Program Specifications that individual states would be required to apply to "CCR structures" It is difficult to determine in advance how such statutory specifications may be interpreted by each to a diversity of state solutions. Until states promulgate regulations that include a more detailed definition of a CCR "structure," program applicability will not be determined with specificity. The regulated universe of "owners and operators" won't be known until a state defines a structure. The proposed law also omits that CCR disposal facilities would not be subject to the law. Proposed Section 4011 would provide a framework for states to create permit programs to regulate CCR management. It is implied, but not explicitly required, that each state implementing a CCR Permit Program would promulgate regulations applicable to CCR structures. Supporters of this approach have suggested, given the unique conditions in each state, that such programs could be at least as effective as federal requirements that are already in place. The key definition is that of a "structure" In the Permit program Specifications, all Revised Criteria and the five relevant Minimum Requirements would apply. withdrawal of determination of adequacy. Proposed definitions comparable to those in 40 C.F.R. Part 239 are those for "coal combustion residuals permit program" and "permit" The applicability of a CCR Permit Program would also depend on the definition of a "structure" (at proposed Section 4011(k)(6), which would mean a structure of some kind. The proposed definition of "permission" would be similar to that of a permit. 4011, particularly the Permit Program Specifications, and develop regulations based on their interpretation. There is no explicit directive in the bills that the requirements applied via the permit program be those necessary to protect human health. 4011 would provide the program specifications a state would use to create its permit program, allowing states a certain degree of flexibility to determine details regarding how the program would be implemented and to whom it would apply. Provisions of the proposed bills discussed below are those likely to have been included in 4011. meet a state-determined standard of protection. States would determine when owner/operators would be required to comply with the requirements implemented via the permit program. Participating states would certify that they have a program in place within three years of enactment of proposed Section 4011, according to the bill. The bill is expected to be voted on by the House of Representatives in the next few weeks, and the Senate in the coming months, the bill's authors say. The Senate version of the bill has been amended to include a provision that would require states to certify that their permits are in place by the end of 2015. the permit program). There are few provisions in Section 4011 that specify required elements of the permit program itself. Included under the "Minimum Requirements" in this section are five provisions (pertaining to Permits, State Notification, Agency Requirements, Agency Authority, and State Authority) that are drawn, in part, from selected individual criteria included among the Requirements for Adequate Permit Programs in Subpart C of Part 239. Both sections include provisions drawn from selected elements in 40 C.F.R. §239.13. is no statement to this effect in the proposed bills themselves. It appears that the achievement of a level of protection comparable to that in RCRA was considered when applying the "revised criteria" to the proposed permit program under Section 4011. In particular, the House report for H.R. 2273 includes a reference to "revision of criteria" for the permit program. The bill is expected to be voted on by the House of Representatives this week. The Senate is also expected to vote this week on the bill. existing versus new facilities, among other elements. State inclusion of those criteria would likely vary from state to state. Decisions regarding the applicability of state regulations and compliance deadlines that required to apply would likely be made by state-by-state basis. The program Minimum Requirements also include five provisions that appear to be drawn, in part, from selected " Requirements for Adequate Permit Programs" included in 40 C.F.R. Part 239, Subpart C. The definition of "structures" that may receive CCRs is unclear. program has never been authorized or established by Congress using such an approach does not mean that this new approach would not meet a particular objective. The CCR bills in the 112 th Congress did not explicitly state that state-implemented CCR Permit Programs would be intended to emulate (in their broad objectives or in specific program details) federal-state programs. The proposed bills, however, did not include a specific statement of the objective of a C CR Permit Program. The bill includes broad statement provisions in Subtitle D as the authorities the agency would use. This report looks primarily at how state programs to regulate CCRs may be developed and implemented by a state. The bills did not explicitly require EPA to set uniform national standards of protection or promulgate regulations applicable to CCR structures. Given the flexibility that states would have to define several key program elements, it cannot be predicted whether state programs would use a fundamentally different framework to create state programs, the report says. The report does not compare provisions in House and Senate bills proposed in the 112 th Congress. The bills would establish a framework that states could use to create programs to regulate CCR disposal. State regulations implemented by that program would not be explicitly required to meet a federal protection standard or other minimum standard of protection. CCR regulations promulgated under a state's own authorities would then apply to existing facilities.existing facilities would be required to met would be particularly relevant in determining the degree to which a state program may protect human health from risks specific to C CR disposal. The bills did not explicitly require a CCR Permit Program to apply criteria to would appear to result in the "proper management" of CCRs. In contrast to that existing RCRA program, the preamble in the proposed bills broadly states that the amendment to RCRA is to "facilitate recovery and beneficial use" The report compares state programs to regulate CCR disposal, created pursuant to program specifications included in the proposal. It raises the question of what changes may occur to existing state waste management programs in a state that believes it is currently regulating CCRs in a way that is adequate to protect human health. Although there ensure facility compliance requirements designed to protecthuman health. Administrator could rely on her authority under Section 2002 of RCRA to "prescribe, in consultation with Federal, State, and regional authorities, such regulations as are necessary to carry out [her] functions under this Act" If EPA were to implement a CCR Permit Program for a state, Section 4011(e) cites existing implement their programs, informing the states in advance how to avoid having elements deemed deficient. Anticipating criticism that such guidance would constitute regulations in disguise, the Administrator might actually issue regulations. Proposed amendments to RCRA would not create a "permit program," per se. Instead, selected provisions in the bills would form a framework that states could use to create programs to regulate CCR management. Legislation addressing CCRs may be considered in the 113 th Congress.. Analysis of selected elements of the legislation considered during the 112 th Congress is provided in this report as background for future legislation that may take a similar approach. Unless otherwise noted, any reference to "the bills" refers to S. 3512/Title IV of H.R. 3409. States would presumably promulgate regulations applicable to CCR structures. Deadlines for compliance and details regarding program applicability would not be known until states description of its program, required to be provided to EPA under the State Actions provisions. States would be required to describe their program, including "a legal certification that the state has, at the time of certification, fully effective statutes or regulations necessary to implement a coal combustion residuals permit program," according to the bill. The bill would also require states to provide a description of their program to EPA. Proposed bills would define a "coal combustion residuals permit program" The degree to which states would create, implement, and enforce programs to regulate CCRs that are similar to MSW landfills depends on various factors that cannot be determined in advance. However, certain similarities and differences between CCR regulations and MSW regulations can be seen. The proposed bills would also allow states to impose fines on companies that fail to comply with CCR requirements. The bills are expected to be voted on in the next few weeks. Proposed Section 4011(c) would require a narrative description of the state's program explaining how the state will assure its CCR Permit Program meets program specifications. The analytical process and technical basis for determining how and why certain requirements were selected or excluded (primarily those found in 4011 (c) in the proposed CCR permit Program) are not included in the proposal. The proposal would also require the state to submit to EPA a certification explaining how their program meets the Permits Program Specifications. disposal may achieve a baseline standard of protection. EPA seemingly could not conduct enforcement actions against owner/operators of CCR structures in states implementing a CCR Permit Program. Proposed Section 4011(e) prescribes conditions under which EPA would be required to implement a C CR program for a state. For example, EPA would not be able to ban CCR disposal units in a state that does not implement a program at all, is that EPA could promulgate its own program. The proposed statutory criteria included among the Permit Program Specifications are not comparable, in scope or in detail, to those identified by EPA as necessary to protect human health. Still, since selected provisions in the bills are drawn from EPA's June 2010 proposal, it appears that a CCR Permits Program would be intended. Absent directives, the legislation would not meet EPA's standard for compliance with that standard. The legislation would also not meet the EPA standard for CCR disposal and use, however. Not later than six months after bill enactment, each state would be required to notify EPA whether it will adopt and implement a CCR Permit Program. It is assumed that all states in which CCRs are managed (i.e., primarily states with coal-fired power plants) would opt to implement their own program. Within 36 months, states (those that notify EPA they will) would have to submit to EPA certification that their CCR permit Programs meet the agency's standards. Proposed bills would allow states to create their own programs to regulate CCRs. Authors: States would draw primarily from provisions in the proposed Section 4011 that specify State Actions, Permit Program programs previously approved under RCRA. They say EPA and state roles would be substantially different in developing, implementing, the most impact on the development and implementation of individual state CCR Permit Programs, and EPA's potential role in oversight and implementation. The authors: It is difficult to determine whether the potential for EPA to implement a CCR permit Program for a state would serve as an incentive to states to implement the program. be required to provide notice to a state regarding "deficiencies" in its program, with regard to certain program elements. EPA would not be explicitly required to identify as a program "deficiency" program elements outside the required Permit. Under a range of circumstances specified in the proposed bills, EPA would be required to implement a CCR Permit Program for a state. If the agency identified some deficiency in that state's permit program, and the state does not remedy the deficiency within the "reasonable timeframe" negotiated between the state and EPA. of the bills would require EPA to implement the state's program to regulate CCRs, except for the deficient component. The second interpretation would apply both in cases of identified deficiencies and of state entire program, with the deficient components corrected. In a second interpretation, EPA would promulgate its own program applicable to CCR structures. In this case, the agency's regulations would apply to the CCR structure, not the state program. The bill was introduced in the House of Representatives on Wednesday. regulatory criteria that met a baseline level of protection. Some have argued that by requiring EPA to implement a CCR Permit Program for a state under specific compliance with requirements necessary to protect human health. For example, would EPA identify as a deficiency a state's definition of a "CCR landfill" that EPA determined was insufficient to ensure that uses of CCRs that constitute disposal on land are regulated? When and how often would EPA identifies program deficiencies? The term "adequate" has decades of agency interpretation providing a mature understanding of its precise meaning. Any ambiguities or requirements not specified in the proposed CCR bills would be subject to state (and potentially court) interpretation. Compared to the bills' structural integrity provisions, EPA's proposed criteria included more detailed requirements comparable to the MSHA standards. For example, criteria that must be applied to CCR structures using a CCR Permit Program include selected MSW landfill Criteria (see Table A-3 in Appendix A ). 4011(c)(1)(C) Location —similar to EPA's proposal. Some in Congress have expressed concern that EPA has "overreached" its existing legislative mandates. Legislation would limit EPA's role in regulating CCR disposal while encouraging states to create programs to regulate CCRs. So, how much would EPA's guidance influence states? To what extent would the bills result in states developing or revising requirements for CCR management that would go beyond current waste management requirements? When would owners and operators of CCR structures be subject to any new regulations? If a state were a way that it views as necessary to ensure the viability of the state programs. included in the narrative description of a state's program. Apart from those program elements, EPA would not be explicitly required to assess other program elements (e.g., how a state defines a landfill that receives CCRs) How would EPA interpret its obligation to identify program deficiencies? Would EPA identify a program as having a deficiency if EPA determined it was not adequate to ensure facility program requirements that would otherwise be left to states to interpret? How wouldEPA use its existing general authorities under RCRA and the latitude provided in the bills to interpret Section 4011 in RCRA? to the entity required to obtain a permit, and any required elements of the permit program itself. Compared to other programs created under federal pollution control laws, this is an approach that does not clearly distinguish the purpose of federal regulations that meet provided separately in CRS Report R41341, EPA's Proposal to Regulate Coal Combustion Waste Disposal: Issues for Congress. As noted, the approach to creating a permit program in the bills considered in the 112 th Congress differs from what is typical in federal pollution laws. criteria and required elements of an "adequate" permit program were developed and implemented using data and information gathered over a more than 20-year period. Over that time, working cooperatively with states, EPA has identified risks to human health from waste management, regulatory criteria that effectively address those risks, and regulatory implemented using a permit program. At a minimum, the regulations were required to be those necessary to "protect human health and the environment." That generally is understood to mean regulatory criteria necessary to ensure that toxic constituents likely present in a waste, disposed of under certain conditions, will not degrade. The House report further notes that the "revised criteria" that would.these wastes and the practical realities of facilities' ability to implement the criteria. "The Committee expects that permit programs using the minimum Federal baseline established by this legislation will meet the standard of protecting human health and the environment," the House report says. The House report also says that it expects that the permit programs will meet "the standard ofprotecting human health" and the "environmental health and safety" of the American people. A state permit "program" is the body of authorities, activities, and procedures that the permitting authority uses to implement and enforce regulations applicable to a solid waste disposal facility. Permit programs may include, among other elements, state laws that specify the programs have been created. A state program that met the requirements in the SIR would be expected to be.applicable to a landfill that accepts industrial solid waste. A new permit program may be created by amending existing laws to specify the entity required to operate using a permit. Each state was required to "adopt and implement a permit program or other system of prior approval and conditions" States were required to comply with applicable criteria by the applicable deadlines, regardless of whether a state had adopted the federal criteria or had a program in place to implement and enforce those criteria. States were not required to have an approved state permit program, but to have a program to enforce the criteria. The requirements were to ensure that each solid waste management facility within such state which may receive hazardous household waste ... will comply with the [the newly revised] regulatory agency. Be implemented by EPA for a state. State solid waste management agencies commonly require owners and operators of certain waste disposal facilities to obtain a permit as part of that state's program. Such permits are legally enforceable and provide a state agency with authority to implement the regulatory program applicable to those facilities. They also authorize the permitting authority to conduct compliance inspections and to take enforcement action necessary to remedy violations of program requirements. Exactly how stateSolid Waste Management works is a subject of ongoing debate. For more information, visit the EPA's website. State regulations applicable to waste disposal facilities may vary depending on the issues specific to the type of waste received at that facility. For example, requirements applicable to a landfill that receives construction and demolition debris would be tailored to address waste management issues that may be different from requirements to the permittee. Once the regulations are promulgated, the authorized state agency would generally be required to take measures necessary to ensure that the newly regulated waste disposal facility operates in compliance with applicable requirements. The permit would specify those compliance requirements (e.g., daily operating procedures, facility design requirements) regulations that met the baseline federal standard of protection. The ultimate objective of the regulatory program was the same nationwide, but details regarding how each state may achieve that objective varied from state to state. Under the Constitution, Congress has no power to impose regulations on the private sector. The U.S. has the right to regulate itself through its own laws and regulations, but not to impose them on other countries or countries. The federal government has the power to enforce its laws, but it has no obligation to do so. not precluded from adopting regulations more stringent than the federal criteria. However, in requiring the criteria to meet a specific standard of protection, facility compliance with the minimum national standard was intended to achieve a consistent level of protection from threats specific to improper management of MSW. Congress intended states to be able to adopt regulations that were more restrictive than those set by the federal government. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. Each state could determine key elements related to program implementation (e.g., program applicability) and facility compliance, at least to the degree that such state determinations did not undercut a baseline standard of protection. Although it could be assumed that any state permit program would be used to implement certain regulatory requirements, it could not be assumed the purpose of those requirements would be to achieve those goals. The U.S. would not be explicitly required to ensure facility compliance with regulations that meet a baselineStandard of Protection. would require facility owners and operators to implement standards necessary to prevent contaminant spread. The proposed provision that would be applied via the permit program would prescribe actions a state would be required to take after it was determined that contaminants had migrated from the deposition site. In the narrative, the proposed provision would require a state to take action to prevent the spread of contaminants from a deposition site to a nearby site. The proposal would also require the state to provide information to the public on how to prevent contamination from spreading to other sites. required components of program application, including detailed information that must be provided by a state in the narrative description of its program. required components of the state's legal certification of program requirements. Requirements for Adequate Permit Programs —details minimum permitting requirements, compliance monitoring authority, and enforcement authority a state a state must comply with to be considered an adequate permit program. For more information, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/29/politics/opa-permit-programs/index.html. also define terms necessary to determine program applicability and to clarify required elements of specific criteria. Absent the inclusion of requirements comparable to general criteria, states would have discretion to define those criteria, implicitly within reason. (See 40 C.F.R. Part 258, Subpart A—General criteria listed in Table A-2 ). The states would be able to apply their own criteria to the program. The states could also use their own standards to determine the program's applicability to the state. location restrictions, operating criteria, design criteria, groundwater monitoring and corrective action, closure and post-closure care, and financial assurance. When individual requirements are largely similar, only the regulatory heading is included. When there is a significant difference between two requirements, additional information is provided to clarify that difference. Those descriptions are: Location restrictions, Operating criteria, Design criteria, Groundwater Monitoring and Corrective Action,Closure and Post-closure Care, and Financial assurance. The descriptions are based on a combination of the regulatory headings and individual requirements. not intended to summarize the full range of detail in each requirement. The most significant differences pertain to the potential regulation of surface impoundments. For example, requirements that would provide protections specific to the disposal of liquids are not included in Part 258 because bulk disposal of liquid is prohibited. For more information on the requirements, visit the EPA's website or the Department of Energy's website. The full requirements can be found at: http://www.epa.gov/nuclear/nuclear-procedures-requirements. detailed compliance deadlines and specific regulatory criteria applicable to existing facilities. Detailed definitions of terms used in the regulations. Included in those general standards, it is specified that the criteria apply directly to owners and operators of facilities that meet the criteria. The criteria apply to existing and proposed facilities. The rules must be implemented within two years of the rules being finalized. The deadline is for facilities to be fully operational by the end of the year. It is not for new facilities to open within the next two years. action requirements. Closure/post-closure care—applicable to any unit upon closure. Financial assurance criteria, to ensure the owner/ operator is financially secure. Design criteria to ensure that existing units would identify and respond to contaminant migration within a certain time frame. The design criteria are intended to ensure existing units that did not meet necessary design criteria would identify, respond to and remove contaminants within a given time frame, according to the design criteria. The criteria are also intended to provide financial assurance to owners/operators. Proposed Section 4011(d) would require EPA to identify and notify a state of "deficiencies" in specific elements of its program. Program elements that could be identified by EPA as having some deficiency would include the state's obligation to would be required to consist of the Permit Program Specifications. A third interpretation envisions a more proactive role for EPA. In this interpretation, rather than wait to make decisions regarding deficiencies after the fact, the Administrator might issue guidance before the states. being managed sufficiently under current state regulatory programs, environmental and citizen groups have expressed doubts over the degree to which states would adopt new standards. This report provides information regarding EPA's proposals to ensure the protection of human health. It also provides information about EPA's proposal to require the use of more renewable energy sources in power plants. It provides information on how the proposal would be implemented in the United States. The report also includes information on the potential impact of the proposal on the U.S. economy. the following statement: The Committee believes that it is not necessary for EPA to promulgate new regulations. EPA acknowledged in [its June 2010 Subtitle D] Proposed Rule that the "part 258 criteria represent a reasonable balance between ensuring the protection of human health and the environment from the risks of pollution" EPA acknowledged that the criteria were "reasonable balance" between protecting the health of humans and protecting the environment. The committee believes that the EPA should not have to issue new regulations to protect the health and environment. still developing its program—suggests that such a review may be anticipated at some point in the future. Would EPA make such determinations on an ongoing basis? Would EPA establish requirements (similar to 40 C.F.R. Part 239) or issue guidance to allow for such reviews? Would it review a program for adequacy immediately after a state certified that it had a program in place, or would it wait until years after? Or would it issue guidance or establish requirements to allow such reviews. state programs to adopt, implement, and enforce those criteria evolved during the 1990s. They largely ended in the early 2000s, when state programs deemed adequate by EPA were in place in all U.S. states and territories. These now-mature state MSW programs reflect a variety of state approaches, but share common common goals and objectives. They reflect a range of states, but all share a common goal: to reduce the number of children who are at risk for premature death. EPA subsequently promulgated " Requirements for State Permit Program Determination of Adequacy," in 40 C.F.R. Part 239, also referred to as the State Implementation Rule (SIR) The SIR includes the following four subparts: General —specifies the purpose and scope of the program and defines key program terms. State Program Application —lists the Amendment to RCRA Proposed in the 112 th Congress. The requirements that state permit programs were required have to be deemed adequate by the EPA. would need to demonstrate to EPA before the program could be deemed adequate by EPA; and requires state programs to provide for citizen action in the state civil enforcement process. Adequacy Determination Procedures —includes criteria EPA would use to make its adequacy determination or to partially approve state programs, procedures states must follow if they needed to modify their programs, and criteria and procedures EPA may use to withdraw its determination of adequacy. (Individual criteria included in the SIR and provisions in Section 4011 are listed in Table B-1 .) Program that meets Permit Program Specifications delineated in the bills. If a state fails to remedy program deficiencies identified by EPA within the time frame negotiated between the state and EPA, deadline is not explicitly defined. For example, not later than one year after the date on which the state receives the notice. The requirement that EPA identify a deficiency at any time a state is not implementing a program — as opposed to when a states is other basic program elements typically specified in regulations — would not provide explicit deadlines. would be obligated to provide information necessary for EPA to make its deficiency determination within 90 days of EPA making the request. If EPA identifies a program deficiency, the agency would be directed to collaborate with the state to establish a reasonable deadline to address it. What constitutes a "reasonable deadline" is up to the state and EPA to decide. The deadline would be 90 days after EPA makes a request for information about the program. The state would be required to provide the information necessary to make a deficiency determination. Program.bills' requirement that EPA identify certain state program elements that may be "deficient" involves the use of a term not found in the RCRA statute. It is difficult to anticipate how EPA would interpret this authority, but there appear to be at least at least two ways it could be interpreted, the authors say. In contrast, EPA's authority with regard to state program Elements found to be 'deficient' involves a term that has no history of interpretation, they say. to identify program deficiencies at any time after states are implementing the program, rather than determining program adequacy to ensure compliance with a federal standard. Standards of protection that differ from other permit programs implemented by terminology (i.e., identify "deficiencies" instead of determine program "adequacy") may not be known until EPA interprets the statutory directives and promulgates requirements detailing criteria EPA would use to make its determination. In the bills, EPA could identify as a deficiency program elements described in the Permit Program Specifications or. tense (e.g., references to programs that "may be" or "could be" created and implemented by states refer to bills proposed in the 112 th Congress) Since the most recent bill passed by the House adopted provisions in the Senate bill, the language in this article has been updated to reflect the changes in the House bill. The most recent version of this article referred to a bill that was proposed in 112th Congress. We are happy to clarify that this was not the case. Under current law, the term "backstop authority" is not formally defined in statute or regulation. Whether EPA is said to have backstop authority or not has no legal consequence. The term has been widely used to refer to explicit authority provided to EPA to enforce standards at individual facilities in a state authorized by EPA to implement and enforce federal standards. For example, under RCRA, the Clean Air Act, and the Clean Water Act, the bills would provide EPA with authority to backstop state programs. regulations established by EPA explicitly define terms necessary to determine the applicability of those regulations. Those definitions have included sufficient detail to allow a potentially regulated entity (the owner/ operator of a particular waste disposal facility) to determine whether or what regulations may apply to their waste management activities. The definitions are not intended to apply to all waste disposal facilities, but to those with which the EPA has been in contact to discuss possible regulations. The regulations are intended to be a starting point for discussions about possible future regulations. Some stakeholders debate the appropriateness of EPA's definitions. While there may be debate among stakeholders, the bills leave that issue unresolved, opening the door to further debate. The bills are expected to be voted on in the next few weeks. The bill is expected to pass with a majority vote in the House of Representatives by the end of the month. For more information on the bill, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/29/science-and-technology-bills-bipartisan-cnn-news/story. EPA would provide its analysis of risk assessment data, studies, reports, and various other data used to determine regulatory criteria that it (EPA, in conjunction with state agencies and other interested stakeholders) determined. EPA would provide analysis of data during the rulemaking process, under the Administrative Procedure Act, to determine the criteria for a new rule. It would be during that time that EPA would make a decision on whether or not to make a change to the current rule. The rule would change the rules on disposal and use of waste. of a permit program absent a directive to EPA to promulgate standards applicable to the entity potentially regulated pursuant to the program. EPA would be required to notify states if they did not meet the deadlines to notify the agency whether they intended to implement a program. At any time after a state is and implement permit programs that would be deemed adequate by EPA. EPA could potentially withdraw its approval of a state program, if EPA were to receive information indicating that the program is not being implemented as originally described by a state. Congress has authorized EPA to promulgate and enforce certain regulations, while simultaneously providing for conditions under which a state may be authorized or approved to adopt and enforce those regulations. Given the options of allowing EPA to enforce a federal standard at facilities in the state or adopting and enforcing the regulations themselves, states generally choose the latter. Congress may not require states to adopt federal regulations or requireStates to implement certain requirements using a permit program. To compel states to exercise their sovereign authority, Congress must pass a law. provide no formal role for EPA in this regulatory development process. Once a state is implementing a permit program, EPA would have a role in states that fail to remedy program deficiencies. The extent of EPA's role would depend on how EPA interprets its obligation to implement a permit under those circumstances. How much influence would EPA regulations have on a state's development of its own regulations? What regulations would EPA implement, and how would the agency interpret those regulations? If EPA uses its own rules, how would it interpret permit rules? from EPA—with regard to either required elements of the program itself or the regulations that would be implemented by the permit program. In contrast to other RCRA permit programs, EPA would have a substantially different role in program implementation and enforcement. EPA would be given a more limited role in development of the regulatory program for CCR facilities, compared to the existing program to regulate MSW landfills. Compared to that program, the most significant differences in EPA's role are with regard to promulgating regulations applicable to the entity required to obtain a permit. and specify some level of EPA oversight after states are implementing the program. Such a program would be comparable to existing state programs to implement and enforce standards necessary to ensure facility compliance with RCRA's open dumping prohibition. Based on the construction of the proposed amendment (e.g., listing specific MSW three options), EPA would implement only the deficient components of a state's program. In the first and most limited option, EPA might implement part of the program while the state implements other parts. Alternatively, EPA could implement the state's. The proposed amendment would also have provided no explicit authority for EPA to directly enforce regulatory criteria applicable to CCR disposal units. Such authority provided to EPA in other parts of RCRA (and in some other pollution control landfill criteria) In the proposed amendment to RCRA, however, EPA would be directed to notify a state of a "deficiency" if a state is not implementing a CCR program that meets statutory specifications. How EPA would interpret the directives in proposed Section 4011(d) using this new authority is unclear. in consultation with Federal, State, and regional authorities, such regulations as are necessary to carry out [her] functions under this Act." In this third scenario, the need to interpret statutory provisions, coupled with the authorities already given to EPA in RCRA, might inadvertently create something like the agency's traditional regulatory regime. In this fourth scenario, EPA might inadvertentlycreate something like its traditional regulatory structure. The agency's new role could be to interpret and enforce existing laws and regulations, rather than to create new ones. Proposed amendment would not explicitly require the agency implementing the program (presumably states) to promulgate regulations applicable to waste disposal facilities that may receive CCRs. CCR Permit Programs created pursuant to proposed Section 4011 would be implemented in accordance with program definitions (e.g., "deficiencies"), procedures and requirements listed in Table B-1. It could then be determined whether states would uniformly apply permit program conditions to all CCR landfills and surface impoundments within the state's jurisdiction. approach, proposed in the 112 th Congress, was to create state programs to regulate a particular type of waste (CCRs) This report explains existing federal-state programs to regulating MSW landfills, as well as risks EPA has identified as specific to the management of CCRs. With regard to potential state regulations applicable to CCR structures, as noted above, a CCR Permit Program created pursuant to the from CCR disposal. Such an approach to regulating a waste differs from existing state Programs to regulate MSW Landfills. Congress may create a permit program for any constitutionally authorized purpose. CCR Permit Programs are intended to be similar to existing state programs to regulate MSW landfills. A unique element of the proposed amendment to RCRA would be the creation of a C CR Permit Program. It would draw from selected elements of existing state Programs to regulate CCRs, but with different roles for states and EPA and a different timetable for program implementation (the required elements are discussed in " Proposed CCR Legislation Amending RCRA ," below).  minimum program requirements specify that the CCR Permit Program "shall apply" selected MSW landfill criteria to owners and operators of structures. According to that precondition, it is arguably implied that states that choose to adopt and implement a permit program would promulgate regulations applicable to CCR disposal. The similarities between the existing program to regulate MSW landfills and the proposed CCR program lie primarily in the requirement that a CCRPermit Program would apply selected MSw landfill criteria. proposed standards are structured similarly to regulatory requirements applicable to MSW landfills, supplemented to reflect requirements specific to the management of CCRs. According to EPA, if implemented as proposed, each regulatory option would result in a of facilities' ability to implement the criteria. The existing MSW landfill criteria provide minimum national regulatory standards to ensure protection of human health, but from risks associated with MSW management. The proposed standards for CCR disposal units would address threats to human health specific to CCR management. "General Standards" listed in Table A-2 ). To identify minimum national standards for the safe disposal of CCRs, EPA's June 2010 Subtitle D regulatory option drew primarily from the existing criteria applicable to MSW landfills under 40 C.F.R. Part 258. EPA used the MSW landfill criteria as the framework for its June 2010subtitle D proposal. However, those existing criteria would not address all risks specific to the management of C CRs in landfill and surface impoundments. EPA found that surface impoundments pose a significant risk of contaminant leaching when CCRs are placed in an unlined unit. EPA did not use the MSW landfill criteria, alone, to provide a framework for all aspects of the disposal of wastes in land-based units. The MSW criteria represent a reasonable balance between "ensuring the necessary protection from risks of CCR disposal" and the practical realities of impounding CCR slurry and wastewater in landfills. risks to human health from waste management activities pertain to the potential for hazardous contaminants to be released from the site of deposition and to migrate off-site. To identify risks specific to the management of MSW in a landfill, during the public rulemaking process, also indicate the type of waste disposal facilities that have been found to pose a risk if not properly managed. EPA's June 2010 Subtitle D proposal listed MSW landfill criteria and EPA's May 2010 Sub Title D proposal for MSW. or "open dumps" At a minimum, a facility would be deemed a sanitary landfill if solid waste disposal at such a facility posed no reasonable probability of adverse effects on health or the environment. Disposal facilities that did not meet the criteria for sanitary landfills would be considered open dumps, if they did not pose a risk of adverse health or environment effects. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org. EPA did not intend the SIR to be a rigid set of criteria. States could regulate MSW landfills based on the federal MSW landfill criteria. All state programs approved by EPA were determined to be adequate to assure to owners and operators of regulated landfilling that specify compliance obligations applicable to that facility. The SIR allowed states to adopt regulations that may not have been identical to the MSW criteria. At that point, seven years after the MSw landfill criteria had been promulgated, all state programs were deemed adequate. In 1991, the agency promulgated the following requirements applicable to MSW landfills. The criteria are those necessary to protect human health and the environment from risks associated with the disposal of MSW in a landfill. EPA's determination of state program adequacy was also relevant to the agency's potential to directly enforce the MSW landfill criteria. Final regulations represent the "minimum national standard" applicable to waste disposal facilities that, when implemented, would be expected to would achieve the standard of protection set in statute. The MSW landfill criteria are intended to apply to facilities that dispose of largely "dry" waste. They do not address issues specific to liquid waste accumulation in surface impoundment ponds. New MSW landfills were required to ensure impoundments, since the MSW criteria did not address risks from contaminant spread associated with the accumulation of liquid waste. The criteria are not included under 40 C.F.R. Part 258, which addresses the management of liquid wastes. The MSw landfill criteria also do not addresses structural integrity issues associated with structural integrity. MSW landfills are designed and managed in a manner that is protective of human health. Each standard in the MSW landfill criteria is designed to be implemented by the owner or operator. Groundwater monitoring and corrective the practical capability of owners and operators. Given the standard of protection the MSw landfill criteria were required to achieve, state programs implementing the MS W landfill criteria would be required to meet the criteria. The criteria are: Location restrictions, operating criteria, design criteria, and corrective action. criteria—primarily the technical criteria such as operational and design criteria and groundwater monitoring requirements. Program specifications do not include criteria comparable to "general" standards in the MSW landfill criteria. Those general standards define "applicability" (to whom the regulations apply) and specify deadlines for facility compliance. They do not, however, cite or separately include provisions comparable to those included in theMSW landfill standards. The general standards specify the intended scope, purpose, and applicability of the regulations. apply to facilities that may receive hazardous household wastes. EPA subsequently defined these facilities in regulation as municipal solid waste, or MSW, landfills. EPA never stepped in to directly enforce the federal criteria, however. All states now have programs determined by EPA to be adequate to implement the MSW landfill criteria. Now that all states have approved permit programs, EPA has no effective authority to step in and enforce federal regulatory criteria at an individual MSW landfill, authors say.. States "implement" those regulations by issuing permits. EPA approval of a state permit program to implement the MSW landfill criteria was dependent on whether EPA determined that the state's program was "adequate" The report compares three program elements: (1) the flexibility provided to states in implementing the proposed Permit Program Specifications; (2) the standard of protection state regulations may provide; and (3) EPA's EPA as those necessary to address risks specific to the management of MSW in landfills. Listed below are provisions included in the bills proposed in the 112 th Congress that appear to be drawn from the requirements included in 40 C.F.R. Part 239. criteria to ensure protection of human health and the environment. Owner/operators of MSW landfills were required to comply with the criteria within two years. Within 18 months after EPA promulgated the MSW landfill criteria, states wererequired to adopt and implement a permit program to implement the criteria or risk safe for humans. Those directives do not involve a substantive review of the program, only a determination that the state submitted required information at the appropriate time or continues to maintain permit necessary. Congress required EPA to determine whether each state program was "adequate" States either adopted the federal criteria exactly or used them as a model to create their own requirements. That determination could be made in conjunction with EPA's decisions to approve, disapprove, or partially approve state solid waste management plans. How would states interpret minimum program requirements and the MSW landfill criteria listed in the bills? That's a question that won't be answered until states begin to develop and implement their programs and EPA interprets its role. required by Congress, the federal criteria promulgated by EPA, applicable to MSW landfills, were required to be those necessary to "protect human health and the environment" The approach used in the 112 th Congress bills would not have provided an explicit mandate that EPA or the states promulgate regulations applicable the agency made based on the study findings. Further, EPA was required to revise the sanitary landfill criteria to apply to facilities that may receive hazardous household wastes. Congress explicitly required EPA to revision the existing sanitary dump criteria. a paragraph applicable to "Control of Hazardous Disposal" in Section 4005. That paragraph includes provisions that directed states to adopt a permit program to implement the MSW landfill criteria. In particular, the 1984 amendments toSection 4005 required each state to assess each state program. Pursuant to provisions in these sections, EPA promulgated the MSw landfill criteria (at 40 C.F.R. Part 258) and other criteria for the disposal of open dumps in the U.S. the MSW landfill criteria were finalized to the point at which a state adopted a program approved by EPA as adequate to enforce the federal criteria. EPA was explicitly authorized to use its inspection and federal enforcement authorities under Subtitle C, Sections 3006 and 3007. EPA did not promulgate requirements that delineated elements of an "adequate" permit program until October 1998 (at 40 C.F.R. Part 239). Over that period EPA worked with states to develop programs that could be deemed " adequate" pursuant to RCRA. EPA promulgated the MSW landfill criteria in October 1991. EPA could use authorities available in Sections 3007 and 3008 in permit programs. However, EPA has no authority to directly enforce the MSw landfill criteria. State programs to regulate MSW landfills began with the promulgation of federal regulatory criteria identified by MSW criteria in 1991. State authorities to enforce the open dumping prohibition, as well as other Subtitle D authorities, provisions, and resulting regulations, are discussed in " The Federal-State Program to Regulate MSW Landfills " and in Appendix A. Subtitle C ("Inspection" and "Federal Enforcement" provisions in 42 U.S.C. §§6927 and 6928) to directly enforce the open dumping prohibition at MSW landfills in that state. Since the inspection and federal enforcement authorities cited apply explicitly to the management of hazardous waste, an additional provision specifies that the term "requirements of this subchapter" in Subtitle C would be deemed to include criteria "promulgated by the Administrator under Sections 6907(a)(3) and 6944(a)" of RCRA. The EPA's June 2010 Subtitle D option to promulgate standards. applicable to owners and operators of landfills and surface impoundments that receive CCRs would be done pursuant to its existing authority under Sub Title D to. promulgate criteria applicable to open dumping. CCR Permit Programs established pursuant to bills proposed in the 112 th Congress would use as their framework the existing program created under Sub title D to regulate agencies. In contrast to its broad authority to enforce Subtitle C, the EPA would have a much narrower scope. EPA's proposed definition of "CCR landfill" reflects the agency's assessment of risks to human health from the disposal of CCRs. To meet that standard of protection, EPA's proposed standards applicable to CCR landfills and surface impoundments were designed to be those that would pose "no reasonable probability of adverse effects on health or the environment from disposal of solid waste at such facility" The Minimum Requirements include five provisions drawn from EPA's June 2010 proposed Subtitle D standards. OMB, EPA issued a revised regulatory determination that stated its intent to leave the Bevill exclusion in place. However, EPA stated that it was convinced that national regulations under Subtitle D were warranted for CCR disposal in landfills and surface impoundments because 1. the composition of the waste had the same composition as in Bevill, and 2. the waste could be disposed of in the same manner as other CCRs in a landfill or impoundment. For more on this story, visit CNN.com/OMB. EPA's June 2010 proposal was intended to create a national standard to regulate CCRs destined for disposal. In its Subtitle D option, EPA would add to 40 C.F.R. Part 257, "Standards for the Receipt of Coal Promulgated in 1991" Those federal criteria have since been adopted and implemented by individual states. The standards included in EPA's Sub Title D option were designed to meet the standard of protection established by Congress for sanitary landfills. EPA's proposal drew comments from industry groups, environmental and citizen groups, state agency representatives, individual citizens, and some Members of Congress. Opposition to the Subtitle C option was largely due to environment from those methods, and documented cases in which danger to human health or the environment from surface runoff or leachate has been proved. EPA assumed that power plants that dispose of CCRs on-site would continue to do so, but would upgrade their facilities as necessary to applicable specifically to waste disposal units. Under Subtitle C of RCRA, EPA has primary authority to regulate hazardous wastes. Under Subtitle D, however, states have primary authority. The Hazardous and Solid Waste Amendments of 1984 (HSWA; P.L. 98-616) amended RCRA Sub Title D to address an issue almost identical to the one currently applicable to CCRs. In contrast to the directive and authorities provided to EPA to promulgate and enforce standards applicable to hazardous waste, Sub title D established state and local governments as the primary regulating and implementing entities. be regulated according to national waste management standards, rather than standards determined by individual states. Under the Subtitle C option, EPA would reverse a previous regulatory determination to exempt CCRs from the hazardous those risks and protective measure to address them. Under Subtitle D, almost 80% of enforce the prohibition on open dumping under Subtitles C and D. EPA has not questioned whether states are capable of implementing programs to regulate CCR disposal. Instead, the agency has noted that some states do not currently have effective the management and disposal of C CRs in structures in that state. The amendment to RCRA includes provisions commonly referred to as the Bevill Amendment or Bevill Exclusion. Those provisions are found in several RCRA subtitles, but primarily under Subtitle C. The Bevill amendment provisions and EPA's response to directives in those amendments is provided in Appendix C of the RCRA. The amendments are part of a larger amendment to the EPA's authority to regulate greenhouse gas emissions in the U.S. from power plants and other sources. The amendment is known as the "Bevill Amendment" or "Beverly Amendment" RCRA reauthorization. In February 1980, Representative Tom Bevill introduced an amendment to the pending legislation that would require EPA to defer the imposition of hazardous waste regulatory requirements for fossil fuel combustion waste until data regarding its potential hazard to human health or the environment could be determined. Representative Bevill was a member of the House Committee on Energy and Natural Resources. He was later elected to the House of Representatives, where he served until he was defeated in the 1980 presidential election. He is now a member and former chairman of the Committee on Environment and Energy and the Subcommittee on Oversight. such regulation was warranted. EPA's June 2010 proposal was part of the agency's ongoing effort to gather data necessary to determining whether regulating CCRs under Subtitle C is warranted. To make that determination, EPA was directed to prepare a detailed and comprehensive study on concern regarding the potential mismanagement and inconsistent state regulation. EPA stated that it would revise its determination if it found that a need for regulation under Sub Title C was warranted, and its proposal reflects the agency’s revised determination. under its current authorities in Subtitles C and D. Pursuant to the Bevill exclusion, CCRs are explicitly excluded from the Subtitle C requirements, unless or until EPA determines that such requirements are warranted. Under Bevill provisions, "fly ash waste, bottom ash waste,. slag waste, flue gas emission control waste, and other byproduct materials generated primarily from the combustion of coal or other fossil fuels" (i.e., C CRs) were explicitly excluded. programs to regulate MSW landfills. The creation of the latter involved a somewhat complex evolution of RCRA. RCRA's comprehensive amendments to the Solid Waste Disposal Act in 1976 and the Hazardous and Solid Waste Amendments of 1984. EPA's involvement in the creation of MSW landfill criteria establish minimum federal standards that take into account regulations were largely established in RCRA in 1976. The criteria applicable to MSWLandfill are in 40 C.F.R. Part 258. EPA's role in the regulation of solid waste under Subtitle D has largely been to promulgate criteria applicable to sanitary landfills as necessary to identify and eliminate open dumps, prohibited under RCRA. Amendments to RCRA in 1984 required EPA to revise the sanitary landfill criteria toLandfills. EPA has no authority to require or approve/disapprove of state solid waste permit programs applicable to facilities receiving any other type ofSolid Waste regulated under Sub Title D. EPA may only expand upon the landfill criteria relevant to the state-enforced prohibition of open dumping. Permit programs created under RCRA, adopted and implemented by a state, have been expected to ensure that waste disposal facilities, operating in compliance with the federal regulatory criteria, will not pose a risk to human health. Creation of a state program to regulate a particular type of waste, according to statutory provisions in federal law, without detailed federal regulations or guidance, would be a novel approach in RCRA. That a RCRA state program."to protect human health and the environment" would be "a novel approach" created and implemented and to recognize the purpose of selected details of those regulations. One of RCRA's key goals is to prevent contamination associated with waste disposal, if at all practicable, rather than simply remedy it after discovery. Pursuant to RCRA Subtitle D, EPA has been required to promulgate regulations specific to certain types of waste disposal facilities. EPA and state agency roles in implementing and enforcing those regulations are identified and summarized in Table A -1 . Determining Criteria Necessary to "Protect Human Health and the Environment" Under RCRA. Each bill would have added to Subtitle D of RCRA a new Section 4011, Management and Disposal of Coal Combustion Residuals. Compared to H.R. 2273, the Senate-introduced bill (S. 3512) would have required EPA to implement a program. The bills would encourage states to dispose of coal waste in a more environmentally friendly way. The House and Senate bills considered in the 112 th Congress would add to Sub Title D of the RCRA. On October 14, 2011, the House passed the Coal Residuals Reuse and Management Act ( H.R. 2273 ). On August 2, 2012, the Coal Ash Recycling and Oversight Act of 2012 (S. 3512) was introduced in the Senate. Each bill would have amended the Solid Waste Disposal Act—more commonly referred to as the "Coal Ash Act of 2011" or the "CASH Act of 2010" The bill was introduced by Sen. Cory Booker (D-New Jersey) and Sen. Marco Rubio (R-Florida) to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (RCRA) The House subsequently incorporated the provisions of the Senate bill in Title IV of H.R. 3409, the Stop the War on Coal Act, passed in the House on September 12, 2012. The bills would would stop the use of coal as a source of energy. The Senate bill would also stop the production of coal-fired power plants. The House bill would stop use of Coal- Fired Power Plants as a Source of Energy. TVA estimates that cleanup will continue into at least 2014 and will cost $1.2 billion. The incident at Kingston drew attention to the potential for a sudden, catastrophic release related to the structural failure of a surface impoundment. However, EPA has determined that the release will not damage or destroy homes and property. The cleanup is expected to last until at least the end of the year, TVA says. The EPA says the cleanup will take at least a year to complete and cost at least $1 billion. action taken in response to the Bevill directive and more recent action taken in the wake of the Kingston release, are summarized in Table C-1. In March 2000, EPA submitted its "Regulatory Determination on Wastes from Fossil Fuel Combustion" to the White House Office of Management and Budget, for the first time. The White House issued a directive in March 2000 that required EPA to take action to reduce methane emissions from coal-fired power plants. The directive was issued by EPA's Office of the Administrator for the Environment and Natural Resources. treatment, storage, and disposal facilities (TSDFs) In lieu of the federal program, states can be authorized by EPA to implement regulations applicable to those facilities. Most states have requested and received such authorization. While under certain conditions, EPA could rescind state authority to implement a previously EPA must rely on data provided by states and the potentially regulated industry. Much of what EPA knows now about what constitutes waste management criteria necessary to protect human health has been gleaned from the process to determine criteria applicable to TSDFs. ensure compliance with land disposal standards applicable to owners and operators of TSDFs. Because there is no corresponding guaranteed permit mechanism under its Subtitle D regulatory option, EPA integrated selected regulatory criteria from 40 C.F.R. Part 265. The requirements and can adjust them, as appropriate, to account for site-specific conditions. EPA's second regulatory option would be to promulgate national standards for landfills and surface impoundments that receive CCRs. The standards would be tailored to address issues specific to C CRs. similar level of protection. Each option would result in regulatory programs with a substantially different scope and potential for enforcement. Adoption and enforcement of the Subtitle C "cradle to grave" regulations would involve stricter waste management standards implemented at a higher cost to both industry and state waste management. disposal facilities that accept such waste may need to comply with standards that were more detailed than the broad criteria applicable to sanitary landfills. Rather than subject household waste to the full gamut of "cradle to grave," Congress took an approach that could be implemented under Sub Title C. HSWA amended Subtitle D to add Section 4010, in which Congress directed EPA to study the extent to which the to be the primary entities to implement and enforce federal standards. That approach resulted in more detailed regulations than those applicable to sanitary landfills, and included a stronger enforcement mechanism to ensure consistent state conformance with the national standards. However, amendments to Sub Title D in HSWA created a role for EPA in state adoption and implementation of the MSW landfill criteria. HSWA added Opposition to the Subtitle D option stemmed from various concerns, many of which were centered on EPA's lack of authority to directly enforce the standards. Within three years, EPA was required to report the results of its study to Congress, as well as any recommendations. Given the argument by many states that the material was adequate to protect human health and the environment from groundwater contamination, the decision was made to go through with the option. The material is Subtitle C guidelines and criteria applicable to solid waste management and disposal facilities. when the waste was managed in accordance with EPA standards, they would not be classified as hazardous waste. When improperly managed (e.g., disposed of in an unlined surface impoundment) the wastes would become a listed hazardous waste subject to tailored Subtitle C standards. EPA recognized that its March 2000 proposal was not in line with the standards it set in March 2000. The proposal would have required that the waste be treated as a hazardous waste, subject to Subtitle B standards. If finalized, EPA could encourage states to adopt and enforce the Subtitle D standards, but would have no authority to enforce the standards directly. More specifically, EPA was authorized to enforcement the federal standards from 18 months after requirements. If finalized,EPA could promulgate the Sub Title D standards. But it would have limited authority to enforcement them, and would have to use a permit program to implement them. The proposal is expected to be finalized in the next few months and could be implemented by the end of 2015. EPA's authority to.directly enforce the criteria may not currently be invoked by the agency since that authority is limited to states found by EPA to have an inadequate program to implement the MSW program. Under Subtitle C, EPA has primary authority to implement and enforce the federal requirements applicable to hazardous waste authorized state hazardous waste management program. EPA has taken enforcement actions against individual TSDFs in states authorized to implement federal Sub Title C requirements. In contrast to such programs where EPA hasPrimary oversight and enforcement authority. Subtitle C (42 U.S.C. §6928(a), EPA is authorized to enforce standards of performance at individual facilities in a state even after the agency has authorized the state to implement and enforce such standards. Section 111(c) of the Clean Air Act provides EPA with comparable enforcement authority. In this case, EPA can enforce standards at facilities in the state even if the state has not authorized the agency to do so. The agency can also enforce standards in other parts of the country. for the management of solid waste (i.e., household garbage and nonhazardous industrial solid waste) Under Subtitle D, states have the primary authority to implement and enforce standards. EPA's role is limited, with certain exceptions, limited to non-hazardous solid waste, such as household garbage, industrial waste, and recyclable material. EPA has no authority to regulate the disposal of recyclables, but has the authority to set standards for non- recyclers, including plastic, glass, and paper. The report does not provide a comprehensive discussion of EPA's authority to regulate CCRs. EPA has already done much of the work of writing such regulations or guidance. The administrative process provides some transparency regarding how EPA arrived at its determination. It also provides a role, rather than limiting it, to help clarify risks associated with CCR management, the report says. information is those necessary to achieve a certain national standard of protection. That information is are those necessary in order to achieve that standard. The bills considered in the 112 th Congress were proposed in the wake of a June 2010 proposal by EPA to regulate CCRs. This report provides background and selected information regarding that EPA proposal. It is likely that CCR legislation will be considered by the 113 th Congress. In light of EPA's June 2010. proposal and uncertainty regarding the agency's future. regulatory plans, it is likely. that C CR legislation will not be considered in. the 113th Congress. The bills were proposed after EPA proposed to regulate waste management practices identified by EPA as those posing a risk to human health. EPA's June 2010 proposals to regulate CCRs reflect EPA's effort to determine conditions under which such land applications may pose a threat to human health. EPA also identified certain protective measures that may be implemented that would minimize or largely eliminate risks from CCR disposal. Many of the measures reduce risks that might be broadly applicable to the operation or may protect human health from risks specific to CCR management. The proposed regulations would then depend on risksspecific to the management of CCR and protective measures to address those risks. to improper disposal practices, and concern over potential gaps in state regulatory programs to regulate CCRs. EPA determined that national standards were needed to protect human health from risks specific to CCR management (i.e., its disposal and certain uses) Others counter that a program that would continue to allow states flexibility to regulated CCR disposal as they deem necessary would not necessarily fill those gaps. EPA's primary objective was to address gaps in states' programs by establishing national standards that would achieve a minimum level of protection from risks. administered by EPA. That it would be created using a new approach does not mean that it cannot achieve its intended purpose. Its purpose is broadly stated as "to facilitate recovery and beneficial use, and provide for the proper management and disposal" of CCRs. In accordance with that purpose, it will be created in accordance with a new way of looking at the CCR. It will also be created to provide for "the proper management, disposal, and recovery" of the C CRs. EPA was required to identify the source and volumes of CCRs generated annually, methods of disposal and use. The potential danger, if any, to human health and the environment was also considered. The pathways under which exposure would most likely was a departure from previous opinions regarding the management of C CRs, the EPA said in a report. The report was based, in part, on data from damage cases that showed the potential threat to the environment when the waste was managed in a way that lacked oversight. A stressor is any physical, chemical, or biological entity that can induce an adverse response. Stressors may adversely affect specific natural resources or entire ecosystems, including plants and animals. EPA uses risk assessments to characterize the environmental stressors that pose a risk to public health and safety. For more information, visit the EPA's website or go to: http://www.epa.gov/environmental-stressors. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. this sense of the term, the bills would not provide EPA with authority to backstop state programs to regulate CCR facilities. Despite its recent decline in demand, coal remains the dominant fuel for electricity generation in the United States. The legislation will occur in the context of ongoing concern about the impacts of current C CR facilities, changing economics for coal-fired electricity, and a range of perspectives about the appropriate role of states and EPA. Any waste deemed nonhazardous would be exempt from the legislation. In 2011, electricity generating units in the United States burned more than 900 million tons of coal. CCRs are the inorganic material remaining after pulverized coal is burned at electric utilities and independent power producers. According to industry estimates, in 2011, as much as 130 million tons were generated, making up about a third of the coal used in power plants in the U.S. The U.K. is the second largest producer of coal, followed by Germany, with more than 80 million tons generated in 2011. a more common threat associated with CCR management is the leaching of contaminants likely present in the waste, primarily heavy metals, resulting in surface or groundwater contamination. EPA found occur include the following: contaminant leaching and migration off-site when CCRs are deposited in an unlined unit (e.g., a landfill, surface impoundment, sand pit, quarry, construction site) Direct, uncontrolled discharge or release of liquid waste to surface water, as in the structural failure of a surfaceimpoundment. The Kingston release also brought attention to the fact that the management of C CRs is essentially unregulated at the federal level. CCRs one of the largest waste streams in the United States. Disposal of CCRs on site at individual power plants may involve decades-long accumulation of waste. Hundreds of thousands, if not millions, of tons of dry ash (in a landfill) or wet ash slurry ( in a surface impoundment) deposited at power plants. The U.S. has the largest CCR waste stream in the world, according to a report by the U.N.’s International Agency for Research on Energy. On December 22, 2008, national attention was turned to risks associated with managing such large volumes of CCRs. A breach in a surface impoundment pond at the Tennessee Valley Authority's (TVA's) Kingston, TN, plant released 1.1 billion gallons of coal fly ash slurry. The slurry covered more than 300,000 acres of land. The TVA says it has no plans to change the way it manages the CCR program. The company says it will continue to monitor the situation closely. EPA determined that national standards applicable to the management of CCRs destined for disposal are needed. EPA surface impoundments—requirements necessary to minimize the potential of a structural failure. Whether a particular entity may be subject to CCR regulations would depend on a regulatory or permitting programs to manage CCR disposal and use. It is not necessarily a question of a state's ability. Instead, it may be a difference in interpretation between states and EPA regarding standards to address certain risks associated with C CR disposal. CCRs generated in 2011 was managed in a way that involved land application of the material. Such management practices included CCR disposal in landfills, surface impoundments, or mines. EPA has identified a number of CCR structures would be required to obtain a permit and operate in accordance with permit conditions. CCRs used as fill material (a use EPA identified as similar to landfill disposal) would be subject to permitting. The absence of certain requirements among the Permit Program Specifications (e.g., compliance deadlines) CCR structures that would be intended to achieve a specific standard of protection. If promulgated in accordance with existing state solid waste management laws, regulations applicable to CCR structures may meet standards of protection determined by each state. CCR disposal facilities are currently subject to limited federal regulation. There are concerns that it would be costly to implement to both states and industry; be too restrictive; stigmatize the material by labeling it "hazardous," adversely affecting its potential for reuse. It would also restrict uses of the material that involve land-based applications of CCRs, due to land disposal restrictions. Human health concerns. Management methods include disposal in landfills, accumulation in surface impoundment ponds. Use in land applications equivalent to landfill disposal such as the placement of large volumes of CCRs on land for use as structural or embankment fill (e.g., to contour the land at a construction site) and in land application equivalent to land applications such as landfill disposal. In the U.S., CCR can be disposed of in a variety of ways, including by incineration and by landfilling. to address concerns associated specifically with CCR disposal. New disposal units (landfills and surface impoundments) would be required to be placed above the natural water table. Could not be located in wetlands, within 200 feet of a fault zone, or in a seismic impact zone. New or existing disposal could not be placed in wetlands or in seismic impact zones. CCR could be used to dispose of waste in the event of an earthquake or tsunami in the future. It could also be used for other types of waste disposal. control risks EPA identified as associated with CCR disposal and use. Owners and operators of CCR landfills and surface impoundments are likely to install liners and groundwater monitoring systems. EPA's June 2010 proposal reflected its assessment of this body of research. The agency determined that the majority control devices, often in addition to other solid wastes, will be used. The definitions were proposed by EPA based on findings in its groundwater risk assessment and its documentation of C CR damage cases related to CCR management in such units. EPA has found that states appear to be regulating CCR landfills to a greater extent than they had in the past. However, based on available data, of disposal units were likely to be older and lacked liners and groundwater monitoring. EPA found that the majority of states appeared to regulate CCRLandfills adequately. But there appeared to be gaps in state regulatory oversight of surface impoundments. The latter may be regulated under a state's dam safety program (intended to control risks related to the unit's structural integrity) to the following: 4011(c)(1)(B) Structural I ntegrity —related to certain risks associated with a catastrophic release from surface impoundments. EPA intended those risks to be addressed, at least in part, in its "Design criteria for existing CCR surface impounds and lateral expansions" (proposed 40 C.F.R. §257.71) As an example of the level of detail provided in regulatory criteria, Table A-3 lists EPA's "design criteria for new CCR surfaces" EPA determined that a majority of states with CCR surface impoundments did not appear to require facility owner/operators to implement protective measures. As a result of potential risks tied to CCR management, documented cases of damages attributed provided evidence that similar requirements will prevent a catastrophic release of CCRs, as occurred at TVA's facility in Kingston, TN. Taking these various issues into and contaminant leaching from those units. For an example of the level of detail included in regulatory criteria, as well as an example. of a requirement that EPA determined was necessary ensure that management of C CRs in surface. impoundment would pose no reasonable probability of adverse effects on health or environment. A CCR surface impoundment is a natural topographic depression, man-made excavation, or diked area formed primarily of earthen materials. It is designed to hold an accumulation of CCRs containing free liquids, and which is not an injection well. Examples are holding, storage, settling, and aeration pits, ponds, and lagoons. CCR landfills are used to receive wastes from wet air pollution or sluiced CCR's that have been sluice. Combustion Residuals in Landfills and Surface Impoundments. Those standards would apply to solid waste disposal units, defined as follows: CCR landfill —disposal facility or part of a facility where CCRs are placed in or on land. CCR not a land treatment facility, a surface impoundment, an underground injection, or an underground disposal facility. The standards would also apply to land treatment facilities, surface impoundsments, and underground disposal facilities. structure would be defined as "a landfill, surface impoundment, or other land-based unit" that may receive CCRs. The proposed definitions do and implement using a state's permit program would depend on that state's definition of a structure. Would EPA issue guidance to clarify what it would consider a CCR "structure"? If EPA did issue guidance, would it apply to existing RCRA CCR structures? If not, what would state permit program conditions be applied? the units (e.g., a description of the physical and engineering properties of the foundation materials on which the CCR surface impoundment is constructed), and a certification by an independent registered professional engineer that the design is in accordance with current, prudent engineering practices for the units. For more information, visit CCR's official website, or visit the official CCR Facebook page, or go to www.cronews.com/cron-surface-impoundment-unit. release) or as a result of run-on/runoff across the deposition site during rain/flood events. fugitive dust emissions, when fine particulates in dried ash become airborne, as at landfills or large-scale fill operations. Risk to human health was highest from contaminant leaching and migration to surface and surface waters, according to the study. The study was published in the journal Environmental Health and Safety (EH&S) for the first time on Monday, October 8. to human health or the environment from surface runoff or leachate has been proved. alternatives to current disposal methods; the costs of such alternatives; the impact of those alternatives on the use of coal and other natural resources; and the current and potential utilization of such materials. Further, as it is proved or not proved, it can be used to dispose of coal or other materials in a manner that is safe for humans and the environment. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. well, a salt dome formation, a. salt bed formation, an underground mine, a cave, or a corrective action management unit. Landfills also include piles, sand and gravel pits, quarries, and/or large-scale fill operations. Sites that are excavated so that more coal ash can be used are called coal ash dumps. For purposes of this part, landfills are considered to be coal ash dump sites. For more information, visit coal ashdump.org. Surface impoundments also pose a risk of structural failure. structural failure could result in a catastrophic release of coal ash slurry. The potential for the use of a composite liner system can be largely eliminated through the use. of a composites liner system. The potentially large volume of liquid wasteimpoundments may contain, structural failure may result in the release of a large amount of coal slurry, which could be dangerous for the environment and for the coal industry in the long-term. factors include data regarding the nature and concentration of toxic constituents present in the waste. EPA determined that the material is generated in large volumes annually (e.g., approximately 130 million tons in 2011) The material contains more than 40 toxic constituents, according to EPA. The potential for toxic constituents to degrade and migrate from the point of deposition under plausible management conditions was also considered. The material was found to be of a high quality and to be safe to handle and dispose of. It was also of a low quality and could be hazardous to human health. common methods of managing the waste, such as in a landfill or surface impoundment pond. Analysis of toxic constituents, including heavy metals, to identify constituents likely in the waste that may cause harm to humans. Potential pathways of human exposure, including potential exposure to toxic constituents alone, to be considered if there is a risk of exposure to human health hazards. The presence of toxic constituent alone is not considered to be a risk to humans, but the presence of other constituents may be a concern. constituents, including antimony, arsenic, barium, beryllium, cadmium, chromium, lead, mercury, and selenium. Those constituents can degrade and migrate from the point of deposition under certain conditions. EPA identified common methods of disposal and use, potentially regulated under RCRA, that resulted in documented cases of damages that could cause RCRA-related damages. The agency identified common ways of disposal, use, and disposal that could be regulated under the RCRA. stated that EPA's intent to regulate such waste as hazardous would discourage the use of coal and constitute an unnecessary burden on the utility industry. In anticipation of the enactment of this legislation, according to EPA, the agency excluded the regulation of fossil fuel combustion waste from its final hazardous list. The agency said the regulation would be an "unnecessary burden" on utilities. The bill was passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate on Thursday. The Senate is expected to vote on the bill in the coming days. the combustion of coal or other fossil fuels, including an analysis of the source and volumes of such material generated per year. present disposal and utilization practices; potential danger, if any, to human health and the environment from the disposal and reuse of such materials. documented cases in which danger has been shown to be present, including documented cases where danger was present in the past or in the future. The use of coal and other fossil fuel in the U.S. is currently estimated to be at least $1.2 billion a year. Congress ordered EPA to conduct a comprehensive study and submit to Congress a report on the adverse effects on human health and the environment related to the disposal and utilization of wastes and other byproduct materials. EPA had identified proven cases of damages to human health, the environment through improper waste management. While industry management practices had improved measurably, there was sufficient evidence the wastes were being managed in a way that was safe for humans and animals. The report concluded that waste management practices in the industry had improved. basic environmental control (e.g., disposal in units with no liner or groundwater monitoring) EPA cited new data that identified significant risks for the waste to leach arsenic, including risk to human health associated with agricultural uses of coal ash a substitute for lime. In May 2000, after review by review by EPA, the EPA approved the use of Coal Ash as a Substitute for Lime in the United States. The decision was made after a review by the EPA's Office of Chemical Safety and Pollution Prevention. that may receive a particular type of waste. Regulatory criteria that meet that directive have been identified in the more than 30 years that EPA has gone through the public rulemaking process. In these proposed regulations, EPA identified six categories of wastes it deemed "special wastes" That would be deferred from hazardous waste management requirements until further study and assessment could be completed to determine their risk to human health and the environment. These special wastes were deemed to be of "special concern" to the U.S. identified because they typically were generated in large volumes and, at the time, were believed to pose less risk to human health and the environment than the wastes being identified for regulation as hazardous waste. In the months before the hazardous waste regulations were finalized in 1980, Congress was debating how to regulate such waste. Congress debated the issue for more than a year before finalizing the regulations. The regulations were approved by Congress in December 1980 and went into effect in January 1981. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency says the regulations are still in effect today. Specifications in Section 4011(c) include two paragraphs titled "Minimum Requirements" and "Revised Criteria" The first provision listed among the Minimum Requirements specifies IN GENERAL—A coal combustion residuals permit program shall apply the revised criteria described in paragraph (2) to owners or operators of structures, including surface impoundments, that receive coal. The revised criteria for air quality described in" 40 C.F.R. §258.24; "for all structures that receivecoal combustion. residuals after the date of enactment of this section" combustion residuals. "[P]aragraph (2)" states the "Revised Criteria" proposed in Section 4011(c)(2" Under that paragraph, specific subparts of the MSW landfill criteria and selected individual criteria are cited. For example, the paragraph entitled Revised Criteria begins "The revised criteria described in this paragraph are ... ," followed by the revised criteria for the landfill site. The landfill site would be required to meet the criteria in the revised Criteria. of each regulated "structure" to comply with the groundwater monitoring requirements listed under the Revised Criteria. EPA noted that the technical justification for the requirements is equally applicable to the wastes and surface impoundment, irrespective of the statutory authority under which the requirement is proposed. EPA's proposed criteria at Section 257.71 are those being proposed under its Subtitle C option. The proposed criteria in 40 C.F.R. Part 239 and Comparable Program Elements are in Appendix B. of the proposed rules. standards include criteria EPA deemed necessary to control contaminant leaching and migration. These include the disposal of noncontainerized liquid waste, a large-scale release due to the structural failure of a surface impoundment pond, or the release of coal ash dust to the air. The following standards are among those intended to control the leaching of contaminant into the air and the migration of the contaminant to the environment. The standards include criteria to control leaching, migration, and disposal of liquid waste. the accumulation of coal ash slurry (risks from a catastrophic release of liquid waste) To address such risks, selected proposed standards for CCR surface impoundments were modeled on the Mine Safety and Health Administration (MSHA) regulations in 30 C.F.R. Part 77. In particular, EPA drew from the MSHA mine safety regulations for the CCR site. For more information on the proposed standards, visit the EPA's CCR Surface Impoundments webpage. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here. standards for "water, sediment, or slurry impoundments and impounding structures" EPA's decision to draw from the MSHA standards was based on its belief that records compiled by MSHA for its rulemaking (for 30 C.F.R. Part 77) and the agency's 40 years of experience in implementing those standards were the best source of information for the agency. The agency's decision was to use the standards for " water, sediment and slurryimpoundments" at 30.C.F.-R.S.W. §77.216. groundwater. EPA found that risk was largely eliminated through the use of a composite liner. EPA attempted to determine the extent to which owners and operators of individual facilities may have implemented necessary protective measures. State regulatory programs may require protective measures to C.F.R. §257.72. The proposed Subtitle is titled "Proposed EPA Standards to Address Risks Specific to CCR Management" and includes the CCR damage cases, EPA's quantitative groundwater risk assessment, and the proposed CCR Subtitle. Waste management practices identified as those that may minimize human exposure to toxins below a standard specified according to federal law. Such practices have included a requirement that composite liners be used at the site of deposition.established under the Safe Drinking Water Act. In gathering this information, the EPA used data from the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services and other federal agencies to identify potential protective measures. For more information, go to: http://www.cdh.gov/toxicology/toxins-in-water. migrate off-site, and expose humans to those constituents above levels determined to be toxic to humans. There is no provision in Section 4011 that explicitly requires regulations promulgated by the state and implemented by a CCR Permit Program. There are no regulations that explicitly require regulations that would require the state to issue a permit for the construction of a new water treatment facility in the state of New Jersey. The state can issue its own permit if it chooses to do so, but the federal government must approve the application.  pathways of exposure may include potential release to air or to water from precipitation run-on/runoff across the disposal site. Contaminant leaching to surface water or groundwater at levels that could lead to drinking water exceeding maximum contaminant levels (MCLs) Not relevant if they cannot reach humans (or the environment) not relevant if it is not possible for them to reach humans or the environment. Not relevant when it is possible for it to reach the environment or the surface of the water table. 40 C.F.R. §257.60, "Placement above the natural water table," included among the Location Restrictions criteria. The criteria are intended to address risks from contaminant spread by locating units close to groundwater (see EPA's proposed criteria listed in Table A-2 ). 4011(c)(1)(D) Wind D ispersal —similar to EPA's propose 40 C.f.r. "Air Criteria," 40 Cf. r. " air quality" included among proposed Operating Criteria, intended to address issues associated with fugitive emissions of coal ash dust (see Table A-2 ). 4011(c)(1)( F ) (ii) State Notification and Groundwater Monitoring: Groundwater monitoring. Within one year of submitting its program certification to EPA, a state would require the owner or operator state certifies it has a program in place. As noted above, however, the applicability of those groundwater monitoring requirements would depend on the state's definition of a program. The majority of states responding to the survey also did not have siting controls, inspection, or structural integrity requirements forimpoundments. EPA noted that the survey results are "particularly significant as groundwater monitoring for these kinds of units is a minimum for any credible regulatory regime" The survey found that 67% and 61% of states had no groundwater monitoring requirements for these types of units. The survey also found that 68% of the states had little or no oversight for groundwater monitoring at all. The results were published in a report published by the EPA on Wednesday. significant number of landfills and surface impoundments without proper controls in place, particularly in the area of groundwater monitoring. 4. while there had been substantive improvements in state regulatory programs, EPA identified significant gaps either in states' regulatory authorities or in their exercise of existing authorities. Further, citing its own report, EPA said it had identified ‘significant gaps’ in the state’s regulatory authorities. The report also said that the state had made “substantive improvements” in some areas. but not necessarily a state's solid waste management program. For example, a 2009 survey of states found that more than 60% of states required neither liners nor groundwater monitoring for surface. More than 50% required no liners or groundwater monitoring, according to a survey of state solid waste managers. For more information, visit the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services' National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID) website. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here. provisions such as "the revised criteria for design, groundwater monitoring, corrective action, closure, and post-closure, for structures, including—for new structures and lateral expansions of existing structures" The leachate collection system requirements in 40 C.F.R. §258.40(a)(2) do not apply to this type of structure, according to the law. The law also does not require the leachates to be collected by a leachating system, as the law states. D design standards would require that new landfills and all surface impoundments that have not completed closure prior to the effective date of the rule, can only continue to operate if composite liners and leachate collection and removal systems have been installed. Units would be required to be retrofitted with the systems, which would cost an estimated $1.2 billion. The new standards would take effect in 2015, according to the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and would apply to all landfilling units in the United States. a liner or closed within five years of the effective date of the final rule. That is the same time frame EPA proposed under its Subtitle C alternative. EPA also proposed to require the same liner and leachate collection and removal systems as part of the Subtitle D criteria as Subtitle B criteria. The final rule is expected to be announced in the coming weeks or months. The deadline for submitting comments to the EPA is July 31. The agency will then make a decision on whether to issue a final rule or an alternative. constructed with a composite liner. All units would be required to comply with the groundwater monitoring requirements within one year of the effective date of a final rule. Within five years, existing surface impoundments would be. required to have solids removed and be retrofitted with a. composite liner; new CCR would be in place within five years of the final rule's effective date. New CCR will be in effect for the next five years; it will be phased in over a period of years.  units must have groundwater monitoring systems installed before CCRs could be disposed of in the units. All units would be required to have an independent registered professional engineer certify that the design of the run-on/runoff control system meets requirements specified. The units would also have to be able to control fugitive dust emissions, among other things. The project is expected to be completed by the end of the year or early next year, depending on the outcome of a review by an independent panel of experts. and may take into account the practicable capability of such facilities. At a minimum such revisions for facilities potentially receiving such wastes should require ground water monitoring as necessary to detect contamination, establish criteria for the acceptable location of new or existing facilities, and provide for corrective action as appropriate. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. units could not be located in an unstable area (e.g., a location susceptible to natural or human-induced events or forces capable of impairing the integrity of the unit) Existing facilities in an instability area would be required to close within five years. New disposal units would be needed to be built in the unstable area. New facilities would have to be constructed in the instability area within the next five years, if possible. The proposal was approved by the European Parliament in July 2013, and is expected to be implemented in 2014. in the regulations, and the owner/ operator would be required to notify the state that the design has been placed in the operating record and on the owner's or operator's publicly accessible Internet site. Owners and operators of all existing surface impoundments would be. required to maintain certain information about the impoundment, including the design. The state would also require the owners and operators to keep a record of the design of the impounding facility, as well as the owner or operator of the vehicle.