in appendix VII, the activities varied and included the sale of hydroelectric power, audiovisual products, coins, medals, and commemorative items. Agencies reported that most of the $20.5 billion was to be either deposited or converted into concessions operations. On March 21, 1996, we provided copies of a draft of this article to The Washington Post. We are happy to make clear that this article was not based on any of the information contained in appendix VII of this report. More than 10,000 megawatts of power (electricity) from 54 hydro power plants. Power generated at 22 U.S. Army Corps of Engineers projects located in a 10-state southeastern region. Revenue and fees obtained from contractor parking, fitness dues, and other fees. Gas sales to customers who redistribute to retail customers. Power from 21 multipurpose water resource projects of the Army Corps. and 9 of the Bureau of Reclamation, plus power from nonfederal generating plants. interest earned on investments, telecommunications income from billings, earned assessments, provision for assessment credit, exit/ entrance fees, recoverable expenses from the Uniformed Bank Performance Report (UBPR) collections, miscellaneous income from seminars, rents, and others. Collection of civil penalties, the sale of federal campaign disclosure reports and records, and revenues from the U.S. Federal Election Commission (FEC) campaign finance system. The FEC is a federal agency that collects and distributes campaign contributions. investment income (interest earned from the investment of operating funds in U.S. Treasury securities) Harbor maintenance fees; commissions on pay telephone stations; charges for testing, inspecting and grading services; fees and other charges for miscellaneous services. Consolidated Omnibus Budget and Reconciliation Act (COBRA) The objectives of our review were to identify the best ways to reduce the cost of the federal government to the American people. We found that the best way to do this was to identify and reduce the costs of the Federal Government to the Americans. Hoover Dam, site rentals of cabins, trailers, and camping and group-use sites, and land-use fees. Public Information products, the review and approval of pipeline rights-of-way, Cenozoic Publication, transfer of rights- of-way titles, assignment and lease transactions. User fees from applicants for licenses to engage in interstate commerce, parties in rail authority, and parties in state and local governments. The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers is responsible for the construction of the Hoover Dam. observation decks and viewing machines at Eisenhower Lock; fees for vessel service, damage repairs, and violations; rental of office space; pleasure craft and noncommercial tolls for use of the seaway. Civil penalties, sale of test tires and vehicles, royalties, FOIA requests, Corporate Average Fuel Economy fine (CAFE) penalties, and user user fees at the lock. The lock is located on the U.S. Navy's Potomac River. It is located in the state of Washington. filed pursuant to each of the statutes the Commission administers User fees charged to cover the costs of materials, brochures, and space rental for seminars, workshops, business award events, and others. Ad valorem fees for cargo on vessels going into U.S. ports; interest on Minority Bank investments; fees for fees. User fees for processing applications to sell ships; operating the computer-aided Operations Research Facility at the U.s. Merchant Marine Academy; making copies of agency rulings, orders, and economic data. FOIA User fee collections, fines and penalty payments, and Davis Law receipts. Filing fee from persons acquiring voting securities or assets who are required to file pre-merger notifications (15 U.S.C. 18a) Entrance fees, commodity revenues from grazing, oil and gas, sand and gravel, and other special use fees. Tours of the state's parks, including the Grand Canyon and Grand Canyon National Park, are included in the user fee collections. For more information, go to: http://www.census.gov/opa. with FOIA and requests made to the Research Division Duplicating costs under FOIA and the sale of Board publications reports License and inspection fees, annual fees, and other regulatory costs Rebates for volume discounts on governmentwide total quality training costs. Fees for over 80 types of applications, statements, and reports. Documents, statements and reports for more than 80 types, including reports, applications, and documents. Documents for over 70 types, such as statements, applications and documents, for which there is a fee of up to $500. for rule reviews, designations, Freedom of Information Act (FOIA), leverage audits, registration, reparations, photocopying, and publications User fees for the disposal of high-level radioactive waste; timber sales; public hunting; recycling; procurement seminars and procurement solicitation fees. occasional rights-of-way and easement and grazing fees; and sale of crude oil and natural oil andNatural gas. User fees are used for disposal of radioactive waste, timber sales, public hunting, recycling, and procurement seminars. Superintendent of Documents, when necessary. VISA and MasterCard credit cards are accepted, also. Orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent. U.S. General Accounting Office P.O. Box 6015 Gaithersburg, MD 20884-6015 Room 1100 700 4th St. NW (corner of 4th and 4th) in Gaitherburg, Maryland. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. Each day, GAO issues a list of newly available reports and testimony. Orders may also be placed by calling (202) 512-6000 or by using fax number (301) 258-4066. To receive facsimile copies of the daily list or to order a copy of the report, call the General Accounting Office at (202-512-6000) or TDD (301- 413-0006) or visit www.gao.gov. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. proceedings and compliant and compliant-type declaratory order proceedings (49 C.F.R. 1002.3) Registration fees from handlers of authorized drugs (doctors, pharmacies, and others) Collection of initial and supplemental registrations for foreign principals. Collection of copies of registration statements, supplements, amendments, exhibits, dissemination reports, political propaganda, and other materials contained in the public. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org for details. Sale of utilities (electricity, steam, water, and sewage treatment) to Federal Prison Industries, Inc. (Trade name-UNICOR) Sale of meal tickets; rental income from staff housing located at various federal prisons. Sale of farm by-products; fees from the care of the care. Files; execution of information searches; preparation and execution of written advisory opinions. Sales of food and beverages; sale of food, beverages, and souvenirs; sale and rental of staff housing. and custody of state prisoners from various states Gift shop sales, tickets, and tours National Archives and Records Management Reproduction services, the sale of reference material, over-the-counter sales (museum and presidential library shops), publication sales, audiovisual sales and rentals, and Presidential library admissions. File search and copying services in association with the National Archives, Records Management, and the National Museum of American History. and the Library of Congress, among others. The National Archives is located in Washington, D.C. and is home to the Smithsonian Institution. Department of Housing and Urban Development The John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts (continued) operations during fiscal year 1994. National Aeronautics and Space Administration National Archives and Records Administration National Endowment for the Arts. National Endowments for the Humanities and Occupational Safety and Health Review Commission Thrift Deposit Protection. Department of the Arts and Humanities Department of Justice Department of Education Department of Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics. National Institute of Health and Human Services Department of Energy and Environmental Protection Department of Defense. any list from the past 30 days, please call (202) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone. A recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists. The list will be sent to you via email or a text message. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. Needs of the National Park Service (GAO/T-RCED-88-27, Mar. 23, 1988). Parks and Recreation: Limited Progress Made in Documenting and Mitigating Threats to the Parks. Parks and Rec: Recreational Fee Authorizations, Prohibitions, and Limitations. Corps of Engineers and Bureau of Reclamation’s Recreation and Construction Backlogs. National Parks’ Health and Safety Problems Given Priority: Cost Estimates and Safety Management. and Recreation: Problems with Fee System for Resorts operating on Forest Service Lands (GAO/RCED-88-94, May 16, 1988). Parks and Recreation: Interior Did Not Comply With Legal Requirements for the Outdoors Commission (GAE/RCed-88/65/BR, Mar. 25, 1988) Parks and Rec: Park Service Managers Report Shortfalls in Maintenance Funding (GAo/RCeds/88/91/BR), Mar. 21, 1988. Federal Lands: Views on Reform of Recreation Concessioners. Forest Service: Little Assurance That Fair Market Value Choices Face the Future of the Recreation Program. Parks and Recreation: Maintenance and Reconstruction Backlog on National Forest Trails (GAO/RCED-89-182, Sep. 22, 1989). parks and recreation: maintenance and reconstruction backlog on national forest trails. Federal Lands: Improvements Needed in Managing Short-Term Concessioner. Federal Land: Little Progress Made in Improving Oversight of Concessers (GAE/T-RCED -93-42, May 27, 1993). Fees Are Collected From Ski Areas (GAO/RCED-93-107, Apr. 16, 1993). National Park Service: Policies and Practices for Determining Concessioners’ Building Use Fees. Federal Lands: Improvements Needed in Managing Concessers. Forest Service: Difficult Could Be Improved (GAE/RCed-83-59, Apr.-Apr. 25, 1983). Increasing Entrance Fees: National Park service (GAo/ RCED-82-84, Aug. 4, 1982). Facilities in Many National Parks and Forests Do Not Meet Health and Safety Standards (GAB/CED-80-115, Oct. 10, 1980). Better Management of National Park Concessions Can Improve Services Provided to the Public (GAC/Ced-80/102) Officials from four of the agencies said they generally agreed with the facts as presented in the draft report. Officials from the National Park Service, Fish and Wildlife Service, and the Bureau of Reclamation said they agreed with most of the facts in the report. The draft report was released to the public on Wednesday. The National Park service said it will release a full report on the issue in the coming days. The Fish and wildlife service said the report will be released in the next few weeks. The bureau of reclamation said it would release a report in the near future. We did our review from January 1995 to November 1995, in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. We selected Canada to obtain information on another country’s experience. Because it was impractical for us to obtain comments from all 75 agencies, we provided copies of their comments. We also visited two of the states—Maryland and Tennessee—and met with their key concessions managers. The U.S. National Park System is made up of 75 different agencies, including the National Park Service, the National Museum of Natural History, and the National Zoo. a questionnaire to five state governments and Canada. We selected the five states on the basis of each government’s rate of return that was collected by the National Parks and Conservation Association. The information showed that these five states had relatively high rates of return. We visited two of the states—Maryland and Tennessee—and met with their leaders. The results were published in the June issue of the magazine, “Parks and Conservation,” on sale now in the U.S. and internationally. The states were California, Maryland, Michigan, and Missouri. The states reported obtaining rates of return ranging from 11 to 17 percent. Canada reported receiving a 9.8 percent rate of return on return from concessions. The U.S. reported obtaining a rate of 9.7 percent. The United States reported a rate. of 8.9 percent on return on concession revenue. The State of California reported a. rate of 8 percent on concession revenues. The state of Maryland reported a return rate of 7.5 percent on concessions. report to the heads of the departments of the six land management agencies for comment. We did not ask for comments from all 75 agencies in our survey because to do so would have been impractical. The six agencies accounted for over 92 percent of total concessions. On March 25, 1996, we discussed the draft report with officials designated by the departments. Their comments are discussed on the next page of this article. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. our work in Washington, D.C., Nashville, Tennessee; and Annapolis, Maryland. Because it was impractical for us to obtain comments from all 75 agencies, we provided copies of a draft of this report to the heads of the departments of the 6 land management agencies for comment. The six agencies accounted for more than 80% of the land in the study area. The study was based on interviews with people in Washington and Nashville, as well as in Annapolis and Frederick, Maryland, for the report. we will send copies of this report to interested congressional committees, the agencies included in our review, the Director of the Office of Management and Budget, and other interested parties. We will also make copies available to others upon request. The major contributors to this report are listed in appendix. We are happy to make this information available to anyone who would like to see a copy of the report. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. IX. If you have any questions concerning this report, please contact me at (202) 512-8387. I will be happy to answer any questions you may have about fiscal year 1994. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255 or visit www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org. for over 92 percent of the concessions. On March 25, 1996, we discussed the draft report with officials designated by the departments. Their comments are discussed on pages 16 and 17. Appendix VIII contains a more detailed description of our objectives, scope, and methodology. As shown in appendix I, 27, 27 of the report, 27 percent of all concessions were given to the U.S. government. For more information, see the report's appendix VIII and appendix I. 27. The report is available on the Internet at: http://www.cnn.com/1996/01/25/science/science-and-environment/features/topics/top-stories.html. 1996, we discussed the draft report with officials designated by the departments. We discussed the report with the Forest Service’s Director of Recreation, Heritage, and Wilderness Resources; the National Park Service”s Acting Chief of the Concessions Program Division; the Bureau of Land Management’“Special Assistant to the Assistant Director for Resource Use and Protection;” and other officials. The report was released in 1996; we discussed it with officials from the departments on the day it was released. The Army Corps of Engineers said they had no comments on the draft report. As agreed with your office, unless you publicly announce its contents earlier, we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days from the date of this letter. At that time, we will publicly announce the contents of the report. The draft report will be made available to the public at www.localities.gov/earthquake. The report is expected to be released within 30 days of the letter being sent. percent of the fees was 3.3 times the rate on agreements where over 50 percent of the Fees were to be deposited into the Department of the Treasury as miscellaneous receipts. Concessions with the highest gross revenues in our survey managed sources in the absence of express statutory authority to do so. Since agencies that collect concessions fees generally are not able to use them, they have less incentive to keep them. Most concessions fees are to be deposit into the Dept. of Treasury as general mis Miscellaneous Receipts. Most of the activities were not conducive to concessions operations, officials say. They estimated that activities generating $175 million, or about 1 percent, generated the money.in Treasury’s special account for the agency's use or retained by the agency for its use. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. Agency authorized to retain fees reported obtaining more fees in proportion to their concessioners’ gross revenues. About 70 percent of the 42 agencies or agency components responding to our survey said they retained fees. An official from one of the agencies that retained fees said that since the fees support agency operations, staff put forth extra effort to obtain a high rate of return on concessions. Generally, agencies are notauthorized to retain and use money they receive from outside to maximize fees. For example, the U.S. Department of Agriculture does not allow agencies to retain or use money it receives from outside. Because agencies did not collect revenue data on all concessions, we could calculate the rate of return only for those agreements where agencies reported both the revenues and fees. As shown in appendix VI, concessions agreements entered into on a competitive basis had higher rates of return than those that were not competed. Our analysis of questionnaire data showed that another factor increasing the rate. of return was the agencies’ authority to retain concessions fees and use them in their operations. The rate of. return on agreements where. agencies reported that they were authorized to retain over 50 by agencies retaining fees averaged an 11.1 percent rate. that competition was a factor. For campground permits where agencies reported both revenue and fee data, agencies reported that they competed 82 percent of the permits issued in fiscal year 1994. Campground permits that agencies reported competing averaged a 7.1 percent rate of return. Nonland management agencies competed more of their concessions than the land management agencies. Information on 2,234 concessions agreements reporting both Revenue and Fee data detailed how they were entered into during fiscal Year 1994. The information showed that nonland management agency competed more than land management agency. to a 2.0-percent rate when agencies reported that they did not use competition. The impact of competition on the rate of return remained when the differences among services were considered. Detailed analysis of reported information on the recreation service providing the highest rate of returns in the land management agencies—campground—showed that competition had a significant impact on the rates of return for campground users. For more information, go to campground.org or call the National Park Service at 1-800-273-8255. percent) of the total 11,263 reported concessions agreements were with the 6 land management agencies. The National Park Service and the Forest Service concessions operations accounted for about 90 percent of the reported concessioners’ gross revenues and fees paid to the government. In contrast, the six nonland management agencies (without authority to retain their fees) reported 93 percent of. the total agreements and 93% of concessioner’s gross revenues but reported 18 percent of concessions fees. Our analysis of the data showed a rate of return of 2.8 percent for the 6Land management agencies’ concessions, 9.2 percent for. the 50 concessions. Nonland management agencies entered into 101 of the agreements and competed 96 percent of them. Land management agencies initiated 2,133 of these concessions agreements. Nonland agencies either entered into concessions agreements using the Federal Acquisition Regulation or using the Land Management Act of 1974. The agreements were negotiated using the land management act or the Land Administration Act of 1976. The agreement was signed on July 1, 1976. It was signed by the president of the United States, George H.W. Bush, and the secretary of state, George W. Bush. Nine of the 42 agencies or agency components also estimated that concessioners provided an additional $4.7 million in nonfee compensation by maintaining government property. This amount is not included in table 2. Total concessions revenues and fees in this table can not be compared to determine the rate of return the government received from concessioners’ revenues. The Central Intelligence Agency did not monitor the value of concessioners' maintenance of consequence. Some agency officials said they estimated non fee compensation value by considering what the cost would have been for the agency to perform the work. Some agencies reported that gross revenue data were not available because concessioners paid a flat concessions fee and the agency had no requirement to track gross revenues. According to the Bureau of Reclamation, the 37 concessioners represent only a portion of the agency’s concessioners. Survey information was not available for the 225 concessions agreements that are managed by the agency. Some agencies had more than one component managing concessions. As indicated in the table, data on all concessioners’ revenues were not Available. did not contain both gross revenue and concessions fee data. In addition to the questionnaire data, we also interviewed federal concessions management staff at both headquarters and field levels and officials of the National Parks and Conservation Association and the National Park Hospitality Association. We also reviewed our previous reports on the state of the U.S. national park system and the number of national parks in the United States. We are happy to provide you with any additional information you may want to know about national park systems and their operations. Five states said none of their concessions staff had procurement backgrounds. They reported that they had contracting officers to set policies. The data showed that the lack of a procurement background for concessions staff did not have an impact on the rate of return. The five states said they had contracts with contracting officers who set policies to set the rates of return for their concessions. The report was published in the International Journal of Concessions, published by Oxford University Press, London, on Monday, November 14, 2013. with the largest reported amount of gross revenues in our survey. Rates of return ranged from a low rate of 2 percent to a high rate of 47 percent for the 15 service categories. Food service operations averaged the lowest rate of return of 1 percent to the highest rate of 1.5 to 2 percent for each of the 15 categories. The average rate for each service category was 1.6 percent to 1.7 percent. The lowest rate was 2 percent and the highest was 47 percent. For more information, visit the U.S. Department of Agriculture website. Fifty components from 29 of the 75 federal agencies we surveyed said they received income of $20.5 billion in 1994 from activities that were not concessions.resulted in a 3.8 percent rate of return, and those without the preference resulted in a rates of return of 6.4 percent. As shown in the chart below, the percentage of income generated by each of the 50 components is based on their share of the federal government's total income in the period from 1994 to 1994. Lowest rate of return (2 percent), and coin-operated copiers in U.S. Postal Service facilities averaged the highest rate ofreturn (47 percent) Other governments reported receiving higher rates of return from concessions operations than the overall federal rate. Four states and Canada reported on average a 12.7 percent rate of rate of returns, according to the report. The report was compiled by the Government Accountability Office and the Center for Tax Policy and Research, based on a survey of more than 2,000 people. were either initiated or extended in fiscal year 1994. From this reported information, we calculated the rate of return by dividing gross revenues into the sum of concessions fees and special accounts. The rate represents how the federal government’s rate of returns compared with that of other governments. We also looked at how the rates of return compared with those of other U.S. states and territories. For more, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/30/politics/federal-government-rate-return-fiscal-year-1994. were to determine (1) the extent of concessions operations in the federal government, (2) the rate of return received from concessions, and (3) how it compared to other governments’ rates of return. We used the data we obtained from objectives one, two, and four and sent a questionnaire to each federal entity’s concessions operations. We also looked at Inspector General reports; and laws, regulations, and policies for each federal entities’ concessions operations, to determine the extent work in this area. the extent of agencies’ nonconcessions activities that generated income in fiscal year 1994 and whether they offered opportunities for the agencies to handle them like concessions. To accomplish objectives one, two, and four, we used three questionnaires to request data from 75 federal executive departments and agencies listed in the 1993/94 U.S. Government Manual. We pretested the questionnaires at six federal agencies or agency components: the Department of Agriculture’s Forest Service, the Army Corps of Engineers, the General Services Administration, the Smithsonian, of the 75 federal departments and agencies surveyed reported having concessions agreements in effect during fiscal year 1994. Forty-two respondents (agencies or agency components) provided concessions data because, as shown in appendix II, some agencies, such as the Department of the Interior, had more than 1 component managing concessions agreements. Fifteen of the 27 agencies either initiated or extended at least 1 concession agreement. The Central Intelligence Agency provided an oral briefing on its concessions program and did not provide any details on its concession agreements. information on all concessions operations and detailed agreement-specific information (including copies of the concessions agreements) on each agreement that was either initiated or extended during fiscal year 1994. Interviews with federal concessions management staff at both headquarters and field levels and nonprofit organizations interested in concessions issues; and (3) obtained copies of all concessions agreements that were signed in fiscal year 1993 or 1994. For more information, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/30/government/government-news/grants/grant-report-grants-report. conducive to competition. On the basis of questionnaire data, we determined that 6 of these types of concessions were among the 50 concessions with the highest reported gross revenues to the concessioners in our survey and were initiated in fiscal year 1994. The reported information showed that the agreements were first in effect in 1994. From this reported information, we calculated the rate of return by dividing gross revenues into the sum of concessions fees and the amount in special accounts. We excluded questionnaires that included financial data for concessions agreements either initiated or extended during 1994. The 42 agencies or agency components reported that they had 11,263 concessions agreements in effect during fiscal year 1994. Reported data showed that concessions operations ranged from small fishing guide services generating annual revenues of less than $1,000 to multimillion-dollar recreation corporations. The reported $82.5 million of government receipts includes funds that concessioners deposited into special accounts that officials said are primarily used for repairs and improvements to facilities. The actual amount of gross revenues was greater because some agencies did not collect gross revenue data from all concessioners. that agencies sent to us; (2) checked agency totals for concessions revenues and fees against prior GAO reports; (3) followed up with agency staff in selected cases to clarify their responses; (4) manually reviewed all pages of each form; (5) had specially trained staff convert the data to computer-readable format; and (6) had the data converted to a computer- readable format. The report was published on October 1. For confidential support, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255. and verify their entries; (6) manually checked computerized data against the original forms, including all data on concessions revenues and fees; and (7) conducted computerized checks for data consistency. We analyzed the information using standard software for tabulating and analyzing data. To calculate the rate of return from concessions, we used the following formula:  “R/R” =  ”“Y/Y’’, ”R/S” = “”, “D/S,” “Y” means “year’s revenue”. and reviewed the laws, regulations, and policies for each federal entity’s concessions operations. If concessions services in agencies were provided under agreements with GSA, we requested agencies not to include these operations in their responses. All 75 agencies responded to our request. Twenty-seven of the agencies said they had at least one concessions agreement. Forty-two respondents provided concessions information, because some agencies, such as the Department of the Interior, provided information. Our information on the concessions to includeThese operations were included in their response. GSA agreed to included these concessions in its response. In response to our questionnaires, we received information on 5,000 concessions agreements. Our information about the agreements comes from only the agencies’ questionnaire responses for the agreements. However, we checked selected responses against copies of the concessions agreements sent to us. We also checked agency totals for concessions revenues and fees against our prior reports, and followed up with agency staff in selected cases to clarify their responses. In some cases, agency staff were asked to explain their responses to the questionnaires. In other cases, the agency staff was asked to provide additional information. for construction or capital improvements, may last up to 50 years. A short-term permit or license, which generally requires little or no financial investment in facilities by the concessioner, mayLast up to 5 years. Each agency is responsible for developing, implementing, and monitoring its concessions program to ensure that when deciding the length of the contract. According to the officials, concessioners are given enough time to make a profit and amortize their investments, but the maximum term of contracts is 20 years. Park Service said that between 1985 and 1989, 28 of 29 contracts up for renewal were awarded to the incumbent concessioner. The National Park Service reported 23 of the 50 concessions agreements with the highest revenues reported in our survey. On the basis of the reported data, when 17 of the contracts were last awarded, the incumbent concessioners received preferential right of contract renewal and received 16 of the contracts. The existing concessioners sold three of the remaining six concessions to other concessioners before the contracts. to existing concessioners who have satisfactorily performed their obligations. Under the Department of the Interior’s regulations, the preferential right for contract renewal is the right of incumbent concessioners to match or better the best offer received from firms competing for the concessions contract. The existing concessioner must have performed satisfactorly. To renew the contract, the incumbent concessioner has to match the best offered by the other firms competing. The best offer from the rival firms must be in excess of the current contract value. and must have been under the existing contract for 2 years. This preference reduces competition because it may limit the number of prospective concessioners. Businesses are reluctant to expend time and money preparing bids in a process where the award is most likely going to the incumbent contractor. The National must be under contract for at least two years to be eligible to bid for the contract. The contract must be for a period of at least five years. It must also be for an area of more than one million square miles. investments made by some concessioners also affect the rate of return that the government receives. The National Park Service official said the report highlighted two factors required by legislation that affect the agency’s rate of returns. He added that three other factors also Affect the Rate of Return: periodic operational reviews of concessioners, and rate control of prices for goods and services. The expense for the Park Service is also a factor in determining the return on investments made by concessioners. The report was published by the Center for American Progress. financial audits to concessioners grossing over 1 million dollars annually that the National Park Service requires. It is likely that all larger concessioners would incur the costs of financial and routine maintenance audits, regardless of the agencies’ requirements. We would expect, however, that economic market forces for large dollar value concessions would be similar for the National park Service and other agencies' concessions. Also with respect to prices, the legislative requirement is the same for all concessioners with over $1 million dollars per year. particularly those paying a flat concessions fee. Some agency officials said they had no requirement to track concessioners’ revenues. However, the National Park Service said it plans to change this practice in the future, because some of these agreements may be conducive to either the Park Service or a successor concessioner has the liability to pay the concessioner sound value compensation. According to National Park service officials, this valuation limits the number of businesses submitting offers for concessions. The new policy covering standard concessions contract calls for National Park Services concessioners' prices to be comparable to those of similar services and facilities under similar circumstances. The Concessions Policy Act of 1965 is the only law covering concessions in land management agencies that specifically requires competition. The act requires the National Park Service to give the public the right to compete for concessions contracts. Competition is limited by the requirement that existing concessioners who perform satisfactorily be given a preferential right of contract renewal when the agreement expires. Officials said that more competition is retaining fees is or would be beneficial to them. Other policies that under most circumstances provide for competition include possessory interest. language, which included a provision to reduce possessory interest for contracts awarded after January 7, 1993. This change is being challenged by the National Park Hospitality Association. The policy revises the calculation of possessoryinterest to “fair value,” which is defined as the original cost of improvements less straight-line depreciation. The change is expected to take effect in early 2015, according to a report by the American Institute of Architects and the American Hotel and Lodging Association (ATLHA) for contracts either awarded or extended during fiscal year 1994 showed that: New and extended agreements granting possessory interest resulted in a rate of return of 3.8 percent. New agreements with preferential right of contract renewal resulted in an interest rate of 4.5 percent. For contracts without possessoryinterest, the interest rate was 3.9 percent and for those without it, it was 4.4 percent. for contracts with a preferential right to renewal, the rate of interest was 4 percent and that for those with no interest at all was 3 percent. the federal government receives a fair return from the partnership. No overall federal concessions policy exists. In exchange for use of federal property, concessioners pay the government a concessions, franchise, permit, or license fee. As shown in appendix III, our analysis of financial data from the questionnaire showed a 3.6 percent rate of return to the government on reported concessioners’ revenues from concessions agreements either a flat fee or a government property. The difficulty of distinguishing between maintenance costs for federal property and concessioners' property. The legislation gives concessioners the right to be compensated for improvements they construct on federal lands. The legislation specifies that unless otherwise provided by agreement, the compensation must be based on “sound value,” which is generally defined as reconstruction cost less depreciation, not to exceed fair market value. The bill was passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate this week. It is expected to be signed into law by the end of the year. For confidential support call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org. in the courts on the basis that the new policy is not in accordance with the Concessions Policy Act of 1965. Officials from the four states and Canada said their regulations do not allow concessioners to acquire possessory interests. However, they said they consider the amount of a concessioner’s investment when deciding whether to allow the purchase of a piece of property. The new policy will take effect on January 1, 2015. The decision will be made on a case-by-case basis. Officials said key factors for selecting concessioners were the amount of fees generated for the government and bidders’ experience and financial status. According to state officials, agreements exempted from competition included short-term permits expecting to gross a low level of revenue, generally $5,000 or less. Officials for one state amount of revenues and fees, information on whether competition was used to select the concessioner, whether fees was one of the factors considered during competition, how competed agreements were advertised, and terms of agreements. provide details on its concessions agreements. Agency responded that concessions fees were sometimes waived because of the following reasons: (1) reduced prices on vended items, (2) difficulty in obtaining contractors, (3) a more attractive procurement was needed because of a lack of offerors, and (4) the building is surrounded by many food establishments. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. The state would enter into a noncompetitive agreement with a business that initiated a proposal for a concession. If the operation proved lucrative after 1 year, the state would renegotiate the concessions agreement through a competitive process. We analyzed numerous factors to determine their impact on the state's decision-making process. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. needed, but they also said it can not always be used. They said some operations could not be competed, such as ski areas where major portions of the operations are located on private land and the concessioners have a substantial financial investment in the activities. In such situations, the federal government could step in, they said. The federal government has stepped in in the past, but not as much as it has in the recent past, they say. They say they are still looking into the matter. government’s land is usually needed to complete a service, such as adding a ski lift. However, other activities such as river running, jeep tours through scenic areas, and hunting trips, were very profitable to concessioners and concessioners, the study found. The study was published in the journal of the International Association of Ski and Snowboard Instructors (IASI), which is published by the International Ski Federation (IFSI) and the Society for International Skiing and Snowboarding (SIMS). For the purpose of this assignment, we defined “concessions” as private or public entities using federally owned/leased property under a government contract, permit, license, or other similar agreements. Concessions services included, but were not limited to, food operations, vending machines, retail shops, public pay telephones, barber/beauty shops, transportation, lodging, and other services. We defined ‘concession’ as entities using federal property to provide recreation, food or other services to the general public or specific individuals. local governments, supply many of the services and accommodations provided on federal property to the public. Each year, millions of people use the services made possible through these agreements. Some agreements are long-term and some are short-term. Long-term agreements generally involve a large financial investment by the concessioner. A long- term agreement, which generally involves a big financial investment, is known as a "long-term contract" or "golden contract" It is a contract that entitles the government to a certain percentage of a person's income for a period of time. services include food service, retail sales such as gift shops, vending machines, and coin-operated photocopiers. Since the mid 1970s, we have conducted several reviews of the concessions programs in the land management agencies. (See the list of Related GAO Products on pp. 43 and 44.) The objectives of our review are to improve the quality of the food service and retail sales in the state. The GAO has no plans to change the way food service is provided to the public. its concessions operations. All four states and Canada said they generally compete concessions agreements. Canada and the four states reported that their concessions services included marinas, food service operations, campgrounds, and retail sales. All of the same types of services reported by the agencies we surveyed were also reported by Canada, the four States, and the United States in the survey. The survey was based on responses from more than 1,000 people. For more information on the survey, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/29/technology/features/fishing-fishermen-fishing. (4) a limited profit rate for concessioners, with overage to be either returned to the government or put back into the food service operation. (5) concessioners make it possible to market Native Americans arts and crafts, an activity the agency could not do. Agency responded that some revenue data were not available, and that it was not possible to provide all the information needed to make a decision. The agency also responded that it could not provide all of the information required to make the decision. percentage of gross revenues. The primary purpose of the six land management agencies’ concessions programs is to encourage operation of a public-private partnership. Concessions services include food service, retail sales, ski resorts, lodging, and marinas. Officials from the Forest Service and the Bureau of Reclamation noted that high and the Department of the Interior’s National Park Service and Fish and Wildlife Service are responsible for most federal concessions. We revised the questionnaires on the basis of their detailed feedback. Nonland management agencies such as the General Services Administration and U.S. Postal Service provide concessions services. The primary purpose of their concessions programs is to provide high-quality merchandise and convenient services at reasonable prices. Their concessions are available to all federal employees or their individual employees and users of their services. For more information, visit the General Services Administration's concessions programs on their website. The U.S Postal Service's concessions program on its website is on its website. to, food operations, vending machines, retail shops, public pay telephones, barber/beauty shops, transportation, lodging, marinas, and campgrounds. We excluded day care centers, employee association stores, and services provided by visually impaired persons under the Randolph-Sheppard Act. Under concessions agreements with federal agencies, private parties and nonfederal public entities, such as marinas and campground. State governments manage Randolph- sheppard concessions that are on federal property. Further, if concessions services in an agency were provided under an agreement with GSA, we requested agencies not. by state agencies. Total (fees + special accounts) Rate of return (percent) Transportation (including ferry, cruise, tourmobile) Food service operations, lodging, campgrounds, vending machines, retail sales, river running, big game hunting, marinas, ski resorts, transportation, cruise boats, boat docks, coin-operated copiers, and others. Retail sales, marina, beaches, golf courses Food Service Operations (including vending machines) Retail Sales (including retail sales) service operations, vending machines, optical viewing machines, water sports equipment, campgrounds, and cruise boats. Food service operations, retail sales, stables, bicycle and boat rentals, rifle ranges, and vending machines. Lodging, foodService operations, marinas, retail Sales, pools, horseback riding, and firewood sales. Campgrounds, swimming pools, snack facilities, and rifle ranges. Camping, food Service Operations, Retail Sales, Camping and RV Park Operations. bars, marinas, boat docks, horseback riding, and golf courses Retail sales, recreation equipment rentals, food service operations, marina, golf courses, tennis courts, theaters, and office and special purpose space Tennessee did not track concessioners’ revenues. It charged a flat concessions fee. Application fees and the sale of patent information fees were included in the fees charged by the state to concessioners. The state also charged concessioners a flat application fees and a patent information fee.