on the ETS revolved around fuel prices. Point Carbon analysis indicates 79% of the variance (R 2 ) inallowance prices was explained by changes in fuel prices (particularly for electricpower), with 23% ofthe variance explained by the weather. This linkage betweenallowance Prices and the power market is not linked to the electricity market. It is not clear if the link between fuel prices and the electric power market will ever be fully restored to its previous state. The ETS is expected to be fully operational by the end of 2014. surprising, as the power sectorconducted the majority of trades in 2005 and therefore significantly influencedprice development. Kaasik argues that the evidence from the past year indicates that fuelprices influence carbon prices, but not the reverse. Specifically, he seesallowance prices as a derivative of natural gas and coal pricing, at least for the next few years. He argues that carbon prices should be based on natural gas prices, not coal prices, for at least the next several years. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here. Climaticevents influencing prices include cold weather, which increased energy usage, anddry conditions, which decreased the availability of hydroelectric power. (22) Figure 2. CO2 Market: Large Price Changes in Very Short Amount of Time Source: Margus Kaasik, Eesti Energia, Carbon Market: EUETS (May 9, 2006),p. 14.2006. The primary economic influence on CO2 prices is the price of carbon dioxide (CO2) electricity price byinfluencing the marginal price of electricity. How this has evolved during the firsttrading period is illustrated by Figure 3 . Figure 3. There is a Very Long-Term Correlation Between CO2 and Electricity Price: Link Via Marginal Producer. Source: Margus Kaasik, Eesti Energia, Carbon Market: EUETS (May 9, 2006) Click here for more information on the EUETS carbon market and its role in the electricity market. carbon intensity of the project would provide an incentive to developlow carbon alternatives. New entrant reserves should be basedon output or capacity, and avoid differentiating according to the CO 2 -intensity of thenew investment. In particular, giving more to coal than gas plants would be a mistake. It would also be a waste of money to invest in new coal-fired power stations instead of new gas-fired plants, which would have a lower CO 2 emissions. It is also a mistake to invest more in coal plants than in gas-powered ones. rewardsinvestment in new coal facilities, which would conflict with objectives to tackle climate change. The damaging effects would be amplified ifcarbon-intensive new entrants not only receive free allowances for the period2008-2012 but also receive free allowance for the next three years. In the long run, this could lead to higher electricity prices, says the report. The report was published by the Royal Society for the Prevention of Climate Change (RSPCC) on Wednesday, November 14. For more information, visit www.rspcc.org. third, trading period. Allocating allowances according to output and not differentiatingaccording to the third, trading periods may have a significant effect on the long-term direction of investment. Allocations should be made to support continuation of current economic development irrespective of itscarbon intensity, says the World Resources Institute (WRI) The WRI says allowances should be given to new entrants according to their output, rather than their carbon intensity. The WRC says the allocation should be based on output, not carbon intensity, and not on output. in theshort-term. Assuming natural gas-fired and coal-fired generation are the marginalcost suppliers of power, allowance prices will respond positively to increasing natural gas prices or decreasing coal prices. Thiscreates a correlation over time between allowance prices and power prices. Likewise, allowance Prices willrespond negatively to decreasing natural gas Prices or increasing coal Prices. In the long-term, the correlation between allowance Prices and Power Prices will be stronger than in the short-term because of the price of natural gas and coal. 2 emissions at theproducer (upstream) level from mobile sources and some stationary sources. For these emissions, regulation at the producer level will not create weaker incentives for reducing emissions than at the consumer level. The volume of emissions from a particularcommodity is not dependent on technology, the Commission says. For the rest of the emissions, the regulation will be at a lower level, the commission says, and will not be as strong as for the other two levels of emissions. For more information, go to the European Commission's website. the then-existing 15 nations of the EU agreed to reduce theiremissions by 8% from 1990 levels under a collective arrangement called a "bubble" By 2001,collective greenhouse gas emissions in the EU were 2.3% below 1990 levels, mostly the result of a structural shift from coal to natural gas in the United States. The U.S. is now the largest emitter of greenhouse gases in the world, followed by the U.K. and Germany. The United States is the second-largest emitter, after China. emissionstrading was elevated by the accession of 10 additional central and eastern Europe countries to EUmembership in May 2004. Collectively, these 10 countries' greenhouse gas emissions dropped 22.6%from 1990-2001, with only Slovenia's emissions increasing during that time (10.4%). Thisexpansion of the EU trading zone to 25 countries greatly increases the EU emissions trading zone. The EU emissions trade zone now has a total of 25 countries, up from 14 in 1990. Norway, a non-EU country, also has an emissions trading system that beganoperating on January 1, 2005. Norway's system covers 51 facilities in the energy andprocess sectors such as oil refining and iron and steel processing. With the long-term effect of theETS uncertain, the future direction of Norway's trading system is uncertain. The government had indicated earlierthat it would consider expanding the [trading] system from 2008 to include as manysources of emissions as practical through an upstream system. acrossthe 25 EU Member countries, including oil refineries, powerplants over 20 megawatts (MW) incapacity, coke ovens, and iron and steel plants, along with cement, glass, lime, brick, ceramics, andpulp and paper installations. Covered entities emit about 45% of the EU's carbon dioxide emissions. The trading program does not cover emissions of that contribute significantly to total emissions and for which trading could reduce cost significantly would "substantially" satisfy these criteria. Norway's offshore oil and gas sector are covered by the country's carbon tax of almost 40 euro per metrictonne of CO 2. These sectors account for about 10-15% of thecountry's emissions. The carbon tax is much higher than the anticipated allowance price under the tradingprogram. The ETS is the European Union's second-largest emissions trading scheme. It is also the largest carbon trading scheme in the world. The European Commission is the ETS' second-biggest emitters. carbon tax is levied on about 64% of the country's CO 2 emissions. The firstphase of the trading program covers the period 2005-2007, with a second, expandedphase to begin in 2008. Developing its initial trading scheme independently of the EU, Norway's"Quota" is based on the European Convention on Climate Change's (ECC) limit on CO2 emissions from power plants and other industries. The ECC's limit is set at 30% of global CO2 levels by 2030. of Environmental Ministers and European Parliament was to achievea new car fleet average CO 2 emissions rate of 120 grams per kilometer (g CO 2 /km) by 2005, or by 2010 at the latest. This objective was not met in 2005 and is unlikely to be met by 2010. Voluntary commitments by the European, Japanese, and Korean AutomobileManufacturers Associations in 1998 and subsequently endorsed by the EC set targetsof 140 g CO 2/km by 2008/2009. At the end of 2005, the average new car emissionsrate is about 160 g CO2 /km. The rate of reduction in CO 2 &km for new cars wouldhave to double for the automobile manufacturers to achieve their commitments. non-CO 2 greenhouse gases, which account forabout 20% of the EU's total greenhouse gas emissions. The first trading period began January 1,2005. A second trading period is scheduled to begin in 2008, covering the period of the KyotoProtocol, with a third one planned for 2013. (4) Under the Kyoto Protocol, Under theKyoto Protocol, the EU must reduce its emissions of greenhouse gases by 20% by 2015. The EU must also reduce its emission of carbon dioxide by 15% by 2025. to the number of installationssubsequent to the respective Commission decision (e.g., opt-ins or opt-outsof installations) At first glance, it would appear that the EU would have little difficulty meeting its Kyoto Protocol requirements during the second trading period. Theanticipated deficit between the second. trading period for the original 15 MemberStates and the original. 15 Member states is estimated to be around $1.2 billion. The EU is expected to meet the Kyoto Protocol's requirements by the end of this year. According to Point Carbon's proprietary databases, the EU-ETS traded 362million metric tons of CO 2 in 2005, valued at 7.218 billion euro. Brokers wereresponsible for 57% of the volume, exchange markets did 15%, and bilateraltransactions accounted for 28%. Of the exchange market volume, the EuropeanClimate Exchange sold millions of metric tons. of CO2 Equivalent unlessotherwise noted) Source: Based on data provided in Annex 1, European Commission, "FurtherGuidance on Allocation Plans for the 2008 to 2012 trading period of the EUEmissions Trading Scheme" (Brussels, Dec. 12, 2005) The EU-ETS is a maturing but still narrow market. Monthly volumes areincreasing, but have never exceeded a 1.6% monthly average. There are several reasons for the overall volatility in the allowance market. Even If No "Big" News Highly Volatile, says Margus Kaasik, Eesti Energia, Carbon Market: EUETS (May 9, 2006),p. 14. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. caps 6.8% (119 million metric tons) from their current level to meet their requirements under the Kyoto Protocol-based second trading period. In contrast, as a group, the newer countries and the EU as a whole are in substantiallybetter shape. (28) Table 4: Comparison of 1st and 2nd TradingPeriod ETS Caps (in) and (in%) ETS caps (in, in, in and out) ETScaps (in), in, out and in) Germany proposes to reduce its ETS allocation from about 499 million metric tons to about471 million metrictons, a decrease of 5.6%. However,Germany's 2005 emissions were only 474. Germany's NAP for the second trading period (NAP II) submitted June 28, 2006, proposes to cut emissions by 5% to 4.6% from 2005 levels. Germany is the world's second largest emitter of carbon dioxide (CO2) after the U.S. The European Union is the largest emaker of CO2, followed by Russia. 2005 emissions have been characterized by EU'sEnvironment Commissioner as an "over-allocation" of allowances. The 2005 emissions totalreflects emissions from 8,980 sources representing more than 99% of the allowances allocated. Othercountries, such as Japan and Canada, may decide to incorporate emissions tradinginto their implementation strategies and acquire allowances from these sources. Yet,the totals suggest that all else being equal, the supply of allowances would beadequate. Asof April 30, 849 sources in the five-year compliance period. 21 countries had not surrendered sufficient allowances. The EC will determine whether the insufficiency is the result of technical difficulties in national registries. Noncomplying sources are subject to a 40-euro penalty for each tonof emissions in excess of surrendered allowances under the ETS. For more information, visit the European Commission's ETS website or the European Council's website. For further information, see the EU ETS webpage or the EU Council's webpage for details. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. trading period,the 21 countries have allocated an annual average of 1.8295 billion allowances and set aside 73.4million allowances for allocation to new sources or for auctions. Verified emissions in 2005 forcovered sources is 1.7853 billion metric tons, according to the CITL. The 44.2 million allowances allocated in excess of actual million metric tons higher than the reported 2005emissions are neither putting the EU on the path to the Kyoto requirements nordeveloping the trading market. period for the original 15 Member States can becovered by trading with the newer Member States that anticipate a surplus. Potential CERs and ERUs from the CDM and JI respectively may helpmaintain limits on allowance costs. Table 6 provides one series of estimates ofavailable allowances for the Kyoto Protocol's 6: International Supply of EmissionsCredits and Allowances (cumulative total 2008-2012, million metric tonsCO 2 ) Source: Compiled by Grubb and Neuhoff, "Allocation and Competitiveness in theEU Emissions Trading Scheme: Policy Overview," p. 20. the second period) delineated in an annex to the emissionstrading directive. (12) Criteria include requirements that the emissions caps and other measures proposed by the state aresufficient to put it on the path toward its Kyoto target. (CAN), a network of 365non-governmental organizations, stated the following: Emissions limits set by MemberStates for the first phase were a major disappointment. To ensure maximumenvironmental benefit of the ETS and the overall success of the system as awhole, they need to be strengthened considerably. some modest emissions targets (i.e., to put the EUon the path toward meeting the Kyoto requirements) Table 2 provides the national emissionsallocations and 2005 emissions levels for 21 EU countries as recorded by the CommunityIndependent Transaction Log (CITL) by the compliance deadline of April 30, 2006. (13) For the first time, the EU has set emissions targets that are below the Kyoto target for 2005. For the second, the European Union has set a target that is lower than the Kyoto targets. requirements) variessubstantially between countries, as illustrated in Table 4 . In general, the originalEU-15 countries have to reduce their emissions caps the most to meet their share ofthe EU's requirements under the Kyoto Protocol. Several countries facingdouble-digit percentage reductions. As indicated, EU-15 states, on average, have toreduce their emissions on an average of 10% per year, with some countries facing as much as 20% reductions per year on average. absolute reductions for the phase 2008-2012. In general, the EC has seen the over-allocation issue as part of the"learning-by-doing" process that should help the EU in implementing the secondtrading period beginning in 2008. As stated in its press release: The new 2005 emissions data givesindependently assessed installation-level figures for the new phase of the second trading period from 2008 to 2012. (16) The EC has said that it will use the data to help implement the second phase of second trading from 2008. might not wish to establish a comprehensive scheme at this stage. There areconsiderable uncertainties surrounding the emissions of the fluorinated gases [HFC, PFC, SF 6 ] and the absorption of carbon dioxide by sinks. Allocating allowances, monitoring emissions and enforcing compliance of small mobile emitters, such as private cars, raise complex technical technical issues. The European Commission is considering a proposal to introduce a carbon trading scheme to reduce carbon emissions from cars and other vehicles. The proposal is expected to be submitted to the European Commission by the end of the year. The EU-ETS has provisions for linking its trading scheme to the JointImplementation (JI) and Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) components of the Kyoto Protocol. These project-basedinstruments involve Annex 1 countries in the case of JI, and between Annex 1 anddeveloping countries in case of CDM. The EU-ETE has a trading scheme that is linked to the Kyoto protocol for countries that have ratified it. The trading scheme is based on an agreement between the European Commission and the European Union. and those that are nationwide. The groundwork for the system is theKyoto Protocol, which (1) defines the pollutants and sets the countries' emissionstargets. Annex 1 countries may implementemissions trading programs, and non-Annex 1 countries can participate through theCDM. The Kyoto Protocol also defines baseline emissions years and defines baseline emission years and emission targets for each country. It defines the scope of participation: Annex 1 nations may implement emissions trading programs; non-annex 1 nations can participate in the CDM. has decided to use anemissions trading scheme (called a "cap-and-trade" program), along with other market-orientedmechanisms permitted under the Protocol. The decision to use emissiontrading to implement the Kyoto Protocol is at least partly based on the successful emissions tradingprogram used by the U.S. U.N. has decided to used an emissions trading scheme to help it achieve compliance at least cost. The U.K. has used a market-based emissions trading program. in favour of a comprehensive trading scheme across differentMember States covering all 6 greenhouse gases and sinks. (7) Economic analysis conducted by the European Commission confirms the potentialcost-saving available from a comprehensive Trading Scheme. As shown in Table 1 , a comprehensivetrading program is estimated by the EU Commission to save up to £1.2 billion per year by the end of the decade. The European Commission estimates the potential cost-saving from a trading scheme to be around £1,000 million per year. Climate change is generally viewed as a global issue, but proposed responses typicallyrequire action at the national level. With the 1997 Kyoto Protocol now in force, countries that ratified the protocol are developing appropriate implementation strategies to begin reducing theiremissions of greenhouse gases. (1) In particular, the European Union (EU) is developing appropriate strategies to reduce the emissions of carbon dioxide (CO2) and other greenhouse gases from vehicles and power plants. (2) The European Union is also developing appropriate plans to reduce CO2 emissions from vehicles, power plants and other sources. opportunities forcost-effective allowance trades. The European Commission (EC) adopted a"learning-by-doing" approach to prepare the EU for the Kyoto Protocol's emissions limitations. For a variety of reasons, the EC chose a trading system with limited coverage rather than acomprehensive system covering all sources and gases. Some European analysts have questioned the effectiveness of the trading system. The EC felt an initial programbeginning in 2005 would give the EU practical of Reaching Kyoto Target to EU Member Statesin 2010 (in billions of 1999 euro) the EC to reduce Kyoto compliance costs to EU countries by 3billion euro, or one-third over a compliance scenario that does not include trading among Membercountries. The cost of compliance with the tradingscheme ultimately chosen by the EC is 13% below the estimate cost of Compliance with the Tradescheme. The EU has agreed to reduce the cost of complying with Kyoto by 0.9 billion euro, which is one third of the original estimate cost. The European Commission has also agreed to cut the costs of compliance by 1.5 billion euro. Kingdom and the incorporation of EastGermany into West Germany. Several countries, including Ireland, Spain, and Portugal, experiencedemissions growth of over 30% during this period. In light of the Kyoto Protocol targets, the EU adopted a directiveestablishing the EU-ETS that entered into force October 13, 2003. (6) The importance of the importance of reducing carbon emissions in the European Union and its member states. (5) The role of the European Commission and the European Court of Justice. For the 2005-2007 period, the European Union is not attempting to meet the Kyoto Protocol. Ex-post adjustments by states are not allowed; such adjustments are seen by the ECas as potentially disruptive to the emissions market and creating uncertainty for companies.or emissions growthassumptions. The EU is trying to get experience with emissions trading with countries such as France, Germany, Italy, Spain, Portugal and the Netherlands. The European Union wants to learn from the experience of other countries in the region. State Note: As all data are held in the CITL and national registries, no data are available for those Member States without an active registry. a. The figures in this column indicate the number of installations with active registry accounts on 30 April 2006. They differ from figurescommunicated in earlier earlier reports. A. The figure for Member States with active registries on April 30, 2006, is the total number of registries in each Member State. a, the total numbers of Registries in the Member States is the sum of all Registries with active accounts, including those in non-member states. installations at the start of the scheme but put aside mainly for new entrants andauctioning (in the cases of Denmark, Hungary, Ireland, and Lithuania). d. Due to technical problems in the national registries of the Czech Republic, France, the Slovak Republic, and Spain, the CITL did not receivewholly reliable information. d. Because of the lack of reliable information, some countries were not able to register their citizens in the scheme at the beginning of the year. ECX had the largest share at 63%, followed by Nord Poolwith 24%, and Powernext with 7.9%. (18) The average price for an allowance traded in 2005 was 19.9 euro, withbrokered and exchanged allowances averaging 20.6 euro and bilateral transactionsaveraging 18.2 euro. However, allowance prices have been quite volatile sincetrading begin in 2005. The average value of a allowance traded was around £1,000. The current value of an allowance is around £2,500. in 2005, as indicated in Figure 1 below. Inparticular, allowance prices dropped from almost 30 euro to about 9-11 euro inApril and May, sparked by a series of reported over-allocation of allowances inseveral Member States. By July 2006, allowance Prices had recovered to about 17euro in July. (19) Figure 1. allowance prices in 2005, and in July 2006. (20) Figure 2. allowance Prices in July and August 2006, by country. (21) resulted in revisions were excessive allocation of allowances and state efforts topermit "ex-post adjustments" to their allocations. Excessive allocation problems resulted from statesthat left a gap in how they would achieve their target, to be filled with measures to be defined later. There were insufficiently delineated plans to purchase allowances; and unrealistic economic plans to achieve the target. There was also a lack of clarity on how to pay for the allowances, which led to a shortage of funds. press releases because they are updated for installations that opted-out for the first trading period, opted-in, andinstallations without open accounts. b. The figures in this column are allowances allocated to existing installations at the start of the scheme. c. The Figures in thiscolumn are allowances not allocated to new installations. The figure in the last column is the sum of the allowances given to all new and existing installations, plus a small amount for new installations that opt-in or opt-out. share of phase 1 allocations. Trading volumes under the U.S. CleanAir Act Title IV sulfur dioxide trading program were very thin in the beginning. Even after several years of operation, SO 2 allowances prices can changeunpredictably and inexplicably. Some reasons for this are not surprising; trading volumes were verythin in the early years of the program. (20) Some reasons may be due to the fact that the trading program was set up in the 1990s, when the market was still in its infancy. those process emissions which arerecommended for inclusion in the system. Regulation by quotas should be imposed at the end-user level in cases where the processes originate with major industrial companies. For process emissions stemming from a series of small sources, e.g.emissions of N 2 O from commercial fertilizers, regulation by quotas shouldn't be imposed. The European Commission is currently considering a proposal to introduce quotas for process emissions in the European Union. The proposal is expected to be submitted to the European Commission by the end of the year. beimposed on retailers, or importers in order to avoid unacceptably high systemcosts. (51) The Commission's recommendation that "regulation by quotas be imposed inpart on the producer" may be overtaken by development of the EU ETS, which is expected to be in place by 2015. (52) The ETS is intended to replace the European Union's own ETS system, which was in place until the end of the first decade of the 21st century. familiarity in operating such a system. The EC alsowanted the most comprehensive program possible. The wider the scope of the system, the greater will bethe variation in the costs of compliance of individual companies, and the greater the potential forlowering costs overall. This argues the EC's "Green Paper" for the new system, published in May, is more comprehensive than any previous version of the document. It is also more cost-effective than previous versions of the paper, the EC says. Commission" (created in 1998) stressed that the 2008 program be ascomprehensive as possible, suggesting that the system could include close to 90% ofthe country's greenhouse gas emissions. (50) To achieve this coverage, the Commissionenvisioned a hybrid system of quotas, depending on cost-effectiveness andpracticality considerations. Arguing in favor of regulating CO, the European Commission argued that it was in the public interest to regulate carbon emissions in a way that was cost-effective. noted that EUpolitics played an important role in preventing serious consideration of a comprehensive program. As noted by Boemare and Quirion: A significantly wider coverage could have beenprovided only by an upstream system, which had been excluded by the [European] Commission at the beginning of the process. The reason was again that EU politics played a key role in stopping the program from getting off the ground in the first place, the authors said. The authors concluded that the program should be scrapped and replaced with a new one that would have been more comprehensive. political: an upstream scheme would have toomuch looked like a tax. (8) Not surprisingly, this reason was not employed by the EC in explaining its decision to create a less comprehensive trading scheme at this time. As stated by theEC: ... there are sound scientific and practical reasons whythe Community should have a trading scheme. (9) The EC also stated that there were 'sound scientific andpractical reasons' why the Community should not have a trade scheme at the same time. (10) The EC looked at five criteria: (1)environmental effectiveness, (2) economic efficiency, (3) the potential effects on competition, (4)feasibility, and (5) existence of alternative policies and measures. It felt that starting with a relativelysmall number of economic sectors and sources would be the best way to start the program.andadministrative issues. (9) For determining the size of the trading program, the EC looked into five criteria, including environmental effectiveness and economic efficiency. Table 3 indicates thetop five topics according to governments surveyed, along with their correspondingranking by other stakeholders. Table 3. Importance of EU ETSTopics (ranking) Source: European Commission, Review of EU Emissions Trading Scheme (November 2005), p. p. 5. The five issues are discussed below. The topics that all relate to long-term uncertainty are discussed in the second part of this article. The third and fourth issues relate to short-term issues. The fifth and final issue relates to medium- and long- term issues. companies, governments, industryassociations, market intermediaries, and non-governmental organizations (NGOs) Asked which of 12 topics surrounding ETSimplementation entities felt were most important to them, companies ranked topics such as emissions reductiontargets, allocation rules, and rules for new entrants and closures as the mostimportant. The survey was carried out from June to September 2005 and polled more than 1,000 people across a range of industries and sectors. The results were published in the journal ETS Implementation. EC'ssurvey of ETS stakeholders revealed that more than two-thirds of the cement, aluminum, and chemical industries thoughtbenchmarking was an "interesting alternative" Less than a third of the respondentsfrom the pulp and paper industry and refineries thought so. In many ways, diversity between Member countries with respect to benchmarking is a reflection of the diversity of the ETS member states, according to the European Commission's report on ETS Benchmarking. The ETS is a multibillion-dollar program that aims to improve the quality of the world's water. the extent to which surplus credits would be created via JI, the EC linking directive requires that such credits (including from CDM) be "supplemental" to acountry's domestic efforts. Each country is to spell out what "supplementsal" means in its NAP for the second trading period.Individual countries are likely to define that term differently -- restricting allowancetrades and purchases in some countries. Another consideration is the overall commitment by the directive that requires thatsuch credits be "Supplemental," to a country's domestic effort. can be covered by trading with the newer Member States that anticipate asurplus. However, there are other considerations. First, countries with potentialsurpluses may want to retain at least some of that surplus to help fuel their countries' growth, possibly at the expense of a Member State that needs allowances. Second, some Member States might want to keep some of their potential surplus to fuel their country's growth, even if it is at a cost to other Member States who may need allowances. general, these allowances are provided free,as that is widely seen as helping boost new investment. Most states have yet to dip intotheir reserves for new entrants. However, the importance of the reserve will increase as the ETS enters its second, and eventually third, phase. The allocationmethods developed by the Member States differ, with some states reserving more money than others. The ETS is expected to be fully operational by the end of 2014. The first phase of the project will see the first of the new stations open. The second will open in 2015. the first time and so providesMember States with an excellent factual basis for deciding upon the caps in their national allocations plans for the second trading period. The plans are subject to approval by theCommission, which will also be making extensive use of the commission's own data. The first trading period ends on the end of the first trading month of the second year of the third quarter of 2014. The targets have to be met to meet theKyoto targets, which are set by the European Commission. Board and may beused in either the first or banked for use in the second trading period. Emissions Reduction Units (ERUs) under JI are transferred from one country toanother -- an exchange that cannot begin until the second Trading period. NeitherCERs nor ERUs are converted into EU-ETS allowances; rather, rather, they are converted to CERs or ERUs by the European Union. The EU does not have the right to issue CER or ERU allowances. they are entereddirectly into the surrendered allowance table. There are other restrictions on theuse of CERs and ERUs. In particular, for the second trading period the amount ofCers andERUs that can used by an affected unit is limited by a percentagespecified by its country. Several EU countries have established CER and ERU quotas for the next two years. The EU has also established a CER/ERU quota system for the 2015-16 period, which will see an increase in the use of the CER. sinks; and (4) sets national inventoryand compliance requirements. Within this framework, the EU defines the elementsthat make the EU-ETS work, including industry participants, the unit of trade, trading periods, settling upprocedures, and linkages within and beyond the EU. With respect to the EU ETS, the European Commission has set out a set of rules and regulations that are intended to make the ETS work. The ETS was established in 2004 and covers the whole of the European Union. CDM. TheEC's linking directive allows operators to fulfil their allowance obligations underthe EU-ETS using credits derived from JI and CDM projects. Their credits areequivalent to allowances in environmental and economic terms, but are notinterchangeable. "Certified Emissions Reductions" (CERs) under the CDM mustbe issued by the Clean Development Mechanism Executive (CDM) Executive. The CDM Executive must issue the CERs under the linking directive. carbon funds topursue JI and CDM opportunities. In general, CER and ERU credits have sold at a discount to ETS allowanceprices. The degree of discount has depended on the riskiness of the project. CERand ERU Credits are available only when the projects are completed. Thus, wherebuyers take the risk, where buyers are taking on more of the risk. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. of non-delivery, such as an emissions reduction purchaseagreement (ERPA), prices are in the range of 8-12 euro. In contrast, for CERsalready issued, or where the sellers take the risk, prices are between 13-15 euro. The real impact of CDM and JI on theEU-ETS system will not be as high as previously thought. The impact of JI and CDM on the EU-ETS will be much lower than originally thought. to the individual Member's NAPs, the EC harmonizes the NAPswith respect to penalties, allocation method (e.g., grandfathering), monitoring, andregistries with the goal of achieving the Kyoto targets. It allows Members flexibilitywith respect to allocations to individual participants, the extent to which banking ispermitted, and whether to permit the auctioning of goods and services. It also gives Members flexibility with respect to allocation to individual Participants, the amount of money to be given to them, and the extent of banking to be allowed. based on best available technology and practices, rather than on historical emissions. The EC does not have the authority to scrutinizeallocations at the facility level, so any allocation harmonization would be on avoluntary basis ("soft harmonization"). Also, allocation schemes, such asbenchmarking, may not be suitable for some industries. (37) The EC has not yet decided whether to harmonize its allocation schemes with those of other countries, but it is expected to do so in the near future. of potentialharmonization issues facing the EU-ETS. One issue of particular interest is the effort to increase the use of "benchmarking" standards in setting allocations. Benchmarking generally involvesallocating allowances. Table 5: NAP HarmonizationIssues Source : Adapted from Fiona Mullins, EU ETS Implementation: Room forHarmonisation (The Royal Institute of International Affairs, 2005). The Royal Institute Of International Affairs is a member of the European Council on Harmonization. Harmonization issues include allocation methods and the use of auctions. The degree to which JI and CDM credits may be used for compliance, and monitoring,verification, and reporting rules. The issue of new entrants and definition of affected units specifically identified by theEC survey, harmonization issues including allocation methods, auctions, and JI/CDM credits. Table 5 illustrates the scope of the issues addressed by the EC in its survey of the world's largest oil and gas companies. to the ETSis inevitable. The final way in which the EU ETSdiffers from many other trading systems is in the devolution of allocationresponsibilities, in this case to its 25 Member States. This was an essential part of thedeal that enabled the EU to become a trading system in the first place. The ETS was established in 2004 and is the world's largest single trading system. It was created by the European Commission and the European Trade Union Confederation. It is the first trading system of its kind in the world, and it is expected to be the largest in the future. the adoption of the Directive: Member States would have neverceded to the European Commission the power to distribute valuable assets to theirindustries. Nor is the EU ETS unique in devolving powers of allocation: it is typicalin a number of US systems. Moreover, there are different degrees of harmonization,applicable to different countries, that can be applied to the ETS as well as to other EU systems. The ETS is not a perfect system, but it is a good one. on the installation level surrenders from these Member States. Some commentators have suggested that annual average 2005-2007 allocations that are actually 44.1. All data represented in the table were communicated directly to the European Commission by the respective authorities of these Member states. Some fields are empty for theseMember States. The European Commission has no plans to change the way the EU allocates grants to Member States in the future. The EU has a long-standing policy of not giving grants to countries that do not contribute to the EU budget. technology, and early reductioncredits. For the second period, the NAP must guarantee Kyoto compliance. Germany is attempting to direct its second NAP toward carbon-intensive, coal-fired electric generating facilities. Reluctance by countries to redirect their NAPs and an inconsistent price from the ETS are among the problems the EC has found with NAP's that the appropriate direction has not been found. The early signs are not particularly encouraging, with the 2005-2008 NAP’s producing anover-allocation of allowances. only 20% ofFrance's greenhouse gas emissions are covered, compared with 69% of Estonia's emissions. (11) National Allocation Plans (NAPs) are central to the EU's effort to achieve its Kyotoobligations. Each Member of the EU must submit a NAP that lays out its allocation scheme under the ETS, including individual allocations to each country. (12) The EU has agreed to a deal with the United Nations to reduce emissions by 20% by the end of 2015. have to be covered by the non-ETS sectors --commercial, residential, and transportation. An assessment done for GreenpeaceInternational states that the German NAP II places "a disproportionate burden foremissions reductions on the non theETS sectors" in terms of meeting its commitmentsunder the EU Burden Sharing agreement. (35) Policies to fill in the gaps are to be announced in the coming months. For more information, visit GreenpeaceInternational's NAPII website. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. for ETS allowance price derivatives are explicable. The ETS market responded to a variety of regulatory,climatic, and economic events over the first trading period. There are significant differencesbetween Members with respect to participant definitions, industry level emissionscaps and allocations, and enforcement. To increase the economic and administrative efficiency of the ETS, somestakeholders are interested in improved harmonization of NAPs. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. 13. Over-allocation issue in the first trading period. It is likely that theEC will take a harder stance in reviewing NAPs for the second Trading Period. Therelationship between the ETS cap for the first. trading period and the estimated ETScap for the. second trading period (the Kyoto Protocol) The Kyoto Protocol is an agreement between the European Commission and the European Union. The European Commission has the power to set the cap on ETS prices. The cap is based on a formula that takes into account inflation, interest rates, and other factors. each affected unit. For the first trading period, eachcountry had to prepare a NAP by March 31, 2004 (May 1, 2004 for the 10 new EU Members). NAPsfor the second period were due June 30, 2006. These NAP's are assessed by the EC to determinecompliance with 11 criteria (12 for each affected unit) for the first period and for the second for the next two periods. For more information on the NAP, visit the EC's NAP website. to emissions trading, the EU isrelying on other programs to control greenhouse gas emissions in other sectors, such as transportation. The future direction of the ETS transportation area is already a major source ofconcern. It is too early to tell whether the Ets market signal and individualcountries' NAPs will move investment in low-carbon industries. A final consideration for the E TS is its suitability for directing long-terminvestment toward a low- carbon future -- the ultimate goal of any climate changeprogram. in terms of increasingcoverage is toward incrementally adding more economic sectors, rather thanaddressing the more complex issue of a comprehensive system. Based on the survey,the focus is currently on the chemical, aviation, and aluminum industries. Given thatthe number-one recommendation for future implementation of the ETS is to provideparticipants with more information, it is likely that the system will be expanded in the coming years. (47) It is expected to be in place by the end of 2015. not covered by the ETS may growfaster than sectors covered by ETS, creating difficulties for compliance. Inparticular, the transportation area has become a major source of concern. The transportation sector is not a part of the Ets and is not likely to be included before the third trading period. Instead, instead of being included in the E TS, the government should focus on other areas of the economy, such as manufacturing and construction, which are more likely to grow faster than other areas. The analysis provided in Table3 assumes that the ETS will have to provide a proportional amount of that reductionbased on 2003 emissions. Some sectors is the overall commitment of the Kyoto Protocol. Asnoted earlier, the Ets only covers a percentage of the overall greenhouse gasemissions in the various Member States of the EU. In particular, the sectors not covered by theETS may grow faster than sectors covered by ETS, creating difficulties forcompliance. The analysis provided by the European Commission is based on the 2003 emissions of Member States. The EU's Emissions Trading System (ETS) is a cornerstone of the EU's efforts to meet itsobligation under the Kyoto Protocol. It covers more than 11,500 energy intensive facilities. The U.S. to implement its sulfur dioxide (acid rain) control programcontained in Title IV of the 1990 Clean Act Amendments. The EU's ETS is the centerpiece of the European Union's effort to meet its Kyoto Protocol obligations. The ETS was established to help the EU meet its obligations to meet Kyoto Protocol targets. fully known until the second trading period, when EUdemand for credits will increase substantially and other non-EU countries wouldbe implementing their own Kyoto compliance strategies. At first glance, the ETS would appear an effective vehicle for the EU to meetits Kyoto Protocol obligations. The anticipateddeficit between the second and third trading periods is not yet known. The European Commission has surveyed stakeholders'viewpoints on ETS implementation and long-term issues. Thereport surveys the viewpoints of participating a longer time frame for implementation. report also notes that despite EU's effort to increase information on fuelefficiency and CO 2 emissions for consumers, the effectiveness of the effort seemslow. Attempts to balance the burden between ETS and non-ETS sectors have already created tension in the EU. "A significant impact on consumer's decisions could not yet be noticed," says the report. "The impact of the ETS on consumers' decisions is yet to be noticed" says the EU's European Commissioner for Energy and Climate Change. 3,000) of the total facilities covered under the ETS,but a very small percentage of total CO 2 emissions. 36% of the covered installations produced less than 10,000 metrictons of CO 2 annually. Three-quarters of all emissions are produced by the largest 7.5% of installations. The small installations (under10,000 metric tons) are responsible for less than 1%. Whether the Ets shouldcontinue to cover the roughly 3,500 facilities under 10,00 metric tons annuallyremains a hotly debated issue. The ETS applies to energyactivities for all sectors with combustion installations above 20 MW of thermal rated input. Oil refineries, coke ovens, and iron and steel, cement,lime, glass, ceramics, and pulp and paper facilities are included. Finland and Swedenopted to include small district heating installations with a rated 20 MW or less. The ETS is available to all countries with a population of over 1.5 million, including Finland, Sweden, Norway and Denmark. Germany is proposing to permitevery new power station built between 2008 and 2012 to opt out from CO 2 caps andthe ETS for 14 years. These emissions increases will be 0.6% from last year's emissions. Germany is also proposing to encourage construction of coal-fired facilities, generally to encourage new power stations. The proposal is expected to be approved by the German parliament in the next few weeks and could be implemented by the end of the year or early next year, depending on the outcome of a vote. promises for subsequent periods. The proposed treatment of coal-fired powerplants by the German Government indicates how difficult it will be to direct future investment toward low-carbon projects. However, it could be argued that the long-term success of the ETS and theEU's commitment to Kyoto and any subsequent agreements rests on such promises. (42) The proposed Treatment of Coal-fired Power Plants by the Germany Government shows that it will not be easy for the government to make such a decision. thermal input below20 MW. In contrast, as noted previously, Germany is attempting to have some planned coal-fired powerplants, which will be large producers of CO 2 , able to opt-out of the ETS for 14 years. In addition to the consistency issue, small installations (between 20MW and50MW) account for 30% (about 20MW) of the total CO 2 emissions in the country. (44) In addition, the European Union is planning to introduce a carbon tax in 2015. aspects of the EU ETS, and the Commission can and does seek to increase the degree of harmonization through guidance notes. (39) [footnoteomitted] The economic value of allowances is nowhere more evident than indiscussions of new entrants. Germany is proposing to permit new coal-fired powerplants built between 2008-2012 to be allowed to enter the EU market. (40) The European Commission has issued guidance notes on harmonization of the ETS with other EU member states. to opt-out of the ETS for thefirst 14 years of operation in order to encourage construction. 85% of all respondents favor a harmonized approach to new entrants and closures. Nearly 75% believed that those allowances should beprovided free. Likewise, an EU-wide opt-in scheme would be a good idea, according to the EC's survey of ETSstakeholders, which found that 75% of respondents believed that this would be the best way to get the most out of the scheme. adoption of the EU ETS designfeatures, Norway seems to move away from this option. (53) Norway is moving away from the option of using the ETS as part of its national transport system. Norway is also moving towards using the Eurostat system instead of the European Convention on Statute of Autonomy (ECAA) as its national transportation system. (54) Norway's ETS system will be based on the ECAA system, not the European Union ETS. (55) transport controls are based on voluntaryagreements with automobile manufacturers to improve fuel economy, fuel-economylabelling of cars, and promoting fuel efficiency by fiscal measures. As announced in 1996, the objective of the EU Council is to achieve improvenew car fleet average CO 2 emissions rates. (30) Thecornerstone is the agreements with automobilemanufacturers to achieve Improvenew Car Fleet Average CO 2 Emissions Rates. (31) The objective ofthe EU Council, as announced in1996, is to achieve improvenewCar Fleet AverageCO 2 Emission Rates. gap reportedly include oneplan to reduce emissions by 3 million tons by training German drivers to drive moreeconomically. As noted by the EC Report cited above, theeffectiveness of public education programs such as this may be problematic. The EU-ETS system involves an interplay between definitions and proceduresthat are EU-wide. It is possible that some of these definitions and procedures may not be compatible with each other. This could lead to problems in the implementation of the EU ETS system. questionnaire conducted by theEuropean Environmental Agency's Topic Centre on Air and Climate Change. Most Member States would welcome harmonization of the treatment of new entrants and closures across the EU. (41) Analogous to the U.S. acid rain program, EU states have set up reserves toprovide allowances to new entrants. In the EU, new entrants have to pay a fee to be allowed to enter the market. The European Commission has set up a panel of experts to advise Member States on how to deal with the issue. aredirection with respect to new entrants and long-term investment. Another area in which several Member States would like more harmonizationacross the EU is the definition of a combustion installation. Concernsrevolve around ambiguity in the current definition ofa combustion installation and the number of small installations covered under the ETS. The European Commission is currently considering a proposal to harmonize the EU's ETS with the U.S. and U.K.'s ETS system. The proposal is expected to be presented to the European Commission in the coming weeks.