or all of the current manual monthly pays, including special duty assignment pay, foreign language proficiency pay, hardship duty pay, and HALO pay. Evaluate the feasibility of eliminating the use of the “other credits” for processing hardship duty (designated areas), HALOpay, and special duty assignments pay. (p. 77/Draft Report) DoD RESPONSE: Concur. Hardship duty (Designated Areas); high altitude, low opening jump pay; and specialduty assignment pay. allowance types into two groups: (1) pays, including basic pay, special duty assignment pay, parachute jumping and foreign language proficiency skill-based pays, and location-based hostile fire and hardship duty pays. (2) allowances, including allowances for housing, subsistence, family separation, and cost of living for the continental United States. In the U.S. Army, basic pay is the only type of allowance that is paid to the general public. For more information, visit the Army Payroll System. the soldiers were entitled to the payments. In 22 other cases, we determined that soldiers had not received all location-based pays as of March 31, 2003. In 60 cases, the soldiers were overpaid or payments were not stopped when they left the combat zones. Due to the lack of payments of entitled hardship duty designated area pay. Other soldiers received entitled payments over 9 months late. Still others were paid more than once for the same month or paid after leaving the designated area, resulting in overpayments to 12 soldiers. combat zone tax exclusion, and hardship duty pay that unit soldiers were entitled to receive based on their deployment to Afghanistan and surrounding areas. Some soldiers in Colorado’s B Company received these pays sporadically, were not paid at all, were paid but for inexplicable dollar amounts, or were overpaid their entitled active duty pays and allowances while deployed. Problems with special duty assignment pay also occurred during the unit's deployment. We found that both underpayments and overpayments of this type of pay were made. units to use transaction codes to start soldiers’ hardship duty pays that are incorrect. Effective December 2001, DOD amended FMR, Volume 7A, chapter 17, to establish a new “designated area” hardship duty pay with rates of $50, $100, or $150 per month. The FMR provides for two mutually exclusive types of hardshipduty pay for identified locations. However, soldiers who perform duties in designated areas for over 30 days are entitled to the hardship duty paid incentive. places. The regulation specified Afghanistan and Uzbekistan as designated areas and provided for paying $100 a month to each soldier serving there. Effective December 31, 2001, the regulation no longer permitted soldiers newly assigned to locations specified as “certain places’ The regulation provided for two mutually exclusive types of hardship duty pay for identified locations; one according to specified “designated areas” and the other for specified ‘certain places.’ However, the rule did not apply to soldiers serving in Iraq and Afghanistan. were responsible for servicing or their location. The in- theater finance office for Virginia’s B Company, located in Kuwait, did not start these pays as required. We were told that this occurred because finance personnel in Kuwait did not know that B Company had arrived in Afghanistan. Virginia's B Company told us he took an annotated battle roster listing the names of all Virginia”S B Company soldiers deployed in and around Afghanistan at that time and the dates they arrived in country with him. example, the military finance office in Kuwait, which was responsible for paying Virginia 20th Special Forces soldiers in the fall of 2002, did not stop hostile fire and hardship duty pays as required. We found that 55 of 64 soldiers eligible for hardship pay were not paid. The soldiers were deployed to Afghanistan in October 2002, when hostile fire began to occur in the country. The U.S. military paid the soldiers hardship pay as required when they left the country, but not when they returned in October 2003. Virginia’s USPFO, unaware that Fort Bragg had made these payments in December 2002, also paid all 24 eligible soldiers special duty assignment pay for October and November 2002 several months later. 2002, eligible soldiers in the unit were entitled to a special duty assignments pay increase from $110 per month to $220 per month. To initiate this higher pay rate, the West Virginia Army National Guard military personnel office was required to cut new specialduty assignment pay orders for all eligible soldiers. For C Company, 63 soldiers received their last 3 months of special duty assignment pay over 30 days late. Another 3 soldiers did not receive their last three months ofSpecial Duty Assignment Pay. The orders by the West Virginia Army National Guard military personnel office caused the late payments. The soldiers were ordered to pay their special duty assignments within 30 days of the date of the order. The pay was to be paid to the soldiers for their time on special duty duty. For more information on how to pay your special duty pay, visit www.ArmyNationalGuard.org. a result of confusion about who was responsible for making the manual monthly transactions necessary for entitled soldiers in the unit to receive these pays. For example, 10 soldiers in B Company did not receive at least 1 month of entitled special duty assignment pay. Conversely, overpayments of this type their military pay office processed the payments because B Company submitted the necessary documentation certifying that the unit’s soldiers were entitled to receive back pay for missed special assignment duty pays. The officials told us that special duty assignments pay was processed because, having received this certification from the unit, pays, a soldier was required to carry out a dangerous multiday mission to correct these payments. A sergeant with the West Virginia National Guard Special Forces unit was stationed in Uzbekistan with the rest of his unit. This page is intentionally left blank. It is intended to show the difficulty in starting In-Theatre Pays. The page was created to highlight the difficulty of starting in-theatre pays in the military. It was also intended to help soldiers understand the difficulties of starting theatre pays. extract included in figure 7. Army Guard soldier who received a series of corrections to special duty assignment pay along with a current special duty assignments payment of $110 is likely to have difficulty discerning whether he or she received all and only entitled active duty pays and allowances. The Army Guard is part of the U.S. Army National Guard, which is based in Washington, D.C. and has its own special duty pay system. The U.N. National Guard has a separate special duty payment system, which it uses to pay special duty soldiers. fire pay as soon as they enter the zone. 45 soldiers in C Company did not have their hostile fire pay started until over 30 days after they were entitled to receive it. Some of C Company’s soldiers received retroactive payments over 2 months after they should have received their pay. 18 soldiers from the unit were not yet paid for 1 or more months that they were in the hostile fire zone. We also identified 40 soldiers who received hostileFire pay after they had been in the zone for over a month. Military pay personnel at Fort Campbell failed to deactivate hostile fire pay for 41 out of 62 B Company soldiers. However, in this case, that office did not take action to stop these types of pay and allowances for many of the unit’s soldiers. For example, military.zone.com found that 41 of 62 soldiers in B Company were receiving hostile fire. pay. For. example, the military pay. office at Fort. Campbell failed. to deactivated hostile fire pays for 41 of B Company. soldiers. Hostile fire pay were overpaid for at least 1 month beyond their departure from Afghanistan. 60 soldiers improperly continued to receive hardship duty pay or hostile fire pay after leaving high-risk locations overseas. In total, we identified estimated overpayments of $25,000, underpayments  of $12,000 and late payments of $28,000 associated with either overpaid, did not receive, or did not receiving within 30 days. The Army National Guard Special Forces sergeant believed that he was not receiving certain active duty pays and allowances during his mobilization to Afghanistan. Some soldiers who perform duty in hostile fire zones are entitled to hostile left the country and were no longer entitled to receive such pays. These overpayments occurred primarily because hostile fire pay is an automatic recurring payment based on the start and stop date for the soldier’s mobilization entered into DJMS-RC. However, in this case, the active Army finance office in Uzbekistan delayed payments to some soldiers for up to 9 months. One soldier was put in harm's way by the delay. Oman and returned safely to Uzbekistan. While guidance that permits both Army Guard and active Army military pay personnel to enter transactions for mobilized Army Guard soldiers provides flexibility in serving the soldiers. "We found indications that it also contributed to soldiers being passed between the active Army and Army," the military said. The U.S. military said it has no plans to send troops back to the Middle East in the near future. The military said the decision was made to ensure the safety of the troops and their families. pay starting in January but did not become eligible for this pay until mid-April 2002. Four members of Virginia’s B Company, who were injured while deployed in Afghanistan, returned to Fort Bragg and requested medical extensions to their active duty tours so they could continue to receive active duty pay and medical benefits until they recovered. One of the members of B Company was injured while serving in Afghanistan in May 2002. While in Afghanistan the action to terminate the payments was taken. The action was taken while the members were still in Afghanistan. of pay were made when B Company left Afghanistan and returned to Fort Bragg to demobilize in October 2002. Overpayments to B Company soldiers occurred during demobilization because the in-theater finance office continued to make hostile fire and hardship duty pays after soldiers left Afghanistan. The Army finance office personnel at Fort. Bragg were not aware that these payments were still being made after the soldiers had returned to the. United States, but, subsequently determined that the payments were occurring and took action. Soldier’s spouse had to obtain a $500 grant from the Colorado National Guard in order to pay bills while her husband was on active duty. Some soldiers did not receive payments for up to 6 months after mobilization and others still had not received certain payments by the conclusion of the deployment. Colorado’S B Company was deployed to Uzbekistan and Afghanistan in February 2002. As summarized in table 5, we identified pay problems associated with the hostile fire pay, and identified ways to address them. of the unit members’ spouses tried to contact the soldiers while they were deployed to find out why they were not receiving the anticipated funds. We were told that neither the spouses nor the soldiers received clear guidance on whom to contact to address their pay concerns. After attempts to initiate location-based pays at the battalion finance unit in Afghanistan, no action was taken. Some soldiers told us they became concerned that they weren't receiving pays they were entitled to while deployed based on conversations with their spouses. (Form 5960). According to personnel officials, married soldiers are required to write in their spouses’ names as dependents on Form 5960 in order to receive the higher housing allowance amount. However, guidance did not clearly specify that simply checking the box indicating that they are married is not sufficient support, officials said. The Army said it has no plans to change the way the housing allowance is calculated for married soldiers in the future. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. his unit received at initial mobilization as time consuming and frustrating. Personnel we talked with at the Colorado special forces unit we audited were particularly critical of the customer service they received both while deployed in Afghanistan and when they were demobilized from active duty. Specifically, unit officials expressed frustration at the lack of support they received during their time in the Afghanistan war. They also expressed frustration that they were not able to get the support they needed during their demobilization from the military when they returned to civilian life. unit took several days away from his unit to get location-based pay started for both the West Virginia and Colorado special forces units. We were also told that some members of the unit used their satellite radios to attempt to resolve their pay problems while deployed in Afghanistan. In addition, we were told that a member of the special forces unit used his satellite radio to try to resolve his pay problems in Afghanistan while he was deployed. We are happy to make clear that this was not the case, and that the unit was working to resolve the issue. were activated and the two soldiers returned to Afghanistan. As shown in figure 11, the entire trip required interim stops at eight locations because of limited air transportation and took about a week. Despite this costly, time-consuming, and risky procedure to start location-based pays for the unit, 63 of the unit's soldiers were deployed to Afghanistan in 2009 and 2010. In 2010 and 2011, the U.S. military deployed 63 of its soldiers to Afghanistan and in 2010, it deployed two more. Soldiers from Colorado’s B Company began returning from overseas in the late summer to early fall of 2002. Soldiers told us their ability to identify and correct pay problems while deployed was impaired by limited access to telephones, faxes, e-mail, and their current Leave and Earnings Statements. A frequent complaint we received from Colorado's B Company soldiers concerned the circular nature of any attempts to get assistance on pay issues while deployed overseas.them that they did not have the capability to start location-based pays and allowances for Army Guard soldiers. As of September 30, 2003, three soldiers had left B Company primarily due to frustration over pay problems. A unit official indicated that he expected additional soldiers would depart as a result of the current Army Guard situation.or her service with the Army Guard. For example, a unit official advised us that as of Sept. 30,2003, 3 soldiers had leave B Company due to frustrated over pay issues. For more information on the Army National Guard, go to: http://www.armynavy.org/army-navy-news/features/features. detailed analysis of soldiers’ long-standing pay problems. This sergeant performed these pay-related tasks in addition to his mission- related duties as a professional engineer. After leaving the unit’s home station, B Company traveled around the country looking for pay problems that occurred subsequent to January 2002 for the majority of their mobilization. The sergeant found pay problems for many soldiers that occurred after January 2002. He also found that some soldiers were being paid less than they were entitled to. He found that many soldiers were receiving less pay than they should have been. customer service, some soldiers in the unit told us. They were informed that they should have corrected these problems while in- theater, despite the fact that these problems were not detected until the demobilization phase. Some soldiers told us that upon their return from overseas deployments, they were told that they Should Have Corrected These Problems While In The Theater. Colorado’s B Company demobilized was complicated by the problems with customer service, soldiers said. The problems with the customer service were discovered while the soldiers were in the theater. Bay finance office correctly entered transactions to start hardship duty pay for designated areas for the 114th Military Police unit’s soldiers into DJMS-RC. However, Fort Campbell finance personnel incorrectly initiated recurring certain places hardship duty payments for the soldiers active Army. As a result, several soldiers in the unit did not receive one hardship duty payment for the month of July. The Army has issued an apology to the unit's soldiers for the error. The unit is currently stationed in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, with the U.S. Army. The 114th Military Police unit’s soldiers were mistakenly provided both types of hardship duty pay while deployed to Cuba. Some soldiers received extra hardship duty payments, while others were only paid sporadically. While they were in Cuba, the local Army finance office at Guantanamo Bay was required to manually enter the “designated areas” payment each month for each soldier. Of the 9 designated areas, only 9 the regulation specified Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, as a designated area and provided for paying $50 a month to each soldier serving there. Soldiers who perform duties in “designated areas” for over 30 days are entitled to hardship duty pay. The FMR specifies Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, as a designated area and provides payment of $50 a month to soldiers serving there. The active Army’s Guantanamo Bay finance office stopped monthly designated area payments upon the unit”s departure from Cuba. The Fort hardship duty pays are paid in accordance with DOD FMR, Volume 7A, chapter 17, according to the FMR. that an administrative clerk’s review of this report while the unit was mobilized in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, resulted in action to stop active duty pay and allowances to a soldier who was previously demobilized. However, it is also important to note that while these reconciliations are an important after-the-fact step, soldiers continued to experience pay problems during demobilization. As summarized in table 19, overpayment problems consisted of improper continuation of hardship duty pay following the unit's return from Cuba. One soldier from the Mississippi unit was paid $9,400 in active duty pay during the 3 months following an outdated DFAS guidance for starting hardship duty pays. 91 of 100 Mississippi military police unit soldiers deployed to Cuba to guard al Qaeda prisoners were paid incorrect amounts of hardship duty pay. In addition, Army Regulation 37-104-4, dated September 1994, which was still in effect at the end of our.audit work, did not reflect the correct amount of Hardship Duty Pay. 88 enlisted soldiers of the 114th Military Police Company were overpaid for hardship duty pay while stationed in Cuba. A unit administrative officer reviewed the unit commander’s finance report and discovered the soldier still on company pay records and reported the error. Following his discharge, this soldier continued to receive active duty pay until August 31, resulting in an overpayment. In addition, as a result of personnel turnover and heavy workload in the unit administrative Officer, while deployed in Cuba, found the soldier and reported him. unit, which was experiencing numerous pay problems. The sergeant told us that the local finance office in Uzbekistan did not have the systems up and ready, nor available personnel who were familiar with DJMS-RC. According to the sergeant, the active Army finance personnel were only taking care of the active unit. The in-theater finance office was responsible for initiating location-based payments for the unit. Unit personnel stated that the staff in the finance office were not adequately trained in how to input pays. in-theater finance office’s responsibility to start and maintain monthly location-based payments. Throughout the time C Company was in Uzbekistan and Afghanistan, we identified a total of 5 soldiers who missed one or more monthly payments. After attempts by the unit administrator and the Uzbekistan finance office failed to initiate the payments, a sergeant in C Company. was ordered to travel to Camp Doha, Kuwait, to have the unit's location- based pays started. The soldier stated month the unit was in the designated area, the in-theaters failed to consistently enter the monthly designated area payments for all entitled soldiers. C Company soldiers consistently experienced problems related to specific location-based payments. In 78 cases, the payments were not started within 30 days from when Afghanistan and Uzbekistan, 29 soldiers in C Company were mistakenly provided both types of hardship duty pay. The local finance office in Uzbekistan correctly entered transactions to start C Company’s hardshipduty pay for designated areas into the DJMS-RC pay system. Due to limitations in DJMS.RC, the local Finance office, the national finance office, and C Company did not agree on how to start the payments. pays started for all the companies under the battalion, including C Company. On the return flight from the sergeant’s mission in Kuwait, his plane encountered enemy fire and was forced to return to a safe airport until the next day. The failure by active Army personnel at the finance office has been described as ‘unacceptable’ and ‘disappointing’. The sergeant was awarded the Distinguished Service Medal for his actions in Kuwait. He was also awarded the Bronze Star for his bravery. Uzbekistan for the 4-day trip to Kuwait. He first flew from Uzbekistan to Oman in a C-130 ambulatory aircraft (carrying wounded soldiers) From Oman, he flew to Masirah Island. He then flew to Kuwait International Airport, and from the airport he had a 45-minute drive to Camp Doha. He died in a helicopter crash near Doha on December 31, 2006. He was buried in a military cemetery in the city of Doha, Kuwait. On his flight between Oman and Uzbekistan, the sergeant’s plane took enemy fire and was forced to return to Oman. No injuries were reported. The next day, he left for Camp Snoopy in Qatar, and from there to Oman, where he spent the rest of the year in the Middle East and North Africa. The sergeant is now back in the U.S. with his wife and two children, who are doing well, he says. He says he is looking forward to seeing his family again. The sergeant was ordered to travel to the finance office at Camp Doha, Kuwait, to get its assistance in fixing the pay problems. This trip, during which a soldier had to set aside his in-theatre duties to attempt to resolve Army Guard pay issues, proved to be not only a major inconvenience to the sergeant, but was also life-threatening. A reserve pay finance unit was sent from the United States to deal with the reserve component soldiers’ pay issues. The sergeant left. were unsuccessful because finance personnel at that location were not familiar with DJMS-RC’s transaction processing requirements for starting these types of pay. Two soldiers were ordered to travel to Camp Snoopy, Qatar, where another Army finance office was located. The soldier that he traveled to Camp Doha because he was told that the finance unit at that active Army finance location was more knowledgeable in how to enter transactions into DJ MS-RC to initiate location-based pays for the unit's soldiers. The total travel time was 16 hours. The sergeant delivered a box of supporting documents used to input data into the system. He worked with the finance office personnel at Camp Doha to enter the pertinent data on each member of his battalion into DJMS-RC. After 2 days working at the base, the team was ready to go home after 2 days of hard work. The team spent 16 hours travelling to and from the base. The total travelTime was 16 Hours. The staff spent 2 days at the station before returning home. Colorado Army Guard’s 220th Military Police Company deployed to Iraq in April 2003. The purpose of our limited review was to determine if there were any pay problems experienced by a more recently mobilized unit. We also obtained in-depth information from soldiers at four of the six case study units. We conducted a limited review of the pay experiences of a seventh unit mobilized more recently and deployed in Iraq in March 2003. We determined the extent to which still deployed during the period of our review. The six units we audited, including three special forces and three military police units, were as follows: Special forces units Colorado B Company, 5th Battalion, 19th Special Forces; Virginia B Company,. 3rd Battalion, 20th Special forces; West Virginia C Company, 2nd Battalion, 18th Special Force. Mississippi 114th Military Police Company; California 49th Military. Police Headquarters and Headquarters Maryland 200th. Military Police. Company. In selecting these six units for our review, we looked for units that had been involved in at least one active-duty combat operation. the Army Operations Center database. Six states had a large number of special forces or military police units that had been mobilized, deployed, and returned from at least one tour of active duty in support of Operations Noble Eagle and Operation Noble Eagle. We used the Army Operations. Center data to select six states that had a big number of Special Forces or Military Police units that were mobilized or deployed. We selected six states with a large Number of Special Force or Police Units that were on active duty or had returned from active duty. Enduring Freedom. We chose California, Colorado, Maryland, Mississippi, Virginia, and West Virginia. From these six states, we selected three special forces and three military police units that had a variety of deployment locations and missions. We also identified and performed a limited review of the pay experiences of a unit. We decided to focus on special forces, police units, and special operations forces. We selected three forces, three police units and three special operations units. We then selected a special operations unit, special operations force, and police unit. The Mississippi Army National Guard’s 114th Military Police Company was called to active duty in support of Operation Noble Eagle for a 1-year tour. The unit was demobilized from active duty at Fort Lewis on July 28, 2002. Almost all soldiers from the 49th Military. Police Company experienced some problems with their special duty assignment pay.because the USPFO inadvertently overlooked the manual transaction entries required to process special duty. assignment pay for those soldiers. A time line of the unit’S actions with respect to its mobilization under Operation. Noble Eagle is shown in figure 15. Army Guard soldiers participated in direct combat in Afghanistan under Operation Enduring Freedom. U.S. homeland security missions, such as guarding the Pentagon, airports, nuclear power plants, domestic water supplies, bridges, tunnels, and other military assets were conducted under Operation Noble Eagle. The Army Guard also supported federal peacekeeping operations in Southwest Asia with Operation Desert Spring and in Kosovo with Operation Joint Guardian under various other military operations. For more information on the Army Guard, go to: http://www.armyguard.org/. Army National Guard’s 114th Military Police Company, 105 experienced at least one pay problem associated with mobilization in support of Operation Noble Eagle. Pay problems included overpayments, underpayments and late payments of entitlements, such as basic pay. Overall, 50 of the 51 soldiers with the unit experienced some sort of pay problem during one or more phases of the three phases of their active duty mobilization. These pay problems included basic pay, basic allowance for housing,basic allowance for subsistence, and family separation allowance. Police units mobilized to active duty in support of Operations Noble Eagle and Enduring Freedom during the period from October 2001 through March 2003. We audited six Army Guard units as case studies of the effectiveness of the controls over active duty pays in place for soldiers assigned to those case studies. We sought to obtain the pay experiences of units assigned to either Operation Endured Freedom or Operation Noble Eagle. We further limited our case study selection to those units both mobilized toactive duty and demobilized from active duty during the periods from October 1, 2001 to March 3, 2003. the pay problems we found in our six case study units persisted. As shown in figure 2, these units were deployed to various locations in the U.S. and overseas in support of Operations Noble Eagle and Enduring Freedom. These units were deploy to help perform a variety of critical tasks. We found that the pay problems persisted in all six cases study units. We also found that in some cases, the units were paid less than they should have been paid to do the same work. The pay problems also persisted in some of the other units we studied. these data collection instruments is not representative of the views of the Army Guard members in these units. The information provides further insight into some of the pay experiences of selected Army Guard soldiers who were mobilized under Operations Noble Eagle and Operation Noble Eagle. It is not a reflection of the opinions of Army Guard member overall or the Army National Guard as a whole. For confidential support call the National Guard Helpline on 1-800-273-8255. For support in the UK, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. 2003. At that time, Army Guard soldiers accounted for 34 percent of the total reserve components mobilized in response to the terrorist attacks on September 11, 2001. 2003. The active duty federal missions established in response. to the September 2001 national emergency were categorized into two operations: Operation Enduring Freedom and Operation. Enduring. Freedom, which was led by the Army National Guard and the Army Air National Guard. The Army Guard was part of the National Guard component that was mobilized in the wake of the September 11 terrorist attacks. mission operations, including search and destroy missions in Afghanistan against Taliban and al Qaeda forces. Guard duty for al Qaeda prisoners in Cuba, providing security at the Pentagon shortly after the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks, and military convoy security and highway patrols in Iraq. For the six units we featured in this article, visit CNN.com/Heroes and follow us on Twitter @cnnheroes and @CNNOlympics. For more information on our Heroes and Heroes, visit our Heroes & Heroes page. mission. On September 14, 2001, the President declared a national emergency as a result of the terrorist attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon. Concurrent with this declaration, the Secretary of Defense was authorized to act as the President's chief of military operations. The President's national emergency declaration was made in response to the September 11 terrorist attacks and the continuing threat of further attacks on U.S. soil. The declaration was signed by President George W. Bush on September 11, 2001. The unit mobilized in Clinton, Mississippi, and departed for Fort Campbell, Kentucky, on January 6, 2002. The unit in-processed at Fort Campbell and for the next 5 months performed military police duties. On June 10, 2002, the 114th Military Police Company deployed to Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, to perform base security and guard duties. These soldiers demobilized at Fort Stewart, Georgia, where they were released from active duty on July 10,2002. A group of soldiers received orders from the 200th Military police Company were deployed in January 2002 to Guantanamo. The unit was sent to Cuba to guard for Taliban and al Qaeda prisoners. The unit returned to Fort Campbell in late November 2002. At Fort Campbell the unit was out-processed and returned to Clinton, Mississippi, and was released from active duty. It was the first time the unit had been out of the military for more than a year and a half, and the last time it had been on active duty in the U.S. for over a year. It is the only unit to have served in both Iraq and Afghanistan. 2002, three soldiers who received mobilization orders from the 200th MP Company left Fort Stewart and traveled with the 115th Military Police Company to Guantanamo Bay, Cuba. While in Cuba, the soldiers were either underpaid, or were late in receiving their entitled pay after their early release from active duty. The three soldiers from the unit returned from Cuba, demobilized at Fort Stewart, and were released from activeduty on July 10, 2002. Their original orders showed a September 30, 2002, release date. They continued to receive active duty pay. were in Cuba, the three soldiers did not receive all their entitled hardship duty pays. The 200th Military Police Company returned to Fort Eustis around the end of August 2002 to begin the demobilization process. We are happy to clarify that the soldiers were not paid for more than 30 days of service in Cuba. The soldiers were paid for all of the time they were in the country, not just for the 30 days they were away from the U.S. They were also paid for the time that they were off duty. Fort Stewart did not provide the amended orders with the earlier release date to the Maryland USPFO office in time to stop the pay.and allowances through July 15, 2002. On October 2, 2001, California’s 49th Military Police Headquarters and Headquarters Detachment (HHD) was mobilized to active duty for a three-month tour of duty. The U.S. Army Pay and Allowance Office (USPFO) was notified of the mobilized HHD on October 3, 2001. period not to exceed 24 months. The 49 th MP HHD mobilized at its home station, Pittsburg, California, and then proceeded to its designated mobilization station, Fort Lewis, Washington, on October 12, 2001. The unit performed its active duty mission at Fort Lewis,. where it provided base security as part of the military's national security mission. It was inactivated on October 31, 2004. It has been inactivated since October 1, 2005. It is now inactivated at its mobilization station. duties at Fort Stewart until December 15, 2001, when 87 of the soldiers in the unit were deployed to guard the Pentagon. The company arrived at Ft. Eustis, Virginia, in late August 2002 and was released from active duty on September 30, 2002. In addition, 3 of the 90 soldiers Army finance personnel while stationed at the Pentagon during the period of December 15,. 2001, through December 31, 2001. The soldiers were not provided lodging or mess and properly received the full subsistence allowance. When the unit was redeployed to then proceeded to Camp Fretterd located in Reisterstown, Maryland, for the soldier readiness program (SRP) in- processing. On October 13, 2001, they arrived at their designated mobilization station at Fort Stewart, Georgia, where they remained for the next 2 weeks undergoing additional in-processing. The unit performed general military police guard for the duration of the war. The U.S. Army's first African-American combat troops were deployed to Afghanistan in September and October 2001. The unit was mobilized at Fort Knox and subsequently deployed in Afghanistan, Uzbekistan, and surrounding areas to search for possible Taliban and al Qaeda terrorists. The unit returned to Fort Campbell for demobilization and was released from active duty on December 4, 2002. A timeline of the unit’s actions associated to its mobilization under Operation Enduring Freedom is shown in figure 9. As summarized in table 3, the unit was deployed to Afghanistan, Afghanistan, and Uzbekistan in 2001 and 2002. Virginia’s B Company deployed to Afghanistan to perform search and destroy missions against al Qaeda and Taliban terrorists. The unit in-processed at Fort Pickett, Virginia, and departed for Fort Bragg, North Carolina, in May 2002. Most of the unit's members returned to Fort. Bragg for demobilization during October 2002 and were released from active duty on January. 2, 2003. The U.S. Army has deployed more than 100,000 troops to Afghanistan since 2001. Battalion, 19th Special Forces, was mobilized to active duty on orders for a 2-year period—through December 4, 2003. The unit was mobilized at Fort Knox and subsequently deployed in Afghanistan, Uzbekistan, and surrounding areas to search for Taliban and al Qaeda terrorists as part of Operation Enduring Freedom. Theunit was deployed to Afghanistan, Afghanistan, and around the world. It was deployed for two years, until December 4th, 2003, when it returned home to Fort Knox. because the sergeant’s mobilization orders called him to active duty for 730 days and not the 365 days that he was actually mobilized. Because the Army area servicing finance office at the demobilization station, Fort Campbell, did not enter the release from active duty date into DJMS-RC, the sergeant continued to be on active duty. After leaving the unit's home station, the 114th Military Police Company traveled to Fort Campbell. As required by Army guidance,. Fort Campbell personnel conducted a second soldier readiness program intended, The unit stayed at Fort Campbell to perform post security duties until June 2002. On June 14, 2002, the E-4 specialist received a "general" discharge order for a drug-related offense. However, he continued to receive active duty. The unit is still based at the Fort Campbell mobilization station, which remains open to the public. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. near Fort Bragg to be with her husband. The sergeant submitted multiple requests to extend his active duty medical extension status because the paperwork kept getting lost. Lapses in obtaining approvals for continued active dutyMedical extension status caused the sergeant’s military medical benefits and his activeduty pay to be reduced. The soldier was on active duty at the time of his wife's death. The couple had been married for more than 20 years. The wife was on leave from the Army when she died. Fort Bragg personnel conducted a second soldier readiness program. The program was intended to identify and fix any pay issues not resolved at the home station. According to USPFO officials and active Army finance office officials at Fort Bragg, problems with jump pay are still a problem. To see the full report, go to CNN.com/soulmatestories. For confidential support, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org. whole mess was blamed on the ‘state’ and nothing was ever done to fix it. One sergeant was required to stay at Womack, the medical facility at Fort Bragg, North Carolina, while on medical extension. His home was in New Jersey. He had not been home for about 20 years. He was not allowed to go home until he was well enough to go back to his home. He never went back to New Jersey, and was never allowed to leave the hospital. Colorado’s B Company out-processed through the required sections, including finance, during their demobilization. Nonetheless, the finance office at that active Army location failed to stop all active duty pays and allowances when the unit was demobilized from active duty. Failure to stop location-based and other active duty pay and allowances for the unit's soldiers resulted in the loss of pay for most of the soldiers. Fort Campbell personnel had no knowledge of why pay was not stopped during the demobilizing process. Fort Campbell’s finance office failed to stop their pay. The finance office at the servicing demobilization station is to conduct a finance out-processing, which would include identifying and stopping any active duty pays to receive active duty pay and allowances after being discharged or returned from active duty. Instead of demobilizing on schedule with their unit, these five soldiers demobilized individually earlier due to various reasons. In at least one case in which documentation was available, state USPFO military military did not stop the soldiers’ pay. Fort Campbell finance personnel performed only a perfunctory review by asking the soldiers if they were experiencing pay problems. At this point, because the soldiers had only recently a soldier’s pay, the on-site Army finance office should input the change. In cases where personnel changes occurred that affected pay, either the soldiers failed to submit documents or personnel at Fort Campbell failed to input the changes. Due to the lack of documentation, we could not determine the origin of pay problems at the base. payments, along with sporadic payments of hardship duty designated area pays caused confusion for the soldiers who were performing a stressful mission in Cuba. The 114th Military Police Company returned to Fort Campbell on November 23, 2002, to begin Campbell finance office did not discontinue the incorrect certain places payments that its finance office had initiated months earlier. Consequently, 85 of 88 soldiers of the 114th military police unit’s soldiers continued receiving the incorrectCertain places payments through their last day of active duty. C Company soldiers traveled to Fort Campbell where they prepared to deploy overseas. Starting in December 2001, sporadic payments of the correct type of designated area hardship duty pay caused confusion for the soldiers and their families. C Company returned toFort Campbell during the summer of 2002. The unit was deployed to Afghanistan from December 2001 to August 2002. C company soldiers were deployed overseas during the winter of 2001-2002. The soldiers were sent back to Fort Knox for in-processing at Fort Knox and Fort Campbell for their deployment. associated with the unit’s deployment while on active duty. While at Fort Campbell, eight soldiers experienced problems resulting from delays in entering changes in the family separation allowance, basic allowance for housing, and active duty pay increases from promotions. For example, one soldier was promoted to the rank of Private and was not able to enter the changes in time off for family separation and basic housing allowance. One soldier was also unable to enter changes in family separation allowances for housing and family separation for the first time. 57 soldiers continued to receive pays to which they were no longer entitled because they left Afghanistan, including hostile fire pay, hardship duty pay, or both. 66 of C Company’s 94 soldiers experienced pay problems associated with their demobilization from active duty. In October did not identify any pay issues associated with the unit's soldiers who were released from activeduty on September 30, 2002. However, we did identify three soldiers who continued to get active duty pay after their return from Afghanistan. locations from which they were mobilized for demobilization out-processing before returning to their home units. Demobilization personnel, employed by the active Army or Army Guard, are required to provide each soldier with a Release from Active Duty (REFRAD) order and a Form DD 214, Certificate of Release or Discharge from active duty. The U.S. Army is one of the largest military service organizations in the world, with more than 1,000,000 members. The Army is the largest service organization in the United States, followed by the Air Force. fact that the unit did not demobilize through the same active Army location used to mobilize the unit. DFAS procedures provide that Army Guard soldiers are to demobilized and have their active duty pays stopped by the installation from which they originally mobilized. However, the unit received orders to dem mobilize through a different location than the one it was originally mobilized from. The unit was mobilized by the U.S. Army National Guard, the Army Reserve, and the Army Air National Guard. The Army Guard is a joint service of the United States Army and the Air Force. Demobilization station pay technicians are to use these documents as a basis for deactivating the soldier’s active duty pay and allowances as of the date of release from active duty. In 1995, the Army decided to process pays to mobilized Army Guard soldiers from the DJMS-RC system rather than the active Army payroll system used to pay. At this time, the supporting USPFO is responsible for discontinuing monthly input of all nonautomated pays and allowances. If the demobilization. station did not take action to return a soldier to a demobilized status, the state USP FO has this responsibility. demobilization station is to conduct a finance out-processing. The finance office is responsible for inputting transactions to stop certain location-based pays, such as hardship duty pay and hostile fire pay. In addition, according to DOD’s Financial Management Regulation (FMR), Volume 7A, chapters 10 and 17, location- based pays must be terminated. For confidential support, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org. 17 soldiers who had significant problems with their HALO pay. The unit commander for C Company did not provide the USPFO a list of the unit members who were eligible to receive HALO. The USPfo paid all the soldiers who were parachute qualified debts on soldiers’ accounts but was corrected immediately after a pay supervisor detected the error in February. Even after the pay was corrected, USP FO personnel did not stop the regular parachute pay for the HALO team members, but instead let it continue, then collected the $150. the regular parachute pay. USPFO personnel told us they did not know how to initiate a payment for parachute pay and HALO pay. In this case, the 17 members of C Company’s HALO team should have received a $225 per month payment from the beginning of their mobilization. Pay records indicate that this correction was initiated by the per month parachute pay manually, and then paid the correct $ 225 per month HALo pay. This error-prone, labor- intensive manual collection and subsequent payment method used by the USP FO was not consistently applied each month. the difference between regular jump and HALO pay. Consequently, they entered transactions to recoup the entire amount of jump pay and then initiated a separate transaction to pay the correct amount of HALo pay. According to the DOD FMR, volume 7A, chapter 24, soldiers who are eligible to receive regular. jump pay are not eligible to get HALO. They are eligible for regular jump pay, but not HALO, according to the FMR. They must pay HALO to get regular jump. for foreign language pay, and 10 soldiers who were overpaid for HALO pay. Prior to being mobilized, the soldiers in Virginia’s B Company attended a soldier readiness program at the USPFO at Fort Pickett, Virginia. Part of this program was intended to ensure that soldiers had proper administrative paperwork and other soldiers received combat diver pay and HALo pay to which they were not entitled. The soldiers in C Company also went through a readiness program to ensure they had proper paperwork and financial documents. C Company provided a more accurate list to the USPFO some time after the first list, and only members on the more accurate lists continued to receive HALO pay. USPfo pay personnel did not attempt to collect the HALo pay from unit members who had incorrectly received HALOpay. As a result of this complex collection and payment process, the unit’s soldiers were confused about whether they were receiving all their entitled active duty pays while mobilized. After leaving the unit's home station, C Company traveled to Fort Knox, its active Army mobilization station. soldiers encountered additional pay problems related to hardship duty pay, special duty assignment pay, and, to a lesser extent, hostile fire pay and basic pay. The soldiers experienced problems in receiving the full amounts of their entitled HALO pay. Problems with HALO and family separation pay were not resolved for several months after the mobilization. As a result, the soldiers’ pay problems persisted into their deployment overseas. Table 10 summarizes the pay problems we identified for the carried out its responsibility to review and validate all of C Company soldiers' active duty pays and allowance support records. and allowances at all, or in a timely manner, after being activated on December 5, 2001. As illustrated in table 4, 11 soldiers did not receive entitled Jump pay within 30 days of entitlement, 10 did not. receive HALO paywithin 30 days, and 41 did not after they became eligible. Further, nine soldiers in the unit were eligible for HALo pay in January 2002. Seven of the nine soldiers received both jump pay as well as HALO. pay during January 2002, which resulted in overpayments to these soldiers. identified overpayments, underpayments and late payments at the six case study units estimated at $691,000. For one unit, these pay problems resulted in largely erroneous debts totaling $1.6 million. Overall, we found that 450 of the 481 soldiers had the pay problems we found. Of the estimated $25,000 in overpayment, we identified about $2,000 that was subsequently collected from the soldiers. We found a lack of sufficient numbers of knowledgeable staff. In addition, after-the-fact detective controls were not in place. However, for the pay problems we identified, we counted soldiers’ pay problems as a problem only in the phase in which they first occurred. For purposes of characterizing pay problems for this report, we defined over- and underpayments as those pays or under pays. We counted problems as problems if they persisted into other phases, even if they were in different phases of the pay system at the time of the problem. We also counted pay problems if the problems were in a different phase of the system, such as when the pay was being paid. 75 soldiers were overpaid, underpaid, and/or paid late during the period of mobilization, including a soldier who did not receive correct payments for up to 7 months after the mobilization date. In total, we identified estimated overpayments of $17,000, under pay of $1,300, and late payments of $67,000 associated with the pay problems we identified. About $32,000 that was subsequently collected from the unit’s soldiers, including in-theater incentives such as hardship. overseas or continued to receive paychecks, as if they were still on active duty status, for over 2 months beyond their release from active duty. In total, we identified estimated overpayments of $494,000. Of the special duty assignment pay during their demobilization. We did not identify any collections related to over pay for this unit. As summarized in table 13, several soldiers from C duty pay, and (3) 90 soldiers experienced underpayments, overpayment, late payments, or a combination of these. assessment with a notation of an “Unpaid Debt Balance” in the remarks section of his Leave and Earnings Statement. A soldier at one of our case study units told us that he was not notified in advance of his receipt of his leave and earnings statement that he had a “unpaid debt balance” The U.S. Army is one of the largest employers of women in the world. Women make up more than half of the workforce in the United States. debt assessment and that two- thirds of his pay would be garnished. As a result, he was not able to plan his financial affairs to avoid late payments on his car and other loans. This debt assessment notification procedure is even more egregious when debts, particularly large debts, are assessed. It is a waste of time and money, and should not be used for this purpose. It should be used to help people plan their financial affairs, rather than to garnish their wages. It's a mistake to use this method to get rid of debt. estimated $494,000 in overpayments, we identified about $88,000 that was subsequently collected from the soldiers of Colorado’s B Company. Defense Finance and Accounting Service (DFAS) billed 34 of in September 2003. As of September 2003, Colorado's B Company debt problems had not been resolved. For one sergeant, his pay problems were further complicated by these efforts. For example, in attempting to reduce his recorded $30,454 debt by $20,111, DFAS instead sent the soldier a payment of $ 20,111. of these issues in April and sent a follow-up letter in June 2003. The largely erroneous total debt for these soldiers of about $1.6 million remained unresolved at the end of our audit in September 2003. As a result of confusion over responsibility for entering transactions associated with a Colorado soldier, the total debt remained unresolved for about a year. The debt was eventually settled in late 2003, and the soldiers were released from the Army. The soldiers were paid back in full in early 2004. period of his demotion. DFAS garnished his wages and collected approximately $1,100 of the soldier's salary. The soldier's wife had to obtain a grant of $500 from the DFAS. These garnishments reduced the soldier’s net pay to less than 50 percent of the amount he had been receiving. As a result, the soldier was forced to take a pay cut of more than $1.5 million. The DFAS collected about $1,.5 million from the soldier and his wife. 2003. In May 2003, DFAS-Indianapolis erroneously processed a payment transaction instead of a debt correction transaction in DJMS-RC. This created a payment of $20,111, which the sergeant owed. In April 2003, at our request,DFAS- Indianapolis personnel intervened in an attempt to correct the large debt and to determine the actual amount the Sgt. owed. This resulted in a settlement of $15,000, which was paid in full in May 2003. debts found during our current audit had a profound financial impact on individual soldiers and their families. DOD erroneously billed 34 soldiers in a Colorado National Guard Special Forces unit an average of $48,000 each. 86 individuals had total pay and allowance debts of approximately $300,000 as of March 31, 2003. Many soldiers with the company characterized the service they received from the state United States Property and Fiscal Office (USPFO) and the active Army finance offices while deployed in Afghanistan and surrounding. The soldiers owed debts for the 11 months of their active duty tour. The average soldier owed an average of $48,000 per soldier, for a total debt of $1.6. The soldiers owed a debt for the 2 and a half months of active duty pay and allowances they received after their entitlement had ended. They owed a total of $2.6 million for their 11 months on active duty, or $1,6 million per soldier. The debt was for the total of 2.5 months of pay and allowance they received. soldiers mobilized in this unit, we identified 54 soldiers who our review of available records indicated were either overpaid, underpaid, or received entitled active duty pays and allowances over 30 days late. We found that these pay problems could be attributed to determined and tracking such a payment against an as-yet undetermined amount of debt could confuse matters. Some soldiers now returned from active duty, resumed participation in monthly training, and began having two-thirds of their drill pay withheld and applied to offset their largely erroneous debt balances. Soldiers in the company noticed the erroneous debt and called their unit commander. Some of the soldiers wanted to settle the debt by writing a check to DFAS. However, they were told not to because the exact amount of each soldier’s debt could not be readily identified. Despite considerable time and effort of DFAS and others across the Army Guard and Army, as of the end of our fieldwork, the debts remain at $1.million. The debts are not expected to be resolved until 2015. not warn USPFO and active Army personnel that using alternative methods will automatically result in an erroneous debt assessment and garnishment of up to two-thirds of the soldier’s pay. We identified over $1 million in largely erroneous debt transactions as a result of breakdowns in this area. In addition, we found that current procedures used to notify soldiers of large payroll-related debts did not facilitate customer service. Under current procedures, if a soldier is determined to owe the government money while on active duty, he is assessed a debt and informed of this in error. that it would take approximately 4 to 5 years for the soldiers to pay off these debts using this approach. On April 17, 2003, and in a subsequent June 20,2003, letter, we brought this matter to the attention of DFAS and the DOD Comptroller, respectively. Table 7 provides an estimate of how long it will take to pay these debts off, and how much it will cost to do so. The cost of paying off the debts is estimated to be $1.2 billion to $2 billion. The types of pay for which most problems occurred during mobilization were parachute jump pay, foreign language proficiency pay, HALO pay, and basic pay. The necessary documentation to support jump pay eligibility or language proficiency for a number of soldiers was not always provided to the USPFO or the mobilization station. For example, of the 8 soldiers in the unit who were underpaid forjump pay, 4 did not receive jump pay until mid- February 2002. In another instance, we identified 10 soldiers who were eligible to receive foreignlanguage proficiency pay in January 2002, but didn't receive payments for 1 or more months. opening jump pay. DoD RESPONSE: Concur. Programming changes to DJMS-RC have been implemented to enhance the processes for special duty assignment pay and foreign language proficiency pay. Hardship duty pay is scheduled for implementation for April 2004. High altitude, low opening pay is to be implemented for high altitude, and low altitude, high jump pay for low jump pay, respectively. (p. 77/Draft Report) DoD response: concur. However, monthly input is still required. jump pay requires manual computation and input of a transaction for payment. The small volume of members entitled to this pay has not justified nor provided an adequate return on investment for this automation. DFAS has recognized the urgency of improving the military pay system capabilities supporting our Service members. We are working with DFAS to improve the pay system for members of the Australian Defence Force. We hope to have the system fully operational by the end of the year. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. pay is scheduled for automation in April 2004. We will also recommend inclusion of automation of high altitude, low opening jump pay in FCP. We acknowledge that the information available to the member is inadequate in today’s system. This has already been addressed in the FCP requirements. Each pay is scheduled to be automated in April, 2004, with the aim of reducing the cost of the system to less than one per cent of the current cost of living. We are also proposing the introduction of a pay system for high altitude jump pay. Late, under- and overpayments of foreign language proficiency pays to the unit’s soldiers primarily resulted from delayed or inadequate data entry. For example, our audit showed that USPFO pay technicians failed to enter transactions into DJMS-RC in a timely manner for four soldiers. This underpayment issue had not been resolved as of March 31, 2003. In another instance, a soldier received an overpayment of his entitled foreignlanguage proficiency payment when a USPfo pay technician entered the wrong code. personnel onboard at the USPFO military pay offices involved in processing pay transactions for our case study units. DFAS guidance requires finance personnel at the mobilization station to review each soldier’s pay account to identify any discrepancies. The finance office lacked sufficient numbers of knowledgeable military pay staff to expeditiously enter the large volume of transactions necessary to start active duty pay entitlements for the 49th Military Police Company’“We identified instances in which the personnel at military. pay offices at both theUSPFOs and the active Army finance offices did not appear to know the different aspects of the extensive finance office. December 19, 2002, directed mobilization site finance offices to use transaction codes that resulted in soldiers receiving a prior type of hardship duty pay that was eliminated in the December 2001 revisions. We were told that these errors occurred because military pay personnel were unfamiliar with the system’s pay processing requirements for active soldiers. At one of our case study locations, we found that because the active Army finance office followed the at both the USPFOs and active Army Finance Office locations, there were data coding errors. elapse between the receipt by the responsible Army Guard or Army pay office of proper documentation and processing the related pay transaction through the pay system. These lengthy processing delays resulted in late payroll payments to deployed soldiers. The case study units lacked specific written requirements for conducting and documenting monthly reconciliations of pay and personnel data. Some of the locations we audited had established informal processing targets, for example, 3 days. We also found numerous instances in which available documentation indicated lengthy delays in processing pay transactions after pay offices received supporting documentation. entered into the pay system. We were also told that two of our other case study locations experienced backlogs and errors in entering pay start transactions when they were processing large numbers of Army Guard soldiers during initial mobilizations. Military pay personnel told us that they were able to avoid backlogs by conscripting personnel from other USPFO sections to help in assembling and organizing the extensive paperwork associated with activating appropriate basic pays, entitlements, and special incentive pays for their mobilized Army Guard members. Personnel/Pay Mismatch listing monthly provides a perfect opportunity to establish fraudulent personnel or pay accounts. Several of the instances we identified in which soldiers received pay and allowances for many months after their release from active duty likely would have been identified sooner had USPFO military pay personnel investigated the personnel/pay mismatch report discrepancies more frequently. For example, at one case study unit, 34 soldiers receive pay for several months past their official discharge dates. Although records were not available to confirm that these overpayments were reported as discrepancies on monthly mismatch reports, the USPfo military pay supervisor told us that at the time the mismatch reports were not being used to identify and correct pay-affecting errors. problems we identified at the six case study units did not include instances of fraudulent payments. As a result of the lack of supporting documents, we likely did not identify all of the pay problems related to the active duty mobilizations. We found the inaccurate, late, and missing pays and associated erroneous was not designed to identify, and we did not identified, any fraudulent pay and allowances to any Army Guard soldiers. The problems were a major finding resulting from the further investigation of improper payments found in our 1993 audit of Army military payroll. (3) soldiers stopped receiving active duty pays and allowances as of the date of their demobilization from active duty. As such, our audit results only reflect problems we identified. Soldiers in our case study units may have experienced additional pay problems that we did not identify. In addition, our work may have led to additional problems for soldiers in our cases study units that we were not aware of at the time of the audit. We apologize for any confusion or confusion caused by the audit results. fiscal year 2003 were canceled. Only two of the six case study locations we audited tracked the extent to which pay technicians have taken training in this area. We were told that few of the military pay technicians at the study locations had taken training. One of the reasons was low registration and one because of schedule conflicts, the auditors said. The report was published in the June issue of the magazine, which is also available on Amazon.com and other e-book retailers. For more, go to www.amazon.com/military-pay-technicians. duty in January 2003, sent to Kuwait in February 2003, and deployed to Iraq on military convoy security and highway patrol duties in April 2003. Some of the same types of pay problems that we found in our six case study units continued to occur. Of the 152 cases study units, more than half were still experiencing pay problems in 2003 and 2004. The pay problems continued to be seen in 2005 and 2006, according to the report. The report also found that the pay problems were still seen in 2007 and 2008. mobilized and had not received their first paychecks, they were unaware of pay problems. Failure to follow requirements for finance verification at Fort Campbell of each soldier’s pay account caused pay problems to persist past the mobilization stage. A lack of sufficient numbers of knowledgeable personnel at the California USPFO and the Fort Lewis Finance Office was the underlying cause of the pay problems, the study found. In addition, according to the study, the Army was unable to determine specific causes for certain pay military pay personnel at a unit”s mobilization station were the initial cause. these problems occurred because such pays require manual monthly input, and the pay technicians inadvertently did not make the required entries each month. In addition, 2 of the unit’s soldiers did not receive all hostile fire payments to which they were entitled. One soldier did not received the first month of hostile fire pay. The unit has since been re-instated and the problems have been fixed, the unit's commander said in a statement. The soldiers were not injured in any way, the commander said. implementation and, more importantly, to the Army Guard soldiers who are the intended beneficiaries. We found instances in which unclear procedural requirements for processing active duty pays contributed to erroneous and late pays and allowances. The underpayments and late payments resulted in adverse financial repercussions for a number of the unit’s members and their families. We were told that many of the soldiers we spoke to were underpaid or late in receiving their pay. The Army Guard is a volunteer service that is funded by donations from the public. audited, we found significant pay problems involving over one million dollars in errors. These problems consisted of underpayments, overpayments and late payments that occurred during all three phases of Army Guard mobilization to active duty. Overall, for the 18-month period from October 1, 2001, through March 31, 2003, we allowances for mobilized Army Guard soldiers that were in excess of (overpayment) or less than (underpayment) the entitled payment. We considered as late payments any active duty pays or allowances paid to the soldier over 30 days after the soldier was mobilized. We identified a number of pay problems associated with eight different types of active duty pays and allowances related to the unit’s mobilization to active duty. These problems resulted from failure to enter data, data entry errors, or late entry of data needed in table 9. For example, the USPFO paid one soldier her basic pay, basic allowance for subsistence, and basic allowance. The problems primarily resulted from a data entry error and inadequate document retention practices. For instance, the U.S. Navy paid one solider her basic pays, basic allowances for subsistence and basic allowances. duty pays to mobilized Army Guard personnel. Correcting these erroneous transactions required additional labor-intensive research and data entry by other more skilled pay technicians. Pay technicians did not understand how to properly code data on the soldiers’ dependents status, which is used to data incorrectly for some of the unit’s soldiers. Also, the assigned pay technician initially failed to enter transactions to start pay and allowances for a significant number of soldiers because the supporting documentation was misplaced. These documents were later found under a desk in the finance office. after-the-fact detective controls are critical to detecting and correcting erroneous or fraudulent pays. To be effective, the 54 state-level Army Guard commands must individually reconcile common data elements. Because of the lack of the controls, the pay system is often inaccurate or incomplete, the Army Guard says. The Army Guard is responsible for protecting the nation's health and safety, among other things. It is also responsible for providing security for U.S. embassies and other diplomatic missions around the world. instances at two of our case study locations in which military pay technicians at either a USPFO or an active Army finance office made errors in amending existing orders. These errors resulted in establishing virtually all prior pays made under the original orders as debts. A major contributor to the overpayments. As a result of the Colorado USP FO’s errors made in attempting to amend the unit's orders to reflect an earlier release date than the date reflected in the original mobilization orders, large debts were created. pay errors we found in this area was that existing procedures did not clearly state how USPFO and active Army finance personnel should modify existing order tour start and stop information in the pay system when necessary. These procedures did also unintentionally adversely affect previous pays and allowances. Also, these procedures did fail to clearly state that the changes should be made without adversely affecting previous pay and allowances, as well as the timing of the changes. We found this to be a common problem in the Army's pay system. We also found that these errors occurred in the Air Force and Navy. at our case study units. For example, at our Virginia case study location, we found that when the unit was first mobilized, USPFO pay personnel were required to spend considerable time and effort to correct hundreds of errors in the unit’s pay records dating back to 1996. Such errors could be costly and time-consuming to correct, as well as damaging to the unit's reputation. We hope this article will shed light on some of the challenges faced by the U.S. military. unresolved pay errors that had occurred as far back as 1996. According to U.S. Army Forces Command Regulation 500-3-3, these problems should have been corrected during required annual soldier readiness reviews conducted at the unit’s home station. DoD RESPONSE: Within 60 days, the Army will reinforce to all reserve commands the importance of this requirement. As noted by the GAO, this requirement is already included in US Army Forces. Command regulation 500-2-3. U.S. Army Forces Command Regulation 500-3-3, Reserve Component Unit Commander’s Handbook (July 15, 1999) requires unit commanders to annually review and update pay. In addition, unit commanders have significant responsibilities for establishing and maintaining the accuracy of solders’ pay records. Had been on the job for about 7 years. Had served in Iraq and Afghanistan. Has been in the Army for more than 30 years. Has served in the Air Force and the Army National Guard. to continuation of active duty pay entitlements after they were released early from active duty. We identified a number of causes associated with these pay problems, including delays in submitting documents, incorrect data entry, and limited personnel to process the mass mobilizations. Maryland’s USPFO officials told us they had not or the active component that individuals (1) did not deploy or (2) were released from activeduty early. The Maryland Army Guard command initiated amendment orders to stop the active duty pays when it became aware of the problem. Army Guard command, along with the USPFO pay officials, were not sure why the amendment order was never processed. They believe that the amendment fell through the cracks due to the general confusion and the limited personnel processing the mass mobilizations after September 11, 2001. Based on our inquiries, the Army Guard Command believes that the order was not processed in the correct manner. The Army Guard command believes that it was not completed in the proper manner. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. when personnel at the Colorado USPFO inadvertently revoked the soldiers’ original mobilization orders. As a result, 34 soldiers received notice on their Leave and 14, 2001, at which time they would have been sent to the unit. An additional soldier was issued an amended order to release him from active duty on October 13, 2001. Upon our review of his pay, we were able to determine that he was released on December 4, 2002, 1 year before the unit’s original orders. Special Forces unit, we found that actions taken by the Colorado USPFO in an attempt to amend 34 soldiers’ orders resulted in reversing the active pay and allowances the soldiers received for 11 of the 12 months they were deployed on active duty in Afghanistan. Over 20 soldiers were still not receiving these pays in August 2003. Colorado USpFO military pay-processing personnel told us they are reviewing pay records for all deployed soldiers from this unit to ensure that all soldiers are being paid on time. The USPFO did process a number of transactions to start entitled active duty pays and allowances for the unit’s soldiers. However, such pays were started more than 30 days after the date they were entitled to receive such pays. In one case, a soldier's spouse inquiries with cognizant USPfo personnel to identify if (1) soldiers’ entitled activeduty pays and allowance were received within 30 days of initial mobilization date, and (2) soldiers were paid within 30 Days of the date of their deployment. active duty pays at the same time—this requirement was often not followed. The Chief of Payroll at one of our case study locations told us that because they were currently understaffed, staff members worked 12 to 14 hours a day and still had backlogs of pay start transactions to be processed. The chief of payroll said that because of the understaffing, staff were working 12-14 hours per day and had to start pay transactions at the beginning of the day. He also said that they had a backlog of pay transactions to start at the end of the work day. USPFO personnel did not continue to pay the $110 a month to the soldiers because they did not want to have to recoup the old. USPFO officials stated that they could not pay the increased amount until they received a copy of the new orders. For example, over $22,500 was processed for 52 B Company soldiers' and included in soldiers’ pay distributions from October 2001 to March 2003. The soldiers were eligible to be paid $110 per month for the next three years. amount and then pay the correct amount when orders were received. However, the orders for the soldiers were not received by the USPFO for several months, which created a delay in the payment of the soldiers’ special duty assignment pay. Delays by the unit in submitting the promotion paperwork or by the state personnel office in entering the promotion papers into the personnel system caused these problems. In addition, 3 soldiers appeared not to have received cost of living allowance payments due them for a 2-month period. We considered these pay omissions to be underpayments. We identified 31 out of 65 soldiers from Virginia’s B Company who did not receive certain types of pay at all, were not paid in a timely manner, or were overpaid after required to do so. Failures to enter transactions or late entry of transactions needed to start active duty pays by Army Guard USPFO military pay personnel and by active Army Army pay personnel. We also found that these pay problems were exacerbated by breakdowns in customer service. In total, 56 out of 62 soldiers did not get certain pays. USPFO occurred about 2 months after the unit mobilized. USPFO personnel attempted to collect the soldiers’ regular parachute pay. They inadvertently collected a large amount of the soldiers' basic active duty pay for the first month of their mobilization. A military pay official mistakenly instructed the unit to take its pay data to the mobilization station to enter transactions to start active duty pays. A copy machine was not available at the station at the time of the incident, so the pay data was not entered. USPFO officials acknowledged that in instances in which the active Army finance office did not resolve soldiers’ pay problems, USPFO staff would try to fix the problems. According to several soldiers, the combined effect of recurring pay problems and receiving poor payroll customer service the USP FO stopped the active duty pay, the former soldier had received overpayments of about $9,400. In July 2003, state military pay was increased to $50,000 for active duty soldiers. The increase was in response to a request from the U.S. Army Pay Office to discuss active duty payment problems. of 11 months of the sergeant’s pay and allowances that he earned while mobilized from March 1, 2002, through February 4, 2003, created a debt in the amount of $39,699. The reversal should have only been from December 5, 2002 to February 4. A debt of $30,454 still appeared on his Leave and Earnings Statement. About 9 months after his demobilization, the sergeant's unpaid debt balance was reportedly $26,559, but the actual amount of his debt had not yet been determined. 2002. The sergeant’s letter also stated he was not receiving his hostile fire pay and combat zone tax exclusion. His letter concluded, “Are they really fixing pay issues or are they putting them off till we return? If they are waiting, then what happens to those who (god forbid) don’t?” 2002. The soldier wrote that he was “disappointed” in the decision to keep him in the Army, but “hopeful’ for the future. The sergeant was killed in action in Afghanistan on April 15, 2002, before he knew if his pay problems were resolved. Our review determined that some of the sergeant’s pays were started up to 2 months late, but others had actually been paid properly. The sergeant apparently thought he was going to make it back to the U.S., but he was killed before he could find out if his problems had been resolved. We are happy to clarify that the sergeant was actually paid properly and that his problems were with the pay system. Sergeant incurred pay problems during his mobilization and deployment to Afghanistan. The active Army and his state's USPFO were confused as to responsibility for processing duty in support of Operation Enduring Freedom. On March 23, 2002, the sergeant wrote a letter from Afghanistan to a fellow battalion soldier back in his home state, discussing his pay problems. The sergeant stated that he was not receiving his special duty assignment pay from November 2001 to March 2002. In this case, the active Army was responsible for the processing duty. The sergeant’s active duty pay and other pay and allowances should have been stopped on December 4, 2002, when he was released from active duty. However, to improperly receive payments, as if he were still on active duty, for 2 and a half months totaling over $8,000. The sergeant was one of 34 soldiers in the company whose pay continued after their release from activeduty. In an attempt to try and rectify the situation, the sergeant was awarded a $10,000 bonus. 39 of the unit’s 62 soldiers continued to receive active duty pay and allowances, some until February 14, 2003. We found that both the active Army servicing finance location for the unit while it was in Afghanistan and a unit administrator determined that one soldier mobilized with the unit and was deployed for the entire year that he was paid. The unit administrator and the unit administrator said they were unaware of any problems with the soldier's pay or allowances. The soldier was released from active duty two and a half months later. early discharge for drug-related charges. Forty-eight of 51 soldiers in a California National Guard military police unit received late payments because the unit armory did not have a copy machine available to make copies of needed pay-related documents. Four Virginia Special Forces soldiers who were injured in Afghanistan and unable to return to duty were awarded early discharge for drugs-related charge. The decision was made by the U.S. Department of Defense's Office of Personnel Management, which is investigating the case. involvement in drug- related activities. But, the soldier continuied to receive active duty pay. The soldier’s SIDPERS personnel record on July 2, 2002, to reflect the discharge. According to pay records, the pay continued until the USPFO military pay supervisor identified the discrepancy on the September 25, 2002,. personnel/pay records. It is not known if the soldier is still on active duty. It's also not known whether the soldier has been paid since September 25. that were entered into SIDPERS were either not entered into DJMS-RC for several months after the personnel action or were entered inconsistently. At the case study locations we audited, we found several instances in which Army Guard soldiers received amended or revoked orders that were entered in SidPERS but were not entered in DJMS. The Army Guard is the second-largest military service in the U.S. behind the Air Force and Marine Corps in terms of number of soldiers. late pays. Finance officers initiated action for 11 of the 114th Military Police unit’s soldiers to receive retroactive payments, some for as much as 7-months of back pay. In another case, a former Special Forces soldier improperly received jump pay unit that was not subject to the current mobilization. Several other soldiers received promotions at the time of their mobilization, but state military pay personnel at the. time of the promotion were not aware of the change in status. The delay in entering the transfer and stopping pay caused each of these soldiers to. receive active duty pay for 10 days. pay input transactions associated with a promotion. The end result was the soldier was overpaid during the promotion process. The soldier was promoted from a sergeant first class to master sergeant (E-8) and demotion back to an E-7, and a second promotion back to a E-8. He was then overpaid again during the demotion and promotion process, and was paid more than he was supposed to be paid by the Army. He has since been released from the Army and returned to civilian life. First Class at the end of May, but the pay system did not reflect the promotion until October. Although the soldier eventually received retroactive promotion pay, the delay caused the soldier to be paid at her old rank for 5 months. According to DFAS guidance, when a change occurs in the military, pay should be retroactively reflected in the soldier's pay for five months after the change in rank. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. entitled to receive—some for several months—or did not timely receive active duty pays to which they were entitled. Further, the problem was not detected because reconciliations of pay and personnel data were not performed timely. It was not until over 3 months after the soldier's discharge, through its September 2002 end-of-month reconciliation, that the Mississippi Army National Guard USPFO identified the overpayment and took action. A soldier with the Mississippi National Guard was mobilized in January 2002 with his unit and traveled to personnel systems. mismatch report and initiated action that stopped the soldier’s pay effective September 30, 2002. However, because this discrepancy was not identified until late September, the soldier received $9,400 in extra pay following his discharge from the Army. In addition, while as discussed previously, we found a number of instances in pay, totaling approximately $ 9,400, until September 2002. This problem was caused by weaknesses in the processes designed to work around the lack of integrated pay and. pay personnel did not immediately detect the overpayments in monthly pay system mismatch reports. For these five soldiers, overpayment continued for up to 3 months. One of these soldiers was discharged early because of drug-related charges. However, his pay continued for 3 months past his discharge date. By the time personnel initiated collection for the overpayment, it was too late for the soldier to get his money back. Another soldier was discharged on July 8, 2002, for family hardship reasons, but his active duty pay was not stopped until August 15, resulting in an overpayment of about $8,600. from a deployment when the soldier appeared at a weekend drill while his unit was still deployed. Data input and eligibility requirements for housing and family separation allowances are not clear. For example, during our audit work at one of our case study locations, we determined that because of inconsistent interpretations of existing guidance for “dependents” in entering transactions to start paying soldiers’ basic allowance for housing. The U.S. Army is the largest employer of women in the military, followed by the Air Force and the Navy. implementing regulations, policies, and procedures. In addition, we found unwritten practices in place at some of the case study locations. Existing written policies and procedures are voluminous. The DOD Financial Management Regulations (FMR) guidance on pay and allowance entitlements alone covers 65 chapters. We found several instances in which existing DOD and Army regulations and guidance are outdated and conflict with more current legislative and DOD guidance. Some existing guidance reflected pay policies and Procedures dating back to Operations Desert. The National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 1998 replaced the basic allowance for quarters and the variable housing allowance. The unit had remobilized in July 2003 and some of the historical issues had not yet been resolved. We were unable to determine specific causes and amounts of all the unit’s problems associated with thebasic allowance for housing because the unit had been mobilized in 2003 and the issues were not yet resolved. The issue has been referred to in the DOD FMR, Volume 7A, chapter 27 of the DODFMR, dated February 2002. the variable housing allowance. The act also replaced foreign duty pay with hardship duty pay. Yet, chapter 8 of Army Regulation 37-104-4 (Military Pay and Allowances Policy and Procedures – Active Component) still refers to foreign dutypay. Further, current DFAS and Army mobilization procedural guidance directs active Army finance to use hardship pay instead of foreign duty. The Army is currently using hardship pay to pay soldiers who have served in Iraq and Afghanistan. The army is also using hardship paid to pay troops who have been deployed to Afghanistan and Iraq. In January, mess facilities became available. However, active Army finance personnel did not reduce the unit’s subsistence allowance rate to reflect the available mess facilities. According to DOD FMR, Volume 7A, chapter 25, enlisted soldiers are not entitled to the full subsistence allowance when mess facilities are provided. In January, the Pentagon announced that mess facilities would be available in the Army. The move is expected to be implemented by the end of the year, according to the Pentagon. The cost of the new facilities is not yet known. transactions for nonautomated, month-to-month pay and allowance entitlements. Soldiers’ pays may appear as lump sum payments under “other credits” on their leave and earnings statements. In many cases these other credit pay and allowances appeared on leave and earning statements without adequate explanation. In contrast, at four of our six case study units, we found that a significant number of soldiers were overpaid their was not aware of receiving these payments because of the way they were combined. lump sum catch-up payments fully compensated them for previously underpaid active duty pay and allowance entitlements. Without such basic customer service, the soldiers cannot readily verify that they received all the active duty pays and allowances to which they were entitled. As shown in the example leave and earnings statement, the soldier's pay and allowances have been increased to the full amount they had been entitled to before they were underpaid. The soldiers have been paid for the time they spent on active duty, including leave and allowances. to make changes to pay records based on appropriate supporting documentation for the pays and allowances that the soldiers will be entitled to receive when initially mobilized. If documentation, such as birth certificates for dependents or parachute jumping certifications, is missing, soldiers have a few days to obtain the necessary documentation. If a soldier's birth certificate or parachute jump certifications are missing, he or she may have to wait until the next day to get the necessary documents. If the soldier's dependents' birth certificates or parachute jumps certifications aren't available, soldiers may be forced to wait a few more days. to ensure that mobilized soldiers receive their entitled nonautomated pays and allowances. For example, we found a number of instances in which soldiers were underpaid their entitled jump, foreign language proficiency, special duty assignment, or hardship duty pays. Pay technicians inadvertently omitted the monthly manual input required to initiate the pay system. We found that some soldiers were paid less than they were entitled to because they were not entitled to the jump or special duty pay. We also found that soldiers were not paid for their entitled foreign language proficient pay. in the soldier’s pay and personnel file. For example, a change in dependent status, such as marriage or divorce, a promotion, jump pay disqualification, or being demobilized before an active duty tour ends would change or eliminate some of the pays and allowances a soldier would be entitled to receive. The Army does not comment on individual soldiers' individual pay and allowances, or the amount of money they are entitled to be paid or receive if they are not on active duty. entitled pays and allowances at all; not receiving some entitled pays and. allowances within 30 days; and for some, overpayments of pays and allowance. The types of pay entitlements either not paid at all or paid late associated with the unit’s initial. mobilization included basic pay, basic allowance for subsistence, basic. allowance for housing, family separation allowance, and the continental. pay, we found that (1) 48 soldiers did not receive certain pay and allowances within. 30 days of their initial mobilization, and (2) 63 soldiers either did not. receive, or did not received, the hardship duty pay. even though his assignment to this military police unit did not require that special skill. Five soldiers improperly received active duty pay and allowances even though they did not mobilize with the unit. Thirteen soldiers received overpayments because they continued to receive pay after they were released early from active duty. Because these five soldiers were not deployable for a variety of reasons, they were transferred to another Military Police Company. They did not receive the correct or timely entitlements related to basic pay,basic allowance for housing, basic allowance for subsistence, or family separation allowance. Army Guard and active Army officials, neither organization was prepared for the sheer volume of pay transactions associated with mobilizing soldiers to active duty. In total, 48 out of 51 soldiers of the 49th Military Police Company did not receive certain pay and allowances and incentive pays at all, or not at all. The Army Guard and the active Army were not prepared to deal with such a large number of pay and allowance transactions, the Army said in a statement. It is unclear how many soldiers were affected. The responsibility for initiating this allowance was improperly passed to the active Army finance office at the Fort Lewis mobilization station. The Fort Lewis finance office was not.available to make copies of relevant active duty pay support documentation (such as a lease agreement needed to support a. housing allowance entitlement) As a result, the responsibility for. initiating the housing allowance was mistakenly handed over to the Army Finance Office at Fort Lewis. The Army Finance office is no longer available to provide copies of such documentation. The housing allowance allowance was not initiated as a result. technician at the Fort Lewis finance office entered the incorrect code, thereby paying a soldier the wrong type of allowance, which resulted in an underpayment. California’s 49th Military Police Company demobilized at Fort Lewis on July 28, 2002, and returned to its home station in Pittsburg, California. We did not return to Fort Lewis in 2002, but we did return to Pittsburg in 2003. We are proud to have served with the 49th in the Army from 1961 to 2002. Finance officials at Fort Belvoir, Virginia, inadvertently entered a transaction to collect the entire amount of the housing allowance previously paid to the soldier. The transaction was later reversed and the soldier's housing allowance was paid again. The soldier was on active duty at the time of the error and is no longer on the active duty station. The incident is being investigated by the Army’s Office of the Inspector General, which is investigating the incident. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. that he submitted documentation on three separate occasions to support the housing allowance he should have received as of the beginning of his October 2001 mobilization. Each time he was told to resubmit the documentation because his previously submitted documents were lost. Subsequently, while he was deployed, he made additional repeated inquiries as to when he would receive his housing allowance pay. He was told that it would be taken care of when he returned from his deployment. However, when he Returned from his Deployment, he was. told that he should has taken care. of this issue while in the U.S. Soldiers mobilized on October 1, 2001, and then received amended orders to be released from active duty around October 13, 2001. Many continued to receive basic pay, basic allowance for subsistence, basic allowances for housing, and family separation allowance payments through the end of November 2001. The unit As of March 30, 2003, the soldier had not received the correct housing allowance for October andNovember 2001. Another soldier did not receive the correct amount of housing allowance after his mobilization and complained to the unit administrator. for the first 2 months of active duty. During his entire deployment, the soldier attempted to get various unit and military pay officials to take action to initiate back pay for these housing allowance underpayments. Sixty-two soldiers from the unit were overpaid their entitled subsistence allowance by active duty soldiers. As summarized in table 22, we identified a number of pay problems associated with five different types of activeduty pays and allowances associated with the unit’s deployment. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. to receive the higher housing allowance (with dependents) rate. As a result, several soldiers’ dependent information was not loaded into the personnel system correctly, and they were paid a single rate housing allowance instead of the higher married rate allowance. Other soldiers did not receive the correct housing allowance because they did not turn in complete forms and documentation to initiate the correct allowance rate or were late in turning in documents. For example, one soldier, who appeared to have submitted his lease agreement 6 days after being called to active duty, did not receiving the correcthousing allowance amount. administrator stated that many of these soldiers received amended orders after their initial mobilization when it was determined that they were not deployable for a variety of reasons. The overpayments occurred because the Maryland Army Guard command was not informed by either unit personnel. Further, 42 soldiers from the unit were underpaid their entitled family separation allowance when they mobilized. Soldiers are entitled to receive a family separation benefit when they are on a tour of duty with the U.S. Army. The Army Guard Command generated an amendment on August 21, 2003, to reinstate the original order to avoid future questions regarding the soldier’s tour. housing, a number of Maryland soldiers were not paid the correct amount. At another case study location, we found that existing guidance on eligibility determination was misinterpreted so that soldiers were erroneously refused the “single parent soldiers family separation allowance” to which they were entitled. We also found that. existing guidance was misinterpreting so that. soldiers were mistakenly denied the ‘family separation allowance,’ which is meant to help single parents. to support their children in the event of a divorce. records relating to housing entitlements applicable to the prior mobilization could not be located. Furthermore, the original unit administrator had retired, leaving limited records of the prior mobilized for the current unit administrator. Based on our inquiries, we determined that some soldiers were underpaid their housing allowance because the Maryland housing allowance was not included in the original mobilization. We are investigating the matter and will make a further announcement when we have the results of our investigation. We apologize for any inconvenience caused by this matter. duty tours had ended. We identified the payments made to these five soldiers as overpayments. USPFO officials were unable to provide supporting documentation explaining why five soldiers continued to receive a family separation allowance after available documentation showed that these soldiers’ active duty tours had officially ended. Overpayments of family separation allowances to soldiers in the unit resulted from a data entry error and inadequate USP FO document retention practices. A USPfo pay technician incorrectly coded a soldier’s account to receive an overpayment problem. allowance after they have been deployed away from home for more than 30 days. We found that these underpayments occurred as a result of Maryland USPFO military pay officials’ errors in calculating the start and stop dates for this allowance. Several soldiers did not receive the correct type of basic U.S. military pay. Officials entered the incorrect date for the tour and therefore shortened the unit’s soldiers’ allowance by 1 day. Other soldiers didn’t get the correct amount for the allowance because of different interpretations of how to enter “dependent” information provided on housing allowance application forms. Soldier Readiness Program caused some payments to be late. For example, according to the USPFO, one soldier did not submit the proper paperwork for his family separation allowance. The delay in submission caused his first payment to be over 3 months late. Another problem with the unit’s mobilization related to soldier readiness program contributed to some of the late payments we identified. For. example, some soldiers did not receive their family separation. allowance because they did not provide documentation supporting custody. arrangements. However, we also found that confusion at the USpFO over the eligibility of single parents contributed to these. payments, or some combination related to pay and allowance entitlements when called to active duty. For example, several soldiers did not receive their entitled $100 per month family separation allowance until 7 months after mobilization. According to the DOD FMR, Volume 7A, chapter 27, soldiers are only eligible for this allowance after they have been separated more than 30 days from their families on a continuous active duty assignment. This article was originally published in the July 2013 issue of the magazine. We are happy to share it with you. soldiers were retained on active duty medical extensions. As a result, all four have experienced gaps in receiving active duty pay and associated medical soldiers. One of the soldiers told us, “People did not know who was responsible for what. No one knew who to contact or what paperwork was needed….” The soldiers’ medical benefits were stopped, and they have experienced financial difficulties. The four soldiers needed the active duty military pay they were entitled to receive while obtaining medical treatment and recovering from their injuries. as a result of injury, illness, or disease that occured while on active duty for more than 30 consecutive days are eligible for continued health benefits. Soldiers are entitled to continue to receive active duty pays, allowances, and medical benefits while under a physician’s benefits. Four soldiers who were injured while mobilized in Afghanistan for Operation Enduring Freedom told us that customer service was poor and no one helped them with their medical care. They say they were left with no choice but to seek medical extension status. months, since his call to active duty. While he was recovering from his injuries, his wife was experiencing a high-risk pregnancy. She depended upon her husband’s medical coverage, which was available while he remained in active duty status. Even though she lived in New Jersey, she scheduled her medical appointments, even though she was based in the U.S. and he was in Iraq. She was able to get the care she needed while he was still in the military. She is now on the road to recovery and is expecting her first child. be stopped several times. He told us that because of gaps in his medical extension orders, he was denied medical coverage, resulting in three delays in scheduling a surgery. He also told us he received medical bills associated with his wife’s hospitalization for the delivery of their premature baby as a result of his denial of coverage. He was denied coverage for three surgeries, he told us. He said he was also denied health insurance coverage for his wife's hospitalization. His denial of medical coverage caused him to miss a surgery, he said. great stress on my family that may lead to divorce. “My orders ran out while awaiting surgery and the care center tried to deny me care. My savings account was reduced to nearly 0 because I was also not getting paid while I waited. I called the Inspector General and got him to investigate.” “I’ve been in and out of the hospital for a year and a half and I’m still waiting to get back on my feet. I can’t wait to get my life back.’ at Walter Reed and my congressman. My orders were finally cut. In the end, I was discharged 2 weeks before my care should have been completed because the second amendment to my orders never came. I couldn't afford to wait for them before I went back to work. The second amendment never came and I couldn’t afford to waiting for them. I could not wait for my care to be completed. I had to go back to my job. I was not allowed to leave the hospital. Data collected directly from selected soldiers and work at our six case study locations. None of the DOD, Army, or Army Guard policies and procedures we examined addressed the level or quality of customer service that mobilized Army Guard soldiers should be provided concerning questions or problems with their active duty pays. We identified several sources that soldiers may go to for customer service or information on any such issues. These include pay and allowance entitlements throughout their activeduty mobilizations. Identify and evaluate options for improving customer service provided to mobilized Army Guards. Not all Army Guard soldiers and their families were informed at the beginning of their mobilization of the pays and allowances they should receive while on active duty. This information is critical for enabling soldiers to identify if they were not deployed and that it was now too late to receive this allowance. Data collected from Army Guard units mobilized to active duty indicated that some members of the units had concerns with the pay support customer service they received associated with their mobilization. With respect to pay issues associated with the Army Guard. receiving such pays and therefore require customer service. Army Guard soldiers had difficulty using the leave and earnings statements to determine if they received all entitled active duty pays and allowances. Several soldiers told us that they had difficulty discerning from their leave and Earnings statements whether they had received such pay or allowances. Our audit identified customer service as a problem area for the Army Guard. We found that the documentation provided to soldiers did not facilitate customer service, as discussed later in this report. We also found that Army Guard personnel were not properly trained to use leave and earn statements. study units told us that he was frustrated with the level of customer support his unit received during the initial mobilization process. Only two knowledgeable military pay officials were present to support active duty pay transaction processing for the 51 soldiers mobilized for his unit. He characterized the customer service he received at initial mobilization as very time-consuming and frustrating. As summarized in table 26, we identified a number of pay problems associated with the mobilization process for the U.S. Army and the Army National Guard. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. We used mobilization data supplied by the Army Operations Center to assist us in selecting the six units we used as our case studies. Using a data collection instrument, we asked for soldier views on pay problems and customer service experiences before, during, and after mobilization. There were 325 soldiers in these units; in total, we received 87 responses. We did not independently verify the reliability of these responses. The information we received from these units was based on the information provided by the unit commanders and was not independently verified. with their demobilization. Of the 43 soldiers responding to our question on satisfaction with customer support during the mobilization phase, 10 indicated satisfaction, while 15 reported dissatisfaction. In addition, of the 45 soldiers. responding to a question on customer support following demobilized, 5 indicated satisfaction while 29 indicated dissatisfaction. 5 indicated. satisfaction while 28 indicated dissatisfaction, and 29 indicated. dissatisfaction. with their customer support after demobilizing. Of those who responded to the question, 5 said they were satisfied, while 29 were dissatisfied with their support. Of soldiers who provided written comments about customer service, none provided any positive comments. Several had negative comments about the customer service they received, including such comments as “nonexistent,” “hostile, or “poor.” For example, a company commander for one of our case said, “I don’t know why I’m still here.’ “I’ve been here a long time, and I like it,’ he said. “It’s a good place to be. I like the people.“” effect of (1) recurring pay problems, (2) having two-thirds of their monthly training paychecks garnished to pay off often erroneous payroll-related debts, and (3) receiving poor payroll customer service during their active duty tours adversely affects morale. Several soldiers told us that the numerous pay problems they encountered would play a major role in their decisions whether to reenlist. As summarized, the Army National Guard has a history of having to pay back large sums of money to pay for training and other expenses. personal toll that these pay problems have had on mobilized soldiers and their families cannot be readily measured, but clearly may have a profound effect on reenlistment and retention. It is not surprising that cumbersome and complex processes and ineffective human capital strategies, combined with the use of an outdated pay system, are to blame for the pay problems. It's not surprising they're to blame, too, as they're the result of outdated pay systems and processes. It’s not surprising, though, that they’re to blame. They’ve been the cause of a pay problem. Some soldiers in the unit expressed significant dissatisfaction with the time and effort they, or their spouses, were required to spend attempting to identify and correct their pay. The labor-intensive efforts by the incorrect pay inputs by Army personnel, and an active Army in-theater finance office’s lack of knowledge about the unit's presence in Afghanistan had a number of adverse effects. Several B Company soldiers we interviewed expressed dissatisfaction with their time, effort, and their spouses' time, as a result of the pay problems. spent significant amounts of time and effort trying to correct the pay problems while deployed on critical mission operations in Afghanistan and surrounding areas. For example, as discussed in greater detail in our West Virginia case study summary, a soldier from that state spent significant time trying to fix his pay problems. The soldier was deployed to Afghanistan and the surrounding areas to support the U.S. military's mission in the war on terror. He was deployed for more than a year and a half to the war in Afghanistan. He spent time and focus away from the mission. to resume their civilian jobs experienced problems in receiving entitled active duty pays and related health care. In some cases, the problems we identified may have distracted these professional soldiers from mission requirements, as they spent considerable time and effort while deployed attempting to address these issues. All four soldiers experienced pay disruptions because existing guidance was not clear on actions needed to ensure that these problems were addressed. Further, they experienced significant pay problems as well as problems in receive needed medical care, in part, as a result of the lack of clearly defined implementing procedures in this area. soldiers experienced pay problems during their tour of active duty related to the proper payment of basic pay, basic allowance for subsistence, and family separation allowance. 3 soldiers experienced pay issues during their demobilization from Fort Stewart related to location-based pays such as hardship duty pay; and 3 soldiers had problems with basic pay during their discharge from the Army. The Army is currently in the process of reducing the number of soldiers stationed at Fort Stewart to 1,500. The reduction is expected to be completed by the end of the year. Special forces soldiers say pay problems have distracted them from mission operations. Several soldiers told us that the numerous pay problems they encountered would play a major role in their decision whether to reenlist. According to several soldiers from Colorado’s B Company, the combined pay problems of special forces soldiers have been a major factor in their decisions to stay in the military. In some cases, the problems have been so bad that they’ve been distracting them from important mission operations, soldiers said. one was really looking after their interest or even cared about them. These problems resulted in numerous personal and financial difficulties for these soldiers. “Not having this resolved means that my family has had to make greater sacrifices and it leaves them in an unstable environment. This has caused them to make more sacrifices,” says one soldier. ‘This has caused my family to make even more sacrifices,' says another. � ‘It has caused me to make many more sacrifices.’ ‘I have made more sacrifices than I ever thought I would,’ says a soldier. The majority of soldiers from Colorado’s B Company experienced some sort of pay problem during one or more of the three phases of their active duty mobilization. Overall, 64 of the 65 soldiers with the company experienced at least one pay problem associated with their mobilization. These pay problems included not receiving entitled pays and allowances at all; not receiving some entitled pay and allowances within 30 days; and for some, overpayments of pays and allowance. The company also identified 36 soldiers who were either overpaid or did not receive certain pay and allowance entitlements at all. Table 2 shows the number of soldiers with at least one pay problem during each of the three phases of active duty mobilization. Due to the lack of supporting documents at the state, unit, and battalion levels, we may not have identified all of the pay problems related to the active duty mobilizations of these units. The payment problems associated with the unit’s mobilization because the unit remobilized in February 2003, and unit administrative personnel did not retain payroll source documents relating to the prior mobilization. Four soldiers were eligible for continued active duty pay and associated medical benefits due to injuries incurred as a result of their involvement in Operation Enduring Freedom. Although these injuries precluded them from resuming their civilian.care, these pay-related problems for wounded soldiers caused significant hardship for them and their families. On December 5, 2001, West Virginia’s 19th Special Forces Group, 2nd Battalion, C Company, was called to active duty in support of Operation Endured Freedom for a 1-year tour. A timeline of the unit’s actions associated with its mobilization under Operation Enduring Freedom is shown in figure 10. As summarized in table 12, the majority of soldiers from C Company experienced some sort of pay problem during one or more of the three phases of their active duty mobilization. Overall, 86 of the 94 soldiers with B Company experienced pay problems during their mobilization. The majority of the soldiers with C Company also experienced pay issues during their mobilized phase of active duty. The U.S. Army is currently in the midst of a two-year mission in Afghanistan. duty on January 5, 2003. A time line of actions associated with the unit’s active duty mobilization is shown in figure 13. As summarized in table 16, at every stage of the unit's 1-year tour of active duty, soldiers experienced various pay problems. Of the 119 soldiers of the Mississippi on active duty in 2003, only two were paid for their time on the active duty. The rest of the soldiers were paid through the end of their tour of duty in 2007. Transfer Excess Dollar Listing after the electronic fund transfer payment has been processed. DJMS-RC does not contain edit checks to reject payments over the threshold amounts. During the period October 1, 2001, through March 31, 2003, of over $7,000 (net) each that were paid by DJMS.RC. Because the Electronic Fund Transfer Excess dollar Listing is printed after the payment is made, timely detection of errors is critical to help ensure that erroneous payments are recovered. DJMS-RC lacks effective edits to reject large proposed net pays over $4,000 at midmonth. DOD established thresholds to monitor and detect abnormally large payments. The lack of preventive controls over large payments poses an increased risk of fraudulent payments. For example, at one of the case study units we audited, one soldier received an erroneous electronic payment totaling $20,110 without prior approval. In addition, our analysis showed 76 other payroll-related payments, including 76 large lump sum payments. that fraud does not occur. DJMS-RC does not have system edits to prevent large debts from being assessed without review and approval prior to being processed. The system does not provide adequate explanations for pay-related debt assessments. Our case studies identified individuals who received debt notices in excess of $30,000. We found no evidence of fraud in any of our case studies. We also found that the system did not provide enough explanation for the large debts it was assessing. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here. DJMS-RC was not designed to make active duty pays and exclude federal taxes in a single pay transaction. To compensate for this system constraint, DFAS established a workaround that requires two payment transactions over a 2-month payroll cycle to properly for training. With Army Guard personnel now being paid from DJMS- RC for extended periods of active duty (as long as 2 years at a time), DFAS officials told us that the system is now stretched because it is being used to make payments and allowances that it was not structured for. of proposed pay transactions before they were submitted to DJMS-RC for processing. A USPFO official told us that because of the limited number of pay technicians available to process pay transactions they had little experience with, or training in, the policies and procedures to be followed in entering pay transactions. An Army finance office official said handling two sets of pay transaction processing procedures is often confusing because they are often required to process a large number of transactions to start. The Army Finance Office has no immediate comment. pay technicians are required to manually enter transactions for nonautomated pay and allowances every month. DJMS-RC was originally designed to process payroll payments to Army Reserve and Army Guard personnel on weekend drills or on short periods of annual active duty. Some pays, such as basic active duty pay and jump pay, can be generated automatically. Many of these pays and allowances require manual, monthly verification and reentry into DJMS -RC because, while some pays are generated automatically, some are not. allowances resulted from the inability of DJMS-RC to pay certain active duty pays and allowances automatically, inaccurate data entry, and inadequate documentation retention practices. For example, our audit discovered that USPFO pay technicians failed to manually enter cost of living allowance transactions into DJMS in a timely manner for 37 months. We are happy to clarify that this was not the case for the entire period of 37 months, and that we were able to correct the problem with the correct data entry process. DJMS-RC is a large, complex, and sensitive payroll computer application. DFAS Indianapolis is the central site for business line, and its Technical Support Office designs and maintains the core pay software. Users can sign on to DJMS- RC directly. to pay Army and Air National Guard and Army and. Air Force Reserve personnel. to the reserve component soldiers. To sign up for a free trial, visit the DFAS website at: http://www.fas.org/pension/payroll. the personnel and order-writing systems, limitations in DJMS-RC processing capabilities, and ineffective system edits of payments and debts. DOD has a significant system enhancement project under way to improve military pay. However, given that the effort has been under way for about 5 years and DOD has encountered challenges fielding it, it is not clear if the project will be completed in time for the 2014 fiscal year. The project is expected to be completed by the end of the year or early next year. The DFAS has already updated its current input system (Defense MilPay Office) to provide a warning to field finance personnel concerning the debt impact of tour cancellation (vice modification) for Reserve/Guard members. DJMS-RC would require a small to medium system change to edit debts that would be affected by tour cancellation. DoD RESPONSE: Concur. The DoD has no plans to make changes to the input system that would affect Reserve and Guard members. The DFAS will continue to monitor the situation and make any necessary changes. DJMS-RC and DJMS-AC systems by March 2006, with the first deployment to the Army Reserve and Army Guard in March 2005. In assessing the risks associated with DIMHRS implementation as part of its fiscal year 2004 budget package, DOD highlighted 20 such risks. For example, DOD reported a 60 percent risk that the system would not work as planned. For more information, visit the Defense Department's website at: http://www.defense.gov/dihrs. Audit work, provides that mobilized Army Guard soldiers are to be paid through the active Army pay system. This procedure, in effect during the mobilizations to support Operations Desert Shield and Desert Storm, was changed in 1995. In 1995, it was agreed that Army Guard personnel would no longer be moved to the active duty pay system, DJMS-AC, when mobilized to active duty. Maintaining such outdated references in current policies may have contributed to confusion by USPFO and active Army finance personnel regarding required actions. mobilized Army Guard soldiers previously. The GAO recommended that the Secretary of Defense direct the. Secretary of the Army, in conjunction with the Under Secretary. to identify any demobilizing soldiers whose tours in the. pay system were not adjusted to coincide with the demobilization date. The Joint Military Pay System - Reserve Component (DJMS-RC) provides the best service, according to the GAO. GAO: The Secretary of. Defense should direct the secretary of. the Army to identify soldiers whose. tours of duty in the pay system weren't adjusted to. coincide with their demobilizations date. determine housing allowances, into the pay system. As a result, we identified cases in which soldiers were underpaid housing allowances to which they were entitled. We also found instances in which personnel pay-affecting changes such as changes in family separation allowance, basic allowance for housing, and active duty pay increases from promotions, were not entered into thepay system promptly. Consequently, these soldiers either received active duty pays they were not entitled to, or were not paid for housing allowances. We found significant pay problems at the six Army Guard units we audited. These problems related to processes, human capital, and systems. We found that these pay problems could be attributed, in part, to the active Army servicing finance office’s lack of knowledge about how to process transactions through the Defense Joint Military Pay System-Reserve Component system (DJMS-RC) For example, we found that active Army finance offices didn't know how to enter location-based pays, such as hostile fire and hardship duty pays. the stop date that was entered into DJMS-RC. We also obtained documentation on and walk-throughs of the personnel-to-pay system interface process. We did not perform an exact calculation of the net pay soldiers should have received. Rather, we used available documentation and follow-up follow-ups to identify pay problems associated with our case study units. The study was published in the Journal of the Army National Guard Readiness Enduring Freedom, published by the Association of Army National Guards. pay transactions into DJMS-RC. Under certain conditions, either active Army pay servicing offices or USPFOs can process applicable pay-altering transactions. This pay input subsystem can be used by active Army finance offices to create transactions for military pay and allowances that are not reported at the time of mobilization. We obtained documentation and performed walk-throughs associated with pay status/active duty change transactions, such as those to ensure that tour start and stop dates match MMPA dates and that the soldier cannot be paid basic pay and allowance beyond MMPA. for entering changes to soldiers’ pay records enabled almost simultaneous attempts by two different pay offices to enter pay transactions into DJMS-RC for the same soldier. At another case study location we found that, in part because of confusion over responsibility for starting location-based payments, two pay offices were trying to enter the same transaction at the same time. As shown in the following illustration, two different offices were attempting to do the same thing at different times in the same place in the U.S. authorized active duty pays are in place for the soldiers in the unit, at the end of this process. This occurred because pay technicians did not update the stop date in DJMS-RC, which is necessary to terminate the automated active duty pay when soldiers leave active duty early. The active Army finance office’s failure to follow prescribed procedures resulted in overpayment of this pay to 40 soldiers. For did not amend the stop dates to reflect that C Company left the designated area before the stopped date entered into DJMS. In February 2003, pay personnel at the Colorado USPFO created a transaction to cancel the tour instead of processing an adjustment to amend the stop date consistent with the date on the Release from Active Duty Order. When this occurred, DJMS-RC automatically processed a reversal until May 31, 2002 and for others the payments continued until the end of their tour of active duty on December 4, 2002. These erroneous certain places hardship duty pays resulted in overpayments. In addition, processing capability limitations required the designated areas payment to be manually entered every. DJMS-RC withholds federal taxes the first month, identifies the taxes to be refunded during end- of-month pay processing, and then makes a separate payment during the first pay update the following month to refund the taxes that should not have been withheld. Soldiers’ taxes could not be refunding the same month because the DJMS- RC refund process occurs only one time a month. Army Guard USPFO and in-theatre active Army area servicing finance office. exempt soldiers’ pay for the combat zone tax exclusion. this shortage of staff knowledgeable about DJMS-RC processing procedures, the Fort Lewis finance office asked the California USPFO to supply additional personnel. The company commander for the unit told us that he was frustrated with the level of customer support his unit received as it moved through the initial mobilization process. Only two people were able to work together over a 2-month period after the unit was the unit’s mobilization date that the FortLewis finance office pay technicians began to enter these transactions into DJ MS-RC. DJMS- RC to stop these payments as required. 55 of 64 soldiers eligible for hostile fire pay were overpaid for at least 1 month beyond their departure from Afghanistan. For 11 soldiers, the finance office inadvertently overlooked entering one or more monthly hardship duty payments. The combination of erroneous certain places led to the overpayments being made in the first place, we found. We found that 57 of 64 soldier eligible for hardship duty pay wereOverpaid at least part or more Monthly hardship duty Payments. errors and input the necessary correcting transactions into DJMS-RC. Initially, the mobilization station finance office assigned an insufficient number of personnel to the task of starting active duty pays for the unit’s 51 mobilizing soldiers. One of the assigned pay technicians was not familiar with DJ MS-RC and consequently entered mobilized to active duty. In addition, the USPFO did not enter the required data to begin cost of living allowance pays for 36 of the unit's soldiers. These personnel were able to enter the omitted transactions needed to start active duty pay and correct the previous erroneous entries. A USPFO pay technician entered an incorrect stop date for the soldier’s active duty tour into DJMS-RC. The pay technician, after being notified of the error by the soldier, corrected the data. This resulted in the soldier receiving her pay nearly 4 months late. Five other soldiers continued to receive basic pay, the basic allowance for subsistence, and thebasic allowance for housing after the date available records show their active duty. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. financial documents necessary to start all entitled active duty pays at mobilization. This verification process disclosed that many soldiers had were physically fit for the ensuing mobilization. Not submitting the complete and current paperwork at the time of the mobilization was not considered a problem. Soldiers not submitting the correct paperwork were physically unfit for the mobilization. Soldiers who did submit the paperwork were able to start their active duty pay at the beginning of the mobilized period. The Army’s readiness program is a joint effort with the U.S. Air Force and the Army National Guard. Soldiers in the 114th Military Police Company attended a soldier readiness program at their unit armory. The purpose of this review was to ensure that all soldiers had proper administrative paperwork and financial documents. The active Army mobilization stations are to act as as specified in the DOD FMR, Volume 7A, chapter 26. The soldier readiness processing at that location is to review every mobilizing soldier’s pay account for accuracy, according to Army regulations. The soldiers were mobilized to the U.S. Army National Guard. records for all soldiers under their command as part of an annual soldier readiness review. (2) obtain and submit supporting documentation needed to start entitled active duty pay and allowances based on mobilization orders. However, we saw little evidence the commanders of our case study units carried out these tasks. The report was based on a survey of more than 1,000 soldiers in the U.S. Army Reserve and the Army National Guard. It was published in the online edition of this magazine, as well as in the print edition. For more information on the report, visit: http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/features/2013/01/29/the-report-on-us-soldiers-in-the-military-receives-more-than-1,000-page-report. During the initial mobilization, units receive an alert order and begin a mobilization preparation program, Soldier Readiness Processing (SRP) The financial portion of the SRP is conducted by one of the 54 United States Property and Fiscal Offices (USPFO) To verify the accuracy of pay records for each soldier and receive individual mobilization orders, they travel as a unit to a mobilization station. At the mobilization station, mobilized Army Guard personnel undergo a secondSRP review. In this second SRP, mobilization station personnel are responsible for confirming or correcting the results of the first SRP. The unit commander is responsible for ensuring that all personnel data for each soldier under their command are current. Mobilization pay technicians are required to promptly initiate pays that were not initiated during the first SRP and enter appropriate pay changes into DJMS-RC. The mobilization station commander is required to certify that the unit is ready for mobilization. If done correctly, soldiers will start to receive basic pay, basic allowances for housing, basic allowance for subsistence, and jump pay automatically based on the start date. input screens would require minimal programming changes. NGB officials stated that they planned to release a programming software change to all 54 USPFOs. The change would allow the start and stop dates to be automatically filled into the mobilization screens to reduce the need for reentry of some mobilization information. Because of the change, the U.S. Army will no longer be required to submit mobilization information to the NGB. The U.N. National Guard will not have to submit information to NGB for mobilization. this software change was scheduled to occur after the conclusion of our fieldwork, we did not verify its effectiveness. In any case, while this proposed programming change may be beneficial, it does not eliminate the need for manual entry and review of certain other mobilization data needed to initiate a mobilization. We did not check the effectiveness of the proposed change, but it is possible that it could be beneficial to some extent. We will continue to monitor the situation closely and report back on any changes that are made. end of active duty tour date documented on the soldier’s mobilization orders. This automated feature is intended to prevent erroneous payments to soldiers beyond their authorized active duty status. However, human intervention is required when a pay or allowance error is detected or an event occurs that requires a change. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. units we audited, USPFO pay personnel had to manually enter the soldier’s active duty tour start and stop dates into JUSTIS from a hard copy of the actual mobilization order. When we brought this to the attention of NGB officials, they stated that providing the auto-fill functionality to the mobilization would be a better solution. We are still waiting to hear back from the NGB on this matter. We will continue to monitor the situation closely and provide updates as we learn more. prior to the end date of the current active duty tour. Concerning the specific case in Colorado cited by the GAO, DFAS and the Army have implemented changes to the input systems to warn the operator processing a tour cancellation when the correct input should be a tour curtailment. The Army says it is investigating the incident. The GAO says the Army has taken steps to correct the problem. The U.S. Army says the problem has been corrected and that the Army is working with DFAS to address it. trained military or civilian resources to execute active duty pay and allowance surge processing requirements. However, this memorandum does not address the resources needed for surge processing at USPFOs. As discussed previously, pay problems at the case study units were caused in part by USPfo military pay sections attempting to execute surge processing. The pay problems were also caused by the failure of USP FOs to provide surge processing resources to the military pay section in the first place, according to the report. support surge processing at mobilization and demobilization sites. provide additional resources to support surge processing for pay start and stop transaction requirements at Army Guard home stations during initial soldier readiness programs. Determine whether issues concerning resource allocations for the military pay operations identified at our case study will be addressed. Find out if the Army Guard will be able to provide surge processing support for Army National Guard personnel during initial Soldier readiness programs for the first time in the history of the Army. find out if this will be possible for the Army National Guards. The Army will work with the National Guard on resourcing the USPFOs for mobilization/demobilization surges. The Army has primary responsibility to provide direct the Secretary of the Army, in conjunction with the Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller), to consider expanding the scope of the existing memorandum of understanding between DFAS and the Army concerning the provisions of resources to support surge processing at mobilization and demobilization sites. (p. 75/Draft Report) DoD RESPONSE: Concur. The National Guard could use additional National Guard soldiers being brought on active duty in a Temporary Tour of Active Duty status to augment the USPFO staff. The additional requirement and funding will need to be found. DoD RESPONSE: Concur. (http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-263876/National-Guard-could-use-extra-soldiers-to-support-surge-requirements.html#storylink=cpy) Iraq in November 2003 to specifically address reserve component support. For the midterm (6 months to 2 years), the training on reserve component pay input for soldiers in finance battalions and garrison support units will be evaluated. The goal is to determine how best to expand the training within the Army total training. The training will focus on the reserve component's pay input. It will also focus on how to use the reserve to support other units in the Army. For more information, visit the U.S. Army Reserve Training Program website. infrastructure, particularly in light of the planned integration of reserve and active component pay processing into a single system. The Army finance school is already evaluating the expansion of the current instruction on mobilized reserve component pay in the training curriculum for the finance advanced individual training course. RECOMMENDATION 11: The Army Finance School should consider adding a course on the use of mobilized reserve pay to its finance advancedindividual training course for the first time in the Army's history. For more information, go to: http://www.armyfinanceschool.org/training. The US Army Reserve Command (USARC) has expanded training programs on DJMS-RC to help support the immediate training needs of deploying units and mobilization/demobilization stations. Over 35 training events have occurred on the system. The system is currently used to monitor completion of JUMPS Standard Terminal Input System (JUSTIS) training for USPFO military pay technicians. It is also used to track the progress of USARC-funded training programs for reservists in the Army Reserve. since February 2002 in support of deploying units and mobilization/demobilization sites. The Army finance school is working with USARC to develop an exportable training package on DJMS-RC, which should be available within the next 6 months. DFAS and the Army are sending a joint training team to Kuwait and Iraq to train soldiers in Iraq and Kuwait. The training package will be available to the public within 6 months of the training package's release, according to the Army. The package will cost $1,000 per person. will prepare a standard information flyer to be given to all mobilizing reservists. The flyer will address entitlements as well as sources of pay support. It will be published via Army Knowledge Online and incorporated into the overall revision to procedural guidance addressed in response to recommendation one. RECOMMENDation 1: A standard information flyers will be issued to all mobilized reservists to provide them with information on entitlements and sources of support. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 909090 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. The toll free number for this center as well as the myPay internet address will be incorporated in the flyer discussed in response to recommendation 13. Until the implementation of DIMHRS, with full Services.inquiries for all Services, the number will continue to be advertised in locations such as Army Knowledge Online. The number will also continue to continue being advertised in other places such as the Army Knowledge Web site. The toll-free number will remain at 1-800-273-8255. The myPay web address will also remain at myPay.com. Command Regulations 500-3-3, Reserve Component Unit Commander Handbook, 500-2-4, Installation Commander Handbook and 500-1-5, Demobilization Plan. We also reviewed various Under Secretary of Defense memorandums, a memorandum of agreement between Army and DFAS, and Army National Guard guidance applicable to pay for mobilized reserve component Army. We are jointly building on the existing guidance procedures as published in FORSCOM REG 500- 3-3 (FORSCOM Mobilization and Deployment Planning System Form Deps, Volume 3, Reserve component Commanders’ Handbook dated July 15, 1999) and interviewed cognizant agency officials. With respect to applicable policies and procedures, we obtained and reviewed 10 U.S.C. Section 12302, DOD Directive Number 1235.10, “Activation, Mobilization & Demobilization of the Ready Reserve;” DOD FMR, Volume 7A, ‘Military Pay Policy and Procedures Active Duty and Reserve Pay’; and the Army Forces. We also reviewed the Department of Defense’s pay policy and procedures for active duty and reserve personnel. guidance will be published within the next 30 days, which will further articulate the specific responsibilities of the servicing finance activities. This breakout of responsibilities will also be provided in a simple matrix form to visually reinforce this guidance. Within approximately 60 days, the Army and DFAS will begin compliance with the new guidance. The Army will then begin to implement the guidance within the Army within 60 days of the guidance being published. The guidance will be released in a matrix form and will be available to the public within 30 days. reviews of the mobilization/demobilization stations to ensure adherence to published guidance and to provide any further assistance these offices may require. Within the next 3 to 6 months, the task force will build upon the existing guidance to provide comprehensive procedures and related standards, down to the individual technician level. The task force is expected to complete its work within the next three to six months. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. Guard servicing locations. Fort Knox and Fort Campbell finance personnel were either unaware of their capability or unwilling to take the actions needed to address the unit's active duty pay concerns. Colorado’s B Company soldiers turned back because they were Army Guard soldiers. According to DFAS officials, the active Army finance offices have the capability to service Army GuardSoldiers and should therefore contact their home state Army Guard USPFO. For more information on DFAS, visit www.dfas.org. required by Army guidance, Fort Knox personnel conducted a second soldier readiness program to identify and fix unresolved pay issues associated with the unit’s mobilization. Based on our findings that the pay problems continued after this review, it does not appear that the active Army finance office at Fort Knox at the time was aware of the problems. We are happy to make clear that Fort Knox is aware of these issues and is working to resolve them. We apologize for any inconvenience caused by these issues, and we are working to address them. active Army locations directed the soldiers back to the USPFO because they were Army Guard soldiers. We also found procedures were not clear on how to ensure timely processing of active duty medical extensions for injured soldiers. Army Regulation 135-381 provides that Army Guard soldier who are incapacited should be sent back to USPfo for medical care. We found procedures not clear how to ensuring timely processing for injured Army GuardSoldiers. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. soldiers themselves were similarly confused. Many of the complaints we identified concerned confusion over whether Army Guard personnel mobilized to active duty should be served by the USPFO because they were Army Guard soldiers or by the active Army. One soldier told us that he was confused about whether he was serving as an Army Guard soldier or as a member of the federal government. He said he was also confused over whether he had been mobilized to federal service or to the Army Guard because he was in the Army. to spend attempting to identify and correct problems with their pay. Another complaint concerned the circular nature of any attempts to get assistance. For example, we were told the USPFO referred soldiers to the active Army finance office and that office referred them back to the U.S. PFO officials told us that the circularnature of giving assistance to soldiers was sometimes unavoidable. for example, they said that once soldiers left their home unit and the Fort Bragg and in-theater finance offices assumed pay responsibilities, the US PFO informed soldiers and their spouses to contact these active Army Finance offices. informed that a soldier did not return with his or her unit, or how the USPFO was to take action to validate the status of such soldiers. At one of our case study locations, officials at the U.S.PFO informed us that they became aware that a soldiers had returned early, or that they were aware that he or she had not returned with the rest of the unit. We asked them how they were going to verify the soldier's status. They told us they were waiting to hear back.  unit administrator told us he contacted the servicing area active Army finance office for the 101st Airborne. The finance office instructed him to contact the USPFO in West Virginia because his unit was assigned to a West Virginia Army Guard unit. However, when he contacted West Virginia officials for service, officials from that office refused to help him. The U.S. Army Pay and Allowance Office says it is working with the unit administrator to resolve the issue. For more information, go to: www.usapfo.org. Pay technicians at the West Virginia USPFO attempted to help take care of some of the National Guard soldiers’ pay problems. They were told by personnel at DFAS-Indianapolis not to get involved. DFAS policy clearly states that it is the active Army finance offices that have primary responsibility for correcting the soldiers' pay issues. The active Army Finance office in Uzbekistan instructed the unit to contact the West West VirginiaUSPFO to start location-based pays for the deployed soldiers from C Company. the military pay section of the USPFO of their home state’s Army Guard, the designated active Army area servicing finance office, and a toll free number, 1-888-729-2769 (Pay Army). While soldiers had multiple sources from which they could obtain service, we found indications that many Army Guard soldiers were displeased the Army pertains only to the management and resourcing of Defense Military Pay Offices, to include their role in support of mobilization/ demobilization stations. office instructed him to contact the USPFO in his home state of Colorado to provide service for his pay problems. Several systems issues were significant factors impeding accurate and timely payroll payments to mobilized Army Guard soldiers. The lack of an integrated or effectively interfaced pay system with both Army finance office could not effectively answer questions concerning their pay entitlements or transaction processing documentation requirements. After not receiving any pay support from the active Army servicing finance location, the unit’s soldiers told us they contacted their Army Guard USPfo in Colorado for assistance. Colorado National Guard's Family Support Group to pay bills. DFAS Indianapolis mobilization procedures authorize the Army Guard’s USPFOs to enter transactions for deployed soldiers. However, we found existing guidance did not provide for clear responsibility and accountability between USP FOs and the active Army’S mobilization station and in-theater finance offices. We found that the current system does not provide clear responsibility or accountability between the Guard and the mobilized Army. We are working with the Guard to improve the system. their families to access for customer service for any pay problems. (p. 77/Draft Report) DoD RESPONSE: Concur. The existing centralized information sources on individual soldiers pay will be expanded. DFAS is developing a separate view-only Personal Identification Number capability which soldiers will be able to give their dependents so they can see the Leave and Earning Statement without being able to change anything on the pay record. This enhancement is scheduled for August 2004. The DFAS also operates a central customer service center for pay.  DFAS Denver is responsible for designing, developing, and maintaining customer requirements for the Military and Civilian Pay Services. SIDPERS is a personnel database maintained and used by the Army Guard at the 54 state-level personnel offices. It captures data on personnel-related actions (e.g. discharge, promotion, demotion actions that impact soldiers’ pay) and is used to help the Army with pay planning and management. The Army Guard uses the database to track personnel actions, such as promotion and demotion, that affect soldiers' pay. with a Reserve Component Pay Support Office. Within the next 6 months, DFAS and the Army will jointly review how these existing mechanisms can be used to more succinctly capture data specifically related to mobilized soldiers and units. The GAO recommended that the Secretary of Defense direct the Reserve component pay support office to be set up within the next six months. For more information, visit DFAS' website or the Army's website. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. Secretary of the Army, in conjunction with the Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller), to establish who is accountable for stopping active duty pays for soldiers who return home separate from their units. (p. 75/Draft Report) DoD RESPONSE: Concur. Within the next 30 days, DFAS, in cooperation with the Army,. will establish a plan to stop active duty pay for returning soldiers. ( p. 75 / Draft Report) DFAS RESPONSIBILITY: To do so within 30 days. for soldiers who return from active duty earlier than their units. DFAS-Indianapolis guidance provides only that “the supporting USPFO will be responsible for validating the status of any soldier who does not return to a demobilized status with a unit’” The guidance did not state how the USPfo should be used to verify soldiers’ demobilization status with their units, or how it would work with the Army’s special operations forces and other units. The local servicing active Army finance office also has primary responsibility for entering transactions to stop hardship duty pay, hostile fire pay, and the combat zone tax exclusion when soldiers leave an authorized hostile fire/combat zone. According to DFAS-Indianapolis Reserve Component mobilization procedures, the finance office is responsible for making the transactions. The transactions were made after soldiers were no longer entitled to receive hardship duty or combat tax pay, according to the Army's finance office. They were also made before soldiers were deployed to hostile fire or combat zones. that prevent soldiers from being paid for pay and allowances beyond the stop date for the active duty tour. Soldiers can also be paid for more than one tour with overlapping dates, or being paid twice during a pay period. Each month, DFAS Indianapolis pay personnel receive an Electronic Fund to help cover the cost of living for soldiers in the U.S. military. The Electronic Fund can be used to help pay for soldiers' medical bills, living expenses, and other expenses. The fund can also help pay soldiers' living expenses.  DFAS documentation shows that finance personnel at Fort Bragg incorrectly initiated a recurring certain places hardship duty payment for soldiers in C Company. According to DFAS policy, when soldiers from C Company was required to manually enter the designated area payments for each soldier every month the unit was in a designated area. For some soldiers, payments continued for some months after the unit left the combat zone. Consequently, there may have been other deployment-related pay problems for C Company that we were not able to identify. receive at least 1 month of their special duty assignment pay. According to DFAS procedures, the unit’s Army Guard USPFO should have initiated these pays. The 49th Military Police Company mistakenly sent the pay documentation to Fort Lewis with their pay documentation, and as a result, it was not until more than 2 months after the incident that they received their pay. In addition, these problems could have been minimized if they were identified and corrected by the Army mobilization station finance office at Fort Knox. The late payments during the mobilization phase primarily resulted from California USPFO military pay personnel’s lack of understanding of their responsibility for initiating active duty pays. According to DFAS reserve component mobilization procedures; the CaliforniaUSPFO was responsible for initiating these pays. However, a California USpFO spokesman said the agency was not responsible for the late payments. The late payments were due to the late payment of the cost of living allowance by the U.S. Department of Defense. The cost of the living allowance is a measure of how much a person earns per year. command support components, as well as active Army finance components and DFAS, have key roles in this process. In addition, there are five key computer systems involved in authorizing, entering, and processing active duty pays to mobilized Army Guard soldiers. Army’s standard is a result of the inability of a myriad of current systems with multiple, complex interfaces to fully support current business process requirements. Figure 6 provides an overview of the five systems currently involved in processing Army Guard pay and personnel information. 3, 4 and 5 provide an overview of the process, particularly of the types of DOD organizations involved. They do not fully capture the numbers of different DOD components involved. Thousands of Army Guard (individual units and state-level organizations), active Army, and DFAS components may be involved in authorizing, or not authorizing, the program. For more information, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/30/military/military-authorization-program/index.html. that are involved in servicing Army Guard soldiers’ location-based active duty pays. The Army National Guard Financial Services Center is responsible for providing guidance, training, and oversight and coordination for active duty pay to Army Guard personnel. DOD, DFAS, Army, and the Army Guard have issued their own guidelines for Army Guard payroll payments to mobilized soldiers. For confidential support call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. For support in the UK, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch. starting active duty pay transactions; active Army finance offices or DOD Military Pay Offices at over 15 mobilization stations across the U.S. that are involved in processing Army Guard personnel to and from their active duty locations. 28 active Army area servicing finance offices at over 50 locations worldwide. The Army Guard is the second-largest Army unit, behind only the Air Force. It has more than 100,000 members, the majority of whom are based in Texas and Louisiana. It is the largest Army unit in the world, followed by the Marine Corps. Army servicing finance office, which may be within the United States or in a foreign country, is responsible for initiating pays earned while the soldier is deployed. Pay technicians start hostile fire pay for each soldier listed on a battle roster or flight manifest. Other location-based pays, such as hardship duty, require pay transactions each month. Active Army servicing finance offices use DMO to enter pay transactions for soldiers deployed to Iraq and Afghanistan. For more information, go to ArmyServicingFinance.com. for entering into DMO hardship duty pay, for deployed soldiers entitled to these types of pays and for which a performance certification is received from the respective unit commanders. However, because pay transactions must be manually entered every month soldiers are entitled to receive these pays, it is often difficult for soldiers to enter these payments into their bank accounts. For more information on how to enter into hardship duty pays, visit the DMO website. For further information, visit DMO’s website or call the Army Pay Office on 08457 90 90 90. Active Army in-theater finance personnel were unfamiliar with the required procedures to follow in starting hardship duty pays, soldiers say. This resulted in soldiers receiving two different location-based types of hardship duty pay for the same duty. Army Guard soldiers told us the active Army in the theater finance personnel did not follow the correct procedures to start hardship duty payments. The Army Guard said the soldiers were paid based on their location, not their duty location. The U.S. Army said it is investigating the matter. state-level command organizations and federal (active Army finance locations at mobilization/demobilization stations and at area servicing finance offices) However, we found a significant number of instances in which critical coordination requirements were not clearly defined. Individual Case Illustration: Confusion over Responsibility for Entering Pay Transactions Results in Family Obtaining a $10,000 Paycheck. Family Obtains a $1,000 paycheck. Family gets a $2,000 check. Family receives a $3,000 payment. Component- Mobilization Procedures, to clearly define the roles and responsibilities between mobilization/demobilization stations, United States Property and Fiscal Offices (USPFOs), and deployed Army finance elements. A joint task force has been established to review existing procedural guidance, lessons learned to date, and available metrics. As a first step, expanded central central offices will be established in Washington, D.C. and New York. The task force will review existing guidance and learn from lessons learned. active Army mobilization stations and in-theater servicing finance offices with respect to responsibility for entering transactions. For example, at one of our case study locations, we found that this broad authority unit while it was deployed. Once the soldiers arrive in- theater, an active Army finance office assigned to the unit is responsible for initiating assignment and location-based pays for the unit’s soldiers in DJMS-RC. We found that the active Army in theater finance offices did not always know which units they were responsible for. integration of pay and personnel, the processing of pay transactions will still require the movement of some entitlement information/authorization from units and personnel to finance via paper. As such, a network of finance support activities is required to geographically align with deployed combat and supporting personnel units. As always, pay continues to be paid in full and on time to all personnel and units in the Army. The Army is committed to providing the best service possible to our troops and their families, and to ensuring their safety and well-being. remains essentially a command responsibility. For the individual soldier, the single source of pay support is his or her unit, which in-turn interfaces with the appropriate finance and personnel activities. For dependents of deployed soldiers, thesingle source for finance, or any administrative issues, is either the rear detachment of the army or a local military unit. For more information, visit the U.S. Department of Defense's official website, or call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255. The National Guard Bureau (NGB) assists the Army Guard in this partnership. NGB is a joint bureau of the Departments of the Army and the Air Force and is charged with overseeing the federal functions of theArmy Guard and Air Guard. All Army forces are integrated under DOD’s “total Army forces’ ‘total Army’ policy. N GB also acts as a liaison between the Department of the. Army and Air Force, and the states. It helps the Army. Guard and the. Air Guard procure funding and administer policies. The President has the authority to mobilize the Army Guard, putting them in federal duty status. While federalized, the units answer to the Combatant Commander of the theatre in which they are operating and, ultimately, to the President. Nonfederalized Army Guard members’ pay and allowances are paid with state funds while federalized Army Guards are paid for with federal funds. Even when notFederalized, The Army Guard has a federal mission to maintain properly trained and equipped units, available for prompt mobilization. Army Guard’s state mission is perhaps the most visible and well known. Army Guard units battle fires or help communities deal with floods, tornadoes, hurricanes, snowstorms, or other emergency situations. In times of civil unrest, the citizens of a state rely on the Army Guard to respond, if needed. During the U.S. Civil War, the Army National Guard was created to protect the nation from the effects of the Civil War. The Army National Guardsmen were trained to fight in the field and in the air. Reports to the governor of the state, or in the case of the District of Columbia, the mayor. At the state level, the governors have the ability, under the Constitution of the United States, to call up members of the Army Guard in times of domestic emergency or need. The president has the power to order the use of the National Guard in the event of a national emergency. The National Guard is a part of the U.S. armed forces and is based in Washington, D.C. While on active duty, all Army Guard soldiers earn various statutorily authorized pays and allowances. The types of pay and allowances soldiers are eligible to receive vary depending upon rank and length of service, dependency status, skills and certifications acquired, duty location, and the difficulty of the assignment. We focused on 14 basic types of pays and allowance applicable to the Army Guard units we selected for case studies. As shown in table 1, we categorized these 14 pay and allowance types into four categories. addition, Army Guard soldiers may be eligible for tax advantages associated with their mobilization to active duty. That is, mobilized Army Guard. soldiers assigned to or working in a combat zone are entitled to exclude from taxable income certain military pay. that would otherwise be taxable. As shown in figure, the Army Guard is eligible for a number of tax advantages. For more information, visit the U.S. Department of the Army's website, or call 1-800-273-8255. enlist for 8 years and are entitled to a number of benefits while serving in the Army Guard. After their enlistment periods, former Army Guard members are entitled. to veterans’ benefits, such as veterans' health care and burial benefits. For more information, visit the U.S. Army Guard's official website or call 1-800-273-8255. For confidential support on suicide matters call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. to call troops to active duty pursuant to 10 U.S.C. Section 12302. Approximately 93,000 Army Guard soldiers were activated as of March. The Secretary of Defense delegated to the Secretary of the Army the authority to order Army Guard Soldiers to activeduty as part of the overall mobilization effort. It is not known how many soldiers have been activated so far. The National Guard is the second-largest military service in the United States, after the Air Force. It has more than 1.2 million members. Army Guard soldiers. The need for such actions is increasingly imperative in light of the current extended deployment of Army Guard soldiers in their crucial role in Operation Iraqi Freedom and anticipated additional mobilizations. Immediate steps to at least increase the number of soldiers in the Army Guard must be taken, the president says. The Army Guard is a vital part of the U.S. military and should be mobilized in support of this operation and the global war on terrorism, he says. It is also a vital component of the National Guard's ability to provide security in Iraq. Army Guard members are required to attend one drill weekend each month and one annual training period (usually 2 weeks in the summer) each year. The Army Guard has armories and training facilities in more than 2,800 communities. After Basic Training, soldiers go to their Advanced Individual Training, which teaches them the special skills they will need for their jobs in the Army Guard. This training can usually be scheduled to accommodate civilian job or school constraints. The U.S. Army is a partner of the Army National Guard. The Army Guard is the oldest component of any of the uniformed services. It traces its roots to the colonial militia, and claims a “birth”of 1636. Today, the Army Guard exists in 54 locations that include all 50 states, the District of Columbia, and three territories: Guam, the Virgin Islands, and the U.S. territories of Guam and the Cayman Islands. The Army Guard was established in 1636, and has been in existence ever since. and Puerto Rico. There are about 2,300 Army Guard units within these locations and over 350,000 Army Guard members. During peacetime, Army Guard. units report to the adjutant generals of their states or territories, or in the. case of the District of Columbia, to the Commanding General. Each adjutants general is responsible for his or her state or territory's Army Guard unit. The U.S. Army Reserve is the largest branch of the armed forces, with more than 1.2 million members. reviews and carry out monthly reconciliations. Establish an ongoing mechanism to monitor the quality and completion of training for both pay and finance personnel and unit commanders. Identify and evaluate options for improving customer service provided to mobilized Army Guard soldiers by providing improved procedures for informing soldiers of their Secretary of Defense. (p. 76/Draft Report) DoD RESPONSE: Concur. Within the next 30 days, the Army will implement the proposed changes to its pay and allowance system. The importance of conducting annual pay support documentation reviews and monthly reconciliations will be incorporated into precommand courses at the company level for the National Guard by the end of Fiscal Year 2004. The GAO recommended that the Secretary of Defense direct the DoD to conduct the reviews. DoD RESPONSE: Concur with the GAO's recommendation. The National Guard will conduct the pay review and reconciliation process in advance of each pay period. The review will take place in the spring and summer of 2004. Guard soldiers. We interviewed officials from the National Guard Bureau, State USPFOs, Army and DOD military pay offices, as well as unit commanders to obtain an understanding of their experiences in applying these policies and procedures. In addition, as part of our audit, we performed a review of certain to the government or to the Army Guard soldiers. On October 10, 2003, we requested comments on a draft Army Guard policy. We briefed DOD and Army officials, National Guard bureau officials, DFAS officials, and USPfo officials in the selected states on the details of the audit. government auditing standards. The GAO recommended that the Secretary of Defense direct the Director of the Defense Finance and Accounting Service (DFAS) in a way that would make it easier for the Defense Department to manage its finances. The Defense Department's budget for 2003 was $1.2 billion. The Pentagon's budget was $8.1 billion. It was supposed to be $9.9 billion, but the GAO said it should be closer to $10.5 billion, not $11.7 billion, because of a lack of funding. mobilized Army Guard soldiers. Clarify the policies and procedures for how to properly amend active duty orders, including medical extensions. Require Army Guard commands and unit commanders to carry out complete monthly pay and personnel records reconciliations and take necessary actions to correct any pay and Personnel record mismatches found each month. For more information on the Army Guard, go to: http://www.armyguard.org/. For more on the National Guard, visit: http:www.nps.gov/armyguest. of Defense (Comptroller), to clarify the policies and procedures for how to properly amend active duty orders, including medical extensions. (p. 75/Draft Report) DoD RESPONSE: Concur. For medical extensions, the Army published revised guidance on June 10, 2003, reinforcing procedures on this process. Included were the requirements for publishing orders, and the procedures for approving medical extensions for active duty personnel. ( p. 74/ Draft Report) For more on this story, go to: http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/features/article-256545/Army-revised-guidance-medical-extensions. GAO’s Standards for Internal Control in the Federal Government states that effective human capital practices are critical to establishing and maintaining a strong internal control environment. Management should take steps to ensure that its organization has the appropriate number of employees, and that appropriate humanCapital practices are in place, according to the GAO. The GAO recommends that all federal agencies have a human capital program in place by the end of the year. For more information, go to: http://www.gao.gov/internalcontrol. We applied the policies and procedures prescribed in these documents to the observed and documented procedures and practices followed by the various DOD components involved in providing active duty pays to Army soldiers. We also used the internal controls standards provided in the Standards for Internal Control in Federal Government. We applied the Policies and Procedures prescribed in These Documents to the Observed and Documented Procedures and Practices followed by The Army. For more information on the Army's active duty pay program, visit the Army Payroll website. For the full report, go to: http://www.armypayroll.com.  policies and procedures were not well understood or consistently applied across the potentially hundreds of organizations and thousands of personnel involved in paying mobilized Army Guard personnel. Confusion centered principally around pay processing responsibility for Army Guard soldiers as they move from state control to federal control and back again. To be effective, current processes rely on close coordination and communication between state (Army Guard unit) and federal (federal) agencies. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. Update policies and procedures to reflect current legal and DOD administrative requirements with respect to active duty pays and allowances. Consider expanding the scope of the existing memorandum of understanding between DFAS and the Army concerning the provision of resources to transaction processing requirements for mobilized Army Guard soldiers. (p. 75/Draft Report) DoD RESPONSE: Concur. In Fiscal Year 2004, DFAS, the Army, and National Guard will respectively update the cited regulations under their cognizance to the most current and accurate requirements. Defense (Comptroller), to take the following actions to address the issues we found with respect to the existing processes, human capital, and automated systems relied on to pay activated Army Guard personnel. Establish a unified set of policies and procedures for all Army Guard, Army, and DFAS personnel to follow for servicing active duty pays for Army Guard Personnel mobilized to active duty. (p. 74/GAO Draft Report) DoD RESPONSE: Concur. DFAS and the Under Secretary of Defense. consistently applied with respect to determining (1) the actions required to make timely, accurate active duty pays to mobilized Army Guard soldiers and (2) the component responsible, among Army Guard, active Army, and DFAS, for taking the required actions. Further, we found instances in which existing guidance was out of concerns at all three phases of the active duty tours. Consistent with the confusion we found among Army. Guard and active Army finance components concerning responsibility for processing pay transactions for mobilized. units exist at all 54 USPFOs, and if so, take appropriate actions to address these issues. Modify existing training policies to determine whether concerns over relatively low graded military pay technicians exist. (p. 76/Draft Report) Enclosure grade levels in the USPfos’ Comptroller sections and the current grade levels for military pay. ( p. 76-7) The current grade level for military. pay is ‘B’. The current level of military pay is a ‘C’ grade. locations we audited. During our audit period, two of the six case study locations had fewer military pay technicians on board than they were authorized. Officials at several of the 6 case study units also stated that restrictions on rank/grade at which USPFOs are allowed to hire personnel for their jobs were in place. The U.S. Army is one of the largest military contractors in the world, with a budget of more than $1.2 billion. The Army is also the largest employer of women and minorities, with more than 100,000 employees. military pay technicians at the USPFOs as part of the ongoing quality assurance review program. The appropriate mechanism for monitoring the training of unit commanders and finance battalion personnel is dependent on the location of that training in the overall Army training infrastructure. Unit training is assessed as being in the Army's overall training infrastructure (i.e. it is part of an overall training program) and is monitored by the Army’s Pay and Finance Office (PFO) The PFOs are responsible for paying the military pay technicians. than the positions in the military pay section. The highest pay grade of the nonsupervisory pay technicians at the six case study units was a GS-7, and the majority of personnel were in the GS-6 pay grade. Although the Army and DFAS have established an agreement that in part seeks to reduce the number of military pay technicians, the study found that the Army still has more than 1,000 more than the DFAS has paid out in bonuses to military personnel in the past year than it did in 2010. pay sections of the USPFOs, (2) the relatively lower grade structure for nonsupervisory personnel in the U.S.’ military pay sections in comparison with the grades for similar positions in other sections, and (3) as discussed military pay section made it difficult to recruit and retain employees. For example, a USPfo official told us that retaining personnel in. the military Pay section was particularly difficult because similar administrative positions in. other sections were typically higher paying and provided better benefits.  appendixes I–VI provide details of the pay experiences of the soldiers at the case study units we audited. Procedural requirements, particularly in light of the potentially hundreds of organizations and thousands of personnel involved, were not well understood or well understood.may adversely affect the Army’s ability to retain these valuable personnel. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. authorizations, each state allocates positions to each of the sections within a USPFO. We compared the actual number of personnel on board to the NGB-authorized staffing level for the military pay sections at the case study. We also compared the staffing levels for the vendor and contract pay sections to the actual staffing levels at the cases study. For more information, visit the U.S. Navy Payrolls Project website or the USNPS Payroll Project website. For confidential support, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org. The Army Guard began offering training on mobilization pays and transaction processing in fiscal year 2002. There is no requirement for USPFO pay technicians to attend these training courses. Two of the five scheduled courses had formal training on JUSTIS, DJMS-RC, or mobilization pay processing requirements and procedures. Require unit commanders to receive training on the importance of adhering to requirements to conduct annual pay support documentation, the report says. The report also says the Army should require all USPfo and active Army pay and finance personnel to receive appropriate training upon assuming such duties. An extensive, cumbersome, and labor-intensive process has evolved to pay mobilized Army Guard soldiers for their active duty service. While figures including hiring, training, and retention, are in place and effectively operating, our audit identified concerns with the numbers of knowledgeable personnel dedicated to entering and processing active duty pays and allowances to mobilized Army Guards. Our audit work identified concerns. with the human capital resources allocated to this area, primarily with respect to the Army Guard military. pay processing at the state-level USPFOs. processing, and paying mobilized Army Guard soldiers. An estimated 2,300 local Army Guard home units, unit commanders, and unit administrators are involved in maintaining up-to-date soldier personnel and related pay records. 54 state-level Army Guard commands, including both USPFOs and state- level personnel offices, are also involved in authorizing and roles in this area. Army Guard operating procedures provide that the primary responsibility for administering Army Guard soldier’s pay as they are mobilized to active duty rests with the 54 USP FOs. sufficient numbers of well-trained, competent military pay professionals can undermine the effectiveness of even a world-class integrated pay and personnel system. Such training is critical given that military pay personnel must be knowledgeable about the extensive and complex pay eligibility and processing requirements. We also found that such training is particularly important for active Army pay personnel who have taken either of the recently established training courses in the area. It is particularly crucial given the extensive, cumbersome, and labor-intensive process requirements that have evolved to support active duty pay to Army personnel. of both active Army personnel and Army Guard and other reserve personnel using different processes and systems at the same time. While the Army Guard offers training for their military pay technicians, we found that there was no overall monitoring of Army Guard pay personnel training. Neither Army Guard unit commanders nor active Army commanders were required to receive training on the importance of the pay to on-board personnel reconciliations. We were told that the training would be used to proactively identify Army Guard soldiers who should no longer receive active duty pays. may have extensive experience and knowledge of pay processing requirements for regular Army soldiers, but may not be well versed in the unique procedures and pay transaction entry requirements for Army Guard soldiers. Army Guard pay technicians relied primarily on on-the-job-training and phone calls to the Army Guard Financial Services Center in Indianapolis or to other military pay technicians at other locations to determine how to process active duty pays to activated Army Guard personnel. During our work at the case study units, we identified numerous instances in which military pay technician case study locations we audited. Few of the military pay technicians on board at the six locations we audited had received formal training on pay eligibility and pay processing requirements for mobilized Army Guard personnel. NGB provides annual authorization for the overall staffing levels for each state. There are no DOD or Army requirements for military pay personnel to receive training. DoD RESPONSE: Concur. The National Guard has instituted mobilization specific training for pay technicians. The national Guard Financial Services Center quality assurance program has also been instituted. (p. 76/Draft Report) for ensuring active duty pays for Army Guard personnel mobilized to active duty. Establish performance measures for obtaining supporting documentation and processing pay transactions (for example, no more than 5 days would seem reasonable). Establish who is accountable for stopping active duty pay for soldiers who return home earlier than reinforce existing procedures on responsibilities for stoppingActive Duty Pay for Soldiers who Return Home separate from their units. This will be part of the revised guidance identified in response to recommendation one. In addition, mechanisms have been established to perform automated comparisons of personnel demobilization records and the Defense. which Army Guard soldiers’ active duty pays continued after their demobilization. Available documentation showed only one instance in the six case study units we visited in which a reconciliation of the unit commander’s finance report resulted in action to stop improper active duty pay and allowances. We found procedural guidance did not clearly specify how to carry out assigned responsibilities, the study found. The study was published in the June issue of the journal “The American Journal of Banking and Finance.’’ 1, there are three key phases associated with starting and stopping relevant pays and allowances for mobilized Army Guard soldiers. (1) initial mobilization (primarily through the Soldier Readiness Processing), (2) deployment, which includes carrying out assigned mission operations while on active duty, and (3) demobilization. Army Guard units and state-level units and units are eligible for pay and allowances from the Army Reserve and the Army National Guard. For more information on how to apply, visit www.Army Reserve and National Guard Pay and Allowance. We reviewed applicable policies, procedures, and program guidance; observed pay processing operations; 31, 2003. From the population of all Army Guard units mobilized and demobilized during this period, we selected three special forces units and three military police units. These case studies are presented to provide a more detailed view of the types and causes of pay problems and the pay experiences of these units. The study was conducted to assess the processes, personnel (human capital), and systems used to provide assurance that mobilized Army Guard soldiers were paid accurately and timely. The study looked at the pay experiences of Army Guard special forces and military. It looked at three key areas of processes, people (human capital), and systems. The study used a case study approach to provide a more detailed perspective of the nature of pay deficiencies in the Army Guard. The report was published in the Journal of the Army and the Army Special Forces, published by the Association for the Study of the Armed Forces (ASAF) and the University of Texas at Austin. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. and personnel mismatch reports and unit commanders’ finance reports. Available documentation showed that these controls were either not done or were not done consistently or timely. Because, as discussed later in this report, the processing of Army Guard pay relies on systems that are not integrated or effectively interfaced, these they are receiving all entitled active duty pays and allowances. The extensive problems we identified at the case study units vividly demonstrate that the controls currently relied on to pay mobilized Army Guard personnel are not working and cannot provide reasonable assurance that such pays are accurate and timely. case study units to identify and resolve any outstanding pay issues for the affected soldiers. (p. 77/Draft Report) DoD RESPONSE: Concur. The National Guard Financial Services Center is working with each of the identified units and supporting USPFOs to ensure all pay issues are resolved. The Army and DFAS will work together to resolve the pay issues, the DoD said in a letter to the National Guard on May 2. The letter was sent to the N.G.F.C. and the Army Chief of Staff on May 3. State Army Guard personnel were not performing effective reconciliations of pay and personnel record discrepancies each month. One such report concluded, “Failure to reconcile the pay and record discrepancies’ was cited as a reason for the lack of effective pay-and-records reconciliation. The Army Guard is responsible for the protection of the U.S. Constitution, the military budget and other national security issues. It is also responsible for protecting the nation’s borders, including the borders with Mexico and the United States. Center, the National Guard Bureau, and DFAS Indianapolis and Denver to augment our documentation and walkthroughs. Because our preliminary assessment determined that current operations used to pay mobilized Army Guard soldiers relied extensively on error- prone manual transactions entry into multiple, nonintegrated systems, we did not statistically test current processes. We are happy to provide you with any information you may want to share with the public about the Army Guard's pay and benefits system. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. mitigate the most serious of the problems we identified are needed to help ensure that the Army Guard can continue to successfully fulfill its vital role in our national defense. The National Guard currently reviews the training status of the soldiers’ deployed unit or, for the National Guard, the applicable State Family Assistance Coordinator. The report will be available at Secretary of the Army, in conjunction with the Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller), to monitor the quality and completion of training for both pay and finance personnel and unit commanders. for all offices and units responsible for pay input support of mobilized soldiers. The GAO recommended that the Secretary of Defense direct the. Secretary of the Army, in conjunction with the Under Secretary of. Defense (Comptroller), to establish performance measures for. obtaining supporting documentation and processing pay transactions. is complete. (p. 14) The GAE also recommended that unit commanders receive training on the importance of adhering to requirements to conduct annual pay support documentation reviews and carry out monthly reconciliations. part of the annual External Evaluation-ExEval) and, as such will be considered as part of the overall evaluation of the reserve pay training addressed in response to recommendation 10. RECOMMENDATION 13: The Secretary of Defense direct the Secretary of the Army, in conjunction with the Under Under, to address the issue of reserve pay in the Army Reserve. The GAO recommended that the. Secretary of defense direct the Army. Under Under to address reserve pay issues in the army reserve. The GAO recommended that the Secretary of Defense direct the Director of the Defense Finance and Accounting Service, to evaluate the feasibility of establishing an edit check and requiring approval before processing any debt assessments above a specified dollar amount. Secondary manual processing would be required to start the collection process or delete the debts. (p. 22) The GAO recommends that the secretary of defense direct the director of the defense finance and accounting service, in conjunction with the under secretary of Defense (Comptroller), to evaluate this possibility. direct the Director of the Defense Finance and Accounting Service, in conjunction with the Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller), to evaluate the feasibility of automating some or all of the current manual monthly pays. Special duty assignment pay, foreign language proficiency pay, hardship duty pay and high altitude, low demonstrated that DJMS RC’s current monthly manual pays can be automated rapidly in the new commercial off-the-shelf based environment. The GAO recommended that the Secretary of defense direct the Director. GAO recommended that the Secretary of Defense direct the. Secretary of the Army, in conjunction with the Under Secretary of. Defense (Comptroller), to evaluate the feasibility of using the. personnel-to-pay interface as a means to proactively alert pay personnel of. actions needed to start entitled active duty pays and allowances. DoD RESPONSE: Concur. Within the next 6 months, we will evaluate the viability of using this interface. (p. 77/Draft Report) Defense direct the Secretary of the Army, in conjunction with the Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller), to determine whether issues concerning resource allocations for the military pay operations exist at all 54 USPFOs. If so, take appropriate actions to address these issues. (p. 3) If there are no issues, then take appropriate action to address the issues. If there is no issue, then the appropriate actions will be taken to address them. If the issues are not addressed, then they should be fixed. If they are not fixed, then there should be a change in policy. addressed by the supplemental provided to Army. Normal manning at the USPFO, Military Pay Section is based on Full Time Support authorized state strength levels. The GAO recommended that the Secretary of Defense direct the. Secretary of the Army, in conjunction with the Under Secretary of. Defense (Comptroller), to make changes to the Army's pay system. The U.S. Army's military pay system is currently based on full-time staff levels based on state strength. The GAO recommended that the Secretary of Defense direct the. Secretary of the Army, in conjunction with the Under Secretary of. Defense (Comptroller), to modify existing training policies and procedures to require. all USPFO and active.pay technicians were validated as correct under OPM standards. Action is complete. The GAO also recommended that all U.S. military service members be required to undergo at least two years of training before they are allowed to serve in the armed forces. The Army agreed to this recommendation. Mobilization Procedures to mandate a remark be entered on the service member’s leave and earnings statement for pays paid under “other credits” to inform the service members exactly what entitlement(s) they have paid. The GAO recommended that the Secretary of Defense direct the. Secretary of the Army, in Defense Finance and Accounting Service, to evaluate the feasibility of redesigning leave and. earnings statement to provide soldiers with a clear explanation of all pay and allowances received so. they can readily determine if they received all and only entitled.  understanding their leave and earnings statement by reviewing and updating (as necessary) the information provided on our website. (p. 78/Draft Report) Enclosure understanding the USPFOs ands Reserve Component Pay Support Offices with monthly newsletters;. providing independent leave and Earnings statement remarks for present and future changes; and. continuing to provide the US PFOs with information on their leave, earnings, and other financial matters. ( p. 78-79/ Draft Report) For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. The General Accounting Office is the audit, evaluation and investigative arm of Congress. It exists to support Congress in meeting its constitutional responsibilities and to help improve the nation's infrastructure. The office is based in Washington, D.C. and has offices in New York, Los Angeles and Washington, DC. It was created in 1978 to help Congress meet its obligations to the American people. It is the only agency of the U.S. government that is independent of the White House and the Department of Justice. performance and accountability of the federal government for the American people. GAO examines the use of public funds; evaluates federal programs and policies; and provides analyses, recommendations, and other assistance to help Congress make informed oversight, policy, and funding decisions.GAO’s commitment to good government is reflected in its core mission: “To improve the quality of life for the people of the U.S. and to improve the economy for the benefit of all Americans.’’ GAO issues a list of newly released reports, testimony, and correspondence. GAO posts this list, known as “Today’s Reports,” on its Web site daily. To have GAO e-mail this list to you every afternoon, go to www.gao.gov and select “Subscribe to e-mails alerts” under the “Order GAO Products” heading. You can print these documents in their entirety, including charts and other graphics. The fastest and easiest way to obtain copies of GAO documents at no cost is through the Internet. GAO’s Web site (www.gao.gov) contains abstracts and full- text files of current reports and testimony and an expanding archive of older products. The Web site features features of accountability, integrity, and reliability. It also features abstracts, full-text files, and a search function to help you find what you are looking for. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. unless you publicly announce its contents earlier, we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days from its date. At that time, we will send copies of the report to interested congressional committees. We will also send copies to the Secretary of Defense, the Under and interested congressional committee members. We have no further plans to distribute the report beyond the 30 days of the date of its release to the public. We are happy to share the report with you if you want to share it with the world. no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staff have any questions regarding this report, please contact me at (202) 512-9505. On December 5, 2001, the Colorado Army National Guard’s B Company, 5th Regiment, was involved in a firefight. The Colorado National Guard was in the midst of a training exercise when the firefight occurred. The incident was captured on video and posted on the Internet. shelf product are fully known.” Staff making key contributions to this report include: Paul S. Begnaud, Ronald A. Bergman, James D. Berry, Jr., Amy C. Chang, Mary E. Chervenic, Francine M. DelVecchio, C. Robert DeRoy, Dennis B. Fauber, Jennifer L. Hall, Charles R. Hodge, Jason M. Kelly, Julia C. Matta, and C. Ronald DeRoy. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. remarks section of their Leave and Earnings Statements. One such assessment showing a $39,489.28 debt is shown in figure 8. DOD has a major system enhancement effort under way in this area described as the largest personnel and pay system in the world in both scope and number of people. The effort is described as being in the form of a ‘modernization’ of the military’s personnel system, which includes a number of new programs and procedures. The project is described by DOD as being ‘in the form’ as a “modernization of the current personnel system’. system that was not designed to handle the intricacies of active duty pay and allowances, would result in significant pay problems. While it is likely that DOD will be required to rely on existing systems for a number of years, a complete and lasting solution to the pay problems we need is a long-term solution. We need a pay system that can handle active duty and allowances in a cost-effective manner. We want a system that is capable of dealing with the full range of benefits available to active duty personnel. by fiscal year 2007. It also reported a development cost of about $427 million. However, our review of the fiscal year 2004 DOD Information Technology budget request shows that DOD is requesting $122 million and $95 million, respectively, for fiscal years 2004 and 2005. In addition, the department reported that it also reported that the Department of Defense had a budget of $1.2 billion in fiscal year 2003. The Department of the Defense has not released its budget request for fiscal year 2005. DOD's total force concept is based on the premise that it is not practically feasible to maintain active duty forces sufficient to meet all possible war contingencies. Under this concept, DOD’s active and reserve components are to be blended into a cohesive total force to meet a given situation. The “total.force” concept is the basis for the U.S. Army’S “Total Force’ concept,” which is being considered by the Army for the first time. identified deficiencies. DOD's response outlined some actions already taken, others that are underway, and further planned actions with respect to our recommendations. If effectively implemented, these actions should substantially resolve the deficiencies pointed out in our report. DOD’s comments are reprinted in appendix VIII. As agreed with your office, we have agreed to share our findings and recommendations with the Department of Defense. We look forward to hearing from you again in the coming days and weeks. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from. We conducted our audit work from November 2002 through September 2003. We received comments on November 5, 2003, and have summarized those comments in the “Agency Comments and Our Evaluation” section of this report. DOD’s comments are reprinted in appendix VIII.ofthis report. We conducted our Audit work in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. We are not required to report on the results of the audit to the public at any point in the history of the Department of Defense. audit fieldwork in September 2003, the problems at the Colorado Special Forces unit had not been resolved. DOD officials did advise us that, as a result of our work, they implemented a software change on September 18, 2003, intended to help avoid such problems in the future. Specifically, we were told that the software change would help avoid future problems with the Special Forces. We are happy to make clear that this was not the case, and that the problems in question were with the U.S. Army. a number of years to accommodate changing legislative requirements, DOD policies, and the unique operating practices of different DOD organizations and systems involved in these processes. As discussed in the following sections, these extensive and evolving policies and procedures were confusing both across various organizations and personnel involved in their processes. The process was designed to be flexible and adaptable to the needs of the military and its personnel. It was also intended to be a source of information for the military, as well as a training tool for the personnel involved. the system, it is likely that the department will continue to operate with existing system constraints for at least several more years. Our findings related to weaknesses in the systems environment were consistent with issues raised by DOD in its June 2002 report to the Congress on its efforts to improve the system. The report was published in June 2002 and was based on information provided by the Department of Defense. It was the result of a joint effort between the Defense Department and the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST). The NIST report was released in June 2003. a complete reengineering of the processes and controls and ensure that this reengineering effort deals not only with the systems aspect of the problems we identified, but also with the human capital and process aspects. In its written comments, DOD concurred with our recommendations and identified actions to address the issues we identified. DOD agreed with our findings and identified steps to address them in written comments to us. We are happy to share our findings with the DOD, which has agreed to take action to address our recommendations. risk associated with “Service issues with business process reengineering and data migration” The department’s ability to effectively mitigate such risks is of particular concern given its poor track record in successfully designing and implementing major systems in the past. Consequently, given the schedule slippages that have already occurred combined with the data migration risks, this is a major concern for the department. The department has not been able to successfully implement a major new system in more than a decade. The project is expected to be completed by the end of the year. to “…initially mirror the existing ‘As-Is’ structure until the new capability has been fielded and risk factors/ requirements have been clearly identified” “A determination of what additional skills and expertise are required for operators of a knowledge-based personnel community must be made after the capabilities of the commercial off-the-shelf have been established,” the report says. “The new capability must be fielded and the risk factors and requirements must be clearly identified,’ it adds. Currently, as a matter of practice, pay and personnel representatives from the USPFO conduct a manual reconciliation between the pay and Personnel system records. This includes a reconciliation of pay records with the unit commander’s records of personnel actually onboard. The U.S. Navy is the world's largest navy, with more than 1,000 ships and submarines in its fleet. The Navy is also the largest employer of women and minorities in the U.N. military, with about 1,500 women and men working for the Navy and the State Department. USPFO does not have the resources to carry out such reconciliations each month, an official says. The purpose of the reconciliation is to ensure that for common data elements, the pay and personnel systems contain the same data. The USPFO has not carried out such a reconciliation in the last 2.2 months, the official adds. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. Several of the case study locations we audited established a standard, but undocumented, practice of reconciling roughly a third of the common data elements every month. However, documentation was not always retained to determine the extent to which these reconciliations were done and if they were done consistently. Our findings are similar to those in reports from reports from other organizations. Reports from other organisations did not always fully reconcile and make all necessary system corrections each month. It is important to make sure that all necessary corrective actions are taken over a 3-month period. of clarity in existing procedural requirements in this area. Several of the locations we visited had established standard but undocumented reconciliation practices. At the six case study locations we audited, we found that although all the USPFOs told us they received monthly SIDPERS and DJMS-RC payments, they did not have the correct records. We found that this was a mismatch in the reporting of these payments. We also found that some of the U.S. PFOs did not even have the right records to show that they were paying the correct amount of money. on October 2, 2002, to stop the individual's pay. However, collection efforts on the $9,400 overpayment did not begin until July 2003, when we pointed out this situation to USPFO officials. The lack of an integrated set of systems was also apparent in the relationship between JUSTIS and the order. We are happy to clarify that this is not the case with all JUSTIS orders and that the order was issued on October 1, 2002. The order was, in fact, issued on September 30, 2002 and the payment was made on October 3,2002. against identified overpayments through March 31, 2003. We did not attempt to estimate payments received against identified underpayments. We provided the support for the pay problems we identified to appropriate officials, at each of our case study locations so that they could fully develop and resolve any additional amounts owed to the military. We are proud of the work we have done for the U.S. military since the start of the Iraq War in 2003. For more information, visit www.military.gov. identified will only be achieved through a complete reengineering, not only of the automated systems, but also of the supporting processes and human capital practices. However, immediate actions can be taken in these areas to improve the timeliness and accuracy of pay and allowance payments to activated workers, according to the report. The report was commissioned by the Department for Work and Pensions (DWP) to improve pay and allowances in the UK. For more information on the DWP’s work and allowances scheme, visit: http://www.dps.gov.uk/. allowances received so that they can readily determine if they received all and only entitled pays. Evaluate the feasibility of establishing an edit check and requiring approval before processing any debt assessments above a specified dollar amount. Evaluates the feasibility. of establishing a check to determine if a debt assessment is required before it is processed.evaluates the. feasibility of. requiring approval. before processing. Any debt assessments over a specified dollars amount should be processed with the approval of the owner of the company. is their intent. While we did not verify the effectiveness of this change, it has the potential to reduce pay problems associated with errors made in amending orders. Required time frames for processing pay transactions. Written requirements did not exist with respect to the maximum amount of time that should be spent processing a pay order. We are happy to clarify that this is not the case and that it is not required to be done in the same way as in the previous version of this article. We apologize for any confusion this may have caused.  standards for the timeliness of processing pay transactions are currently in place for units, finance offices, and central site. However, these standards are focused on the full range of transactions and associated unit level data is generated based on the normal permanent/home station relationship. DoD RESPONSE: Concur. (p. 75/Draft Report) DoD Response: We are committed to working with the Department of Defense to achieve the goals set out in the DoD's pay system modernization plan. continue to work the correction of any specific cases identified as still open for these units. As noted by the GAO, many of the cases identified have already been resolved or involved a delay in payment over 30 days from entitlement rather than an actual unresolved discrepancy. RECOMMENDATION 16: The. Department of Health and Human Services should continue to work to correct the problems identified in this report. The department should work tocorrect the problems in the report, including any that have not yet been resolved. date—some of which still reflected practices in place in 1991 during Operation Desert Storm. These complex, cumbersome processes, which were developed in piecemeal fashion over a number of years, provide numerous opportunities for control breakdowns. We found that a substantial number of payment errors were caused, at least in part, by these processes. The report also found that some of these processes were still in place when the U.S. entered the war in 1991. It was published in the online edition of this magazine, as well as in the print edition. Out-of-date requirements in current regulations may contribute to confusion and customer service. While we were able to associate pay problems with only one of these outdated requirements, there is a risk that they may also have caused as yet unidentified pay problems. We are happy to clarify these issues for the benefit of our customers. We apologise for any confusion caused by this article. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. We observed a number of such system workaround procedures at the case study units we audited. Such manual workarounds are inefficient and create additional labor-intensive, error- prone transaction processing. For example, for the special forces units weAudited, our analysis disclosed a workaround used to exclude soldiers’ pay from control breakdowns. We found pay system input errors associated with amended orders, delays and errors in coding pay and allowance transactions, and slow customer service response. For. example, available documentation and interviews indicate that while several soldiers submitted required supporting documentation, several others did not. control, they are limited because they can only detect situations in which payroll and personnel records do not agree. A number of pay errors we identified resulted from the fact that neither personnel nor pay records were updated. Soldiers returning from deployments earlier than their units. For four of our four cases, the pay errors were due to personnel and pay records not being updated in the same way. We are working to correct these errors and improve the accuracy of our pay records in the future. For more information, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/29/military/pay-errors-and-pay-corrections/index.html. process large numbers of pay transactions without sufficient numbers of knowledgeable personnel. Lack of personnel undermines the ability of the USPFO pay functions to carry out established control procedures. For example, our audits at several of the six case study units showed that there were no independent reviews. There were also no independent audits at any of the cases study units in which there was no evidence of a lack of knowledge of the pay process. The USPfo pay functions are responsible for paying the salaries of the military personnel. particularly in light of the extensive set of policies and procedures now in effect in this area. With respect to human capital, we found weaknesses, including (1) insufficient resources allocated to pay processing, (2) inadequate training related to existing policies and Procedures, and (3) poor customer service. The lack of customer service was also cited as one of the main reasons for the lack of progress in the pay-processing industry in recent years. The report was published by the World Economic Forum in London. that this was primarily because unit commanders have many such administrative duties, and without additional training on the importance of these actions, they may not receive sufficient priority attention. The lack of unit commander training may have contributed to the pay problems we identified. The pay problems may also have been caused by the lack of training on how to handle these types of tasks. We are happy to clarify that the pay issues were not caused by this lack of education. We would like to make clear that the problems were caused by a lack of adequate training on these tasks. any payments above a specified dollar amount. As part of the effort currently under way to reform DOD’s pay and personnel systems—referred to as DIMHRS—incorporate a complete understanding of the Army Guard pay problems as documented in this report into the requirements development for this system. (p. 78/Draft Report) DoD RESPONSE: Concur. The DFAS has provided detailed military pay requirements input to the DIMhRS Program that support fully automated computation of all military pay entitlements. Army Guard soldiers will likely be required to rely on existing pay systems for at least several more years. Our limited review of the pay experiences of the soldiers in the Colorado Army Guard’s 220th Military Police Company. The company was mobilized to active duty when DIMHRS was implemented. The soldiers in this company were paid by the U.S. Army Payroll System. They were also paid by their respective units of the Army Reserve and the Army National Guard. For more on this story, visit CNN.com/military. personnel/pay record for each Service member supporting all Service component affiliations and duty statuses. Enclosure problems identified, but also with the human capital and process aspects when developing DIMHRS. (p. 78/Draft Report) DoD RESPONSE: Concur. The DFAS and Army have been actively involved in recommending an improved operational military pers/pay. The DoD has also been working with the DFAS to develop an improved military pers-pay record. DIMHRS is ultimately intended to replace more than 80 legacy systems. The DFAS is working with the Army DIMH RS Office to document existing workflow and roles and responsibilities. The program is still in the very early stages of determining when and how integrated processes and workflows will be incorporated into the D IMHRS based operational concept. The current plan is to integrate all pay, personnel, training, and manpower concept in the DIM hrs environment. The DIMhRS “Joint Service Functional Concept of Operations,” dated July 15, 2003, page 14, indicates that the current plan was to integrate personnel and pay system. functions across the department by 2007. By the end of fiscal year 2003, DOD reporting shows that it will have invested over 5 years and about $360 million in conceptualizing and planning the system. In 2002, DOD estimated that integrated personnel and pay functions of DIMHRS would be fully deployed by 2007, and that the system would cost $1.5 billion to $2 billion to implement. The system is expected to be fully operational by 2008, and fully functional by 2009. The original DIMHRS project completion milestone date has slipped about 15 months. Part of the requested funding for fiscal year 2004 was to acquire a payroll module, Forward Compatible Payroll. This module, in conjunction with a translation module and a Web services component, is to replace the payroll component of the program. The project is expected to be completed by the end of the year or early in the next year, according to program officials. The cost of the project is estimated to be $1.2 billion. as a mechanism to alert them that soldiers were eligible to receive that particular pay component that month. Although this does not alleviate the problem of month-to-month manual entry, the warning screen could be used to help preclude some of the pay problems we found resulting from failures to enter the correct information. The warning screen was developed by the U.S. Army’s Payroll Management System (PMS) and is available on the PMS website. For more information, visit www.pms.gov.uk. notify the USPFO technician of accounts requiring monthly entitlement input. This will be more efficient and effective than a pop-up warning screen, which would appear only if the individual soldier’s social security number were input. The GAO recommended that the Secretary of Defense direct the Director of the Department of the Army to make the changes. The changes are expected to be in place by the end of the year, the GAO said. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here. a separate component of pay for each type of pay. Evaluate the feasibility of using the JUSTIS warning screen to help eliminate inadvertent omissions of required monthly manual pay inputs. (p. 78/Draft Report) DoD RESPONSE: Concur. The National Guard will develop a JUSTIS table identifying all applicable soldiers in order to identify soldiers in need of help with their leave and Earnings Statements. DoD will also consider redesigning Leave and Earning Statements to provide soldiers with a clear explanation of all pay. New warning messages have been added to JUSTIS that will appear when a transaction is entered to cancel or amend a tour of duty. The new warnings will advise that the transaction will or could result in a collection action and will ask the pay technician to confirm that it will not be processed as planned. Tell us what you think in the comments below or email us at jennifer.smith@mailonline.co.uk. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details.  JUSTIS is the pay input subsystem used by the 54 state-level Army Guard commands, including the USPFOs. This subsystem processes transactions for submission to DJMS-RC to create payments for Army National Guard soldiers. JUSTIS receives certain pay-affecting personnel data from SIDPERS. It also receives a limited amount of mobilization order data directly from AFCOS. These systems are decentralized in that each of the 54 sites owns and maintains its own JUSTIS database. It is used for file transfer transactions, online queries of MMPAs, and downloads of data files. active duty tour that appears on each soldier’s mobilization order. Army Guard pay technicians use JUSTIS to access and record data in DJMS-RC. By entering the soldier's Social Security number and mobilization order number into JUSTIS, the pay technician can view the pay data inDJMS- RC, ensure that they are accurate and up to date. For more information on JUSTIS and how to use it, visit www.justis.org or call 1-800-273-8255. For confidential support on suicide matters call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch or click here. writing system—AFCOS. Currently, certain personnel and order information entered and stored in the AFCOS database is automatically filled in the JUSTIS input screens pertaining to active duty tours for state missions. This auto-fill functionality eliminates the need for some information to be entered in the database. This feature is available to the U.S. Army, Air Force, Navy and Marine Corps, as well as the National Guard and the Army Reserve. It is not available to civilians or the general public. error-prone, manual reentry of data into JUSTIS. Currently, manual entry of data from a hard copy of the soldier’s orders and other documentation is required to initiate pay and allowances. This procedure defeats the purpose of an effective interface. For example, at one of the case study cases, a soldier had to manually enter his pay and allowance details into the JUSTIS system. To see the rest of this article, visit CNN.com/soulmatestories. operate JUSTIS when she was assigned to the job. Instead, she stated, she has learned how to operate the system through on-the-job training and many phone calls to system support personnel in Indianapolis. She estimated that she was not fully comfortable with all the required transaction processing procedures until she was assignment to the JUSTIS job. She said that she has since learned to use the system more effectively and efficiently. She also said she has become more comfortable with the system's security features. designed to provide fully automated computation capability for active, Reserve/Guard and detailed leave and earnings statement reporting to the Service member through myPay. FCP will use legacy military pers/pay data feeds to create a single military pay record for each Service member supporting all Service component affiliations and duty statuses. detailed left and earnings statements reporting through my pay. F CP will also resolve pay systems capability related problems described in this report. RECOMMENDATION 21: FCP recommends the use of myPay as a replacement for the current system. Finance battalions/Defense Military Pay Offices with the National Guard newsletter. For the future, FCP is being designed with an easily understandable leave and earnings statement as one of the main requirements. Each pay is designed to provide fully automated computation capability for active, Reserve/Guard and National Guard personnel. The newsletter will be available to the finance battalions and the National Guardsmen of the U.S. Army, Air Force, Navy and Marine Corps. It will also be available for the Army National Guard and Air Force National Guard. A study was conducted of improvement alternatives in the fall of 2002, which concluded that a new commercial off the shelf based payroll capability (“Forward Compatible Payroll” (FCP) was the best option to expeditiously improve our system payroll services. FCP is currently prototyping military entitlements and deductions and has already has already been used by the military. The Army is currently using FCP to provide payroll services to its military personnel. The military is using it to provide services to the military, including payroll, benefits and deductions. FCP will resolve pay systems capability related problems described in this report. Until such time FCP has been implemented, we will ensure that these certain pays paid under ‘other credits’ are included in the flyer addressed in response to recommendation 13. In addition, DFAS will update the DFAS Reserve Component. The report was published by the Department of Financial Services (DFAS) on Wednesday. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here. implement an integrated military pay and personnel system. Lacking either an integrated or effectively interfaced set of personnel and pay systems, DOD must rely on error-prone, manual entry of data from the same source documents into multiple systems. With an effectively integrated system, changes to personnel records automatically are made. The report indicated these deficiencies were the processing, and paying mobilized Army Guard soldiers were not integrated. The system will be rolled out over the next few years. It is expected to cost about $1.5 billion. update related payroll records from a single source of data input. While not as efficient as an integrated system, an automatic personnel-to-payroll system interface can also reduce errors caused by independent, manual entry of data from the same source documents into both pay and personnel systems. Without an effective interface, errors can be made in payroll and personnel records. Without a good user interface, it's difficult to get the most out of a system that's been designed to work well for a long period of time. between the personnel and pay systems, we found instances in which pay-affecting information did not get entered. We found that an existing interface could be used to help alert military pay personnel to take action when our six case study units to identify and resolve any outstanding pay issues for the affected soldiers. Evaluate the feasibility of using the personnel-to-pay interface as a means to proactively alert pay personnel of actions needed to start entitled active duty pays and allowances. evaluate the feasibility. of automating some Automated improvements could be used to proactively alert USPFOs of certain pay-impacting transactions that are created in SIDPERS. In our case studies, we found instances in which mobilization order data was missing from the SIDpERS system. The goal is to help ensure timely and accurate pay, the authors say. For more information, go to: www.sidpERS.org, or call 1-800-847-8255. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org. Master Military Pay Account (MMPA) is the central pay record repository in DJMS-RC for each soldier. Each MMPA contains a soldier’s pay-related personnel, entitlement, and performance data. Personnel data contained in the MMPA are generated by JUSTIS and DMO. The active all Army military pay and is responsible for maintaining over 1 million MMPAs for the Army. While deployed on active duty, there are several Army Guard (USPFO), active Army, and DFAS components involved in paying mobilized Army Guard personnel. order writing system, Automated Fund Control Order System (AFCOS) Army Guard’s personnel system, Standard Installation Division Personnel Reporting System (SIDPERS) Army Guards’ pay input system, JUMPS Standard Terminal Input System (JUMPS) Defense Military Pay Office System (DMO); and DFAS’ Army Guard and Reserve pay system, DJMS-RC. Army Guard's pay inputsystem, Jumbos Standard Terminal input system (Jumbos) DMO is the pay input subsystem used by active Army finance offices. DMO and JUSTIS share the same operating system platform and certain database tables. Additional data needed to create pay transactions associated with active duty pay and allowances must be entered manually into JUSTIS from hard copies of mobilization orders. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. mobilization transactions are entered into the personnel system. Army Guard state personnel offices used an existing interface between SIDPERS and JUSTIS to transmit data on certain personnel transactions. This personnel-to-pay interface (1) requires manual review and acceptance by USPFO pay personnel. It does not create pay and allowance transactions to update a soldier’s pay records. For example, when Army Guard soldiers change from inactive drilling status to active duty status, state. personnel offices create personnel-related transactions in SidPERS. not programmed to generate automatic payment of certain other types of pay and allowances. At one of the case study units, we found USPFO pay personnel had a procedure in place to help prevent inadvertently omitting month-to-month entry of nonautomated pays for entitled soldiers. Specifically, pay personnel at the USPfo in Maryland used a warning screen within JUSTIS to prevent the entry of these types of pays. For example, each month USP FO pay personnel are responsible for entering into JUSTIS special duty assignment pay, foreign language proficiency pay, and high altitude low opening (HALO) pay. Army area servicing finance offices are responsible these type of pays every month.