Labor has devoted substantial resources to ensuring compliance with the child labor provisions of FLSA over the past decade. In July 2002, the Senate passed the Traveling Sales Crew Protection Act. Several legislative proposals were introduced in the 107th Congress to strengthen the Child Labor Act. The agency has indicated that child labor is one of the agency’s highest priorities, but its efforts to 100,000. This figure represents the number of injuries per hundred thousand hours worked. The number of child employees of the U.S. Postal Service who suffered injuries that required them to miss more than 10 days. Since Operation Child Watch, most of Labor’s national child labor campaigns have focused on providing education and outreach and other compliance assistance to employers. The goal is to increase public awareness of the child labor provisions of FLSA. For example, from FLSA: “Employers may not be required to use child labor to meet the requirements of the Child Labor Prevention Act.” The goal of the FLSA is to reduce child labor rates in certain low-wage industries such as agriculture and local level businesses. Labor does not provide sufficient guidance and training to its regional and district offices on how to use their resources most effectively. Since 1990, Labor has developed better goals for increasing employer compliance with the child labor provisions of FLSA. The information in our draft report was based on our review of WHD’s fiscal year 2001 and 2002 annual performance plans. Neither of these plans describe how well Labor enforces these provisions and to make recommendations for improvement. The report was not intended to describe all of the agency's child labor enforcement efforts over the past ten years. In 2001, several legislative proposals were submitted in the House of Representatives and the Senate that would strengthen the child labor provisions of FLSA. The proposals include the Children’s Act for Responsible Employment of 2001. The penalties for child labor violations depend on the severity of the violations, the number of times the violations occurred, and aggravating factors such as falsification of records and whether the employer has a record of previous child work. The U.S. Department of Labor devotes significant attention to enforcing the child labour provisions ofFLSA. percent of fast food restaurants. Because WHD considered these rates to be sufficiently high, particularly compared to other industries, it decided not to set goals for these industries for improving compliance with the child labor provisions of FLSA. WHD made this decision despite the conclusions reached in its analysis of rate was much lower, 53 percent, for 14- and 15-year-olds working in these restaurants. More recently, WHD developed specific goals for improving overall employer compliance with FLSA in some low-wage industries. Before 2003, WHD’s annual performance plans did not contain specific, measurable goals for improving compliance with the child labor provisions of FLSA for many of the industries in which most children work or are likely to sustain work-related injuries. See GAO comment 10. In September 2002, in its comments on a draft of this report, Labor reported that WHD had developed specific,. measurable goals in the percentage of employers who are in compliance with. the child labour provisions ofFLSA. The goals in WHD's fiscal year 2002 performance plan did not establish specific goals for the goals. Labor’s Wage and Hour Division (WHD) is responsible for enforcing the child labor provisions of FLSA. WHD does not routinely obtain information from BLS on the industries and occupations in which children work. Because WHD conducts many of its investigations in response to complaints about possible violations, the resource allocations indicated in Labor’S charts may reflect these possible violations. The national office the Field Operations Handbook for investigators, and overseeing special projects. The public awareness strategy is designed to inform the general public. of children under age 18, and maintaining a Web site. of FLSA is dependent, in part, upon the establishment of a sound performance management system. Program managers need to be able to evaluate the effectiveness of their child labor compliance efforts and ensure that their limited resources are used in the most effective manner, WHD says. WHD is a non-profit based in Washington, D.C. that works with children and families in need of support. For more information, visit www.whd.org or call the National Child Labor Helpline at 1-800-273-8255.  FLSA authorizes the Secretary of Labor to designate certain types of jobs and equipment as too hazardous for children under the age of 18. Once children reach age 16, they are only prohibited from working in jobs or with are allowed to work an unlimited number of hours in nonhazardous jobs. The Young American Workers’ Bill of Rights would amend the FLSA to require employers to obtain work permits for all children age 18 and under who are still in school. Other legislative proposals introduced in the 107th Congress are listed in table 13 below. employers whose annual gross volume of sales is less than $500,000 and whose work cannot be linked to interstate commerce are not covered under FLSA. Children who are self-employed are not subject to the child labor provisions of underFLSA. CPS does not collect information on the characteristics of employers for which children work. We used data from NLSY97, the most recent available data on child labor in the U.S. to make our estimates. As with the other limitations, however, the extent to which our estimates are overstated because not all children work in employment covered by FLSA cannot be determined. WHD’s investigations database and we found no data on employer coverage under FLSA. We also found, in our discussions with WHD officials, that establishing coverage for employers in the construction industry was not a problem for some of the district offices we visited, particularly those on the east coast. 22.6 million Americans are covered under the FLSA, according to the Department of Health and Human Services. That number is expected to rise to 22.7 million by the end of the year. told us they could tell their activities generate attention if WHD receives a lot of media inquires and that they count the number of times individuals access information from WHD’s Web site. However, WHD does not link its education and outreach activities with changes in employer behavior. While we recognize spent by WHD investigators on activities other than investigations, we found that it did not contain complete information on the time investigators spend on non-enforcement activities. We continue to believe that this is a problem. 2001, with a low of 5 percent in 1998. WHD headquarters officials use various factors to measure the success of their enforcement efforts. They told us that they do not know how to develop methods of measuring their education and outreach activities. Officials say they use a number of factors to determine success, but do not have a clear idea of what those factors are. They also say they have no idea of how to measure success in the long-term, and are unsure of the best way to do so. a low of 49 percent of the original amount assessed to a high of 82 percent for investigations completed in fiscal years 2000 and 2001. WHD does provide adequate training to all of its regional and district offices on how to obtain reports from the investigations database to use the past, used only limited data from its WHISARD investigations database. In some cases, reports we requested from the database, such as reports that showed the source of investigations, was the first time that WHD had run such reports. The WHD agreed to obtain and review data from the WHISARD database to better hold local offices accountable. It also agreed to explore the possibilities of collecting additional data through CPS or NLSY. It agreed to provide better guidance to WHD’s regional and district offices concerning penalty assessment, and provide training to training to take action on them. The WHD will also explore the possibility of collecting more data from CPS and NLSy. It will also consider collecting more information from local authorities. The penalties range from $275 for a record-keeping violation to $11,000 for a violation involving a serious injury or death. Information on WHD’s investigations, violations, and penalties assessed is tracked in its investigations database–the Wage and Hour Investigative Support and Reporting Database, WHISARD. Over the past decade, according to WHD, the number of labor violations in the U.S. has increased by more than 50 per cent. The number of wage and hour violations has also increased by nearly 40 per cent over the past 10 years. had staff members with the skills needed to obtain reports from the investigations database that enabled them to identify where they had found child labor violations in the past. Officials at two of these offices, however, said that they had only one staff member who had the skills to access the database and use it to target their compliance efforts. They said they had no staff members who could use the database to help them identify where to target compliance efforts in the future. They also said they only had one person who could access the databases to help with compliance efforts today. person with these skills and that, if they lost this person, they would not be able to obtain the reports they need from the investigations database. By allowing and encouraging children to work, the nation acknowledges that children can derive many benefits from working, such as independence, confidence, and responsibility. The nation also acknowledges that if they lose this person they would be unable to get the reports that they need to carry out their investigations. This would be a loss to the nation and to the world at large. trying to develop such methods. Officials at one district office told us that they felt it was important to obtain at least an indication of success by conducting investigations of employers after their education and outreach activities. They also said they were working with researchers at the University of California, Los Angeles, to try and find a way to get the results they were looking for, such as by conducting interviews with potential employers after education and community outreach activities, they said. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. on how to obtain information from the investigations database. We provided a draft of this report to Labor for comment. Overall, Labor disagreed with many of the conclusions and recommendations in the draft. Labor’s comments and our specific responses are included in app. IV. We disagreed with our recommendation to ask for information from an investigation database. The report is available on the Labor Department's website and is available to download for free from the Apple App Store and the Google Play Store for Android and iOS. WHD staff on how to obtain information from the investigations database. Labor also provided technical comments and clarifications, which we incorporated in the report as appropriate. We are sending copies of this report to the Secretary of Labor, the Wage and Hour Administrator, the Commissioner of the Bureau of Labor and the Labor Department's Wage andHour Administrator. The report is available online at: http://www.whed.com/investigations/report/whed-investigation-investigator-wHD-report. Statistics, and other interested parties. Copies will be made available to others upon request. This report is also available at no charge on GAO’s Web site at http://www.gao.gov. If you have any questions concerning this report please contact me at (202) 512-7215 or Lori Rectanus at (Washington, D.C.) (D.C) (P.S. The report is available on the GAO Web site as well).  WHD officials told us that they do not use data from BLS on the industries and occupations in offices generally rely on the anecdotal knowledge they have gained from previous investigations. Labor maintains that it does routinely use such data. WHD also does not use information from its investigations database or reports on local child labor initiatives to assess the results of the regional and district offices’ child labor efforts. We found that children were more likely to be injured or killed while working in several industries in which WHD conducts few child labor investigations. which children ages 14 through 17 can work. WHD does not routinely use data from BLS to identify the industries and occupations in which children work, work are adequately protected. BLS’s CPS data do not include information on children younger than 15. Even if WHD were to use all existing data as effectively as possible, it would still not be able to use the data to better target its child labor compliance efforts for children under 15, WHD says. The agency does not use all of the data available to plan its future child labor efforts or assess their success. hindered because WHD does not routinely use all of the data available from BLS and NIOSH to target its child labor compliance efforts to the places that are most dangerous for children. WHD has no procedures for routinely obtaining data to plan its child Labor enforcement efforts. The district offices we visited confirmed that they do not receive this information to use in planning their local child labor efforts. Labor agreed with the remainder of our recommendations or agreed to WHD routinely uses BLS or NIOSH data to planning the allocation of its child labour resources. this information for use in planning their local child labor efforts. Second, Labor’s statement that WHD routinely uses state workers’ compensation data to plan its enforcement efforts must be qualified to indicate that many states refuse to release this information to WHD because of privacy concerns. Third, WHD has, in addition to using state workers' compensation data for child labor enforcement efforts, used the data for other purposes, such as planning the enforcement of child labor laws in the state and local areas. WHD’s education and outreach activities are specifically targeted to groups that can have an impact on youth employment, such as teachers, parents, and employers. Education and outreach Activities include publishing and distributing materials such as bookmarks with information on the rules governing the employment. The inherent difficulties in assessing the impact on employer behavior of WHD's activities are difficult to measure, but measurement is important in distributing WHD’S limited resources. Some district offices were found to be using the same materials for different groups. 1996 to 2001, WHD conducted its “Work Safe This Summer’ initiative. WHD provided pamphlets and posters with information on the child labor provisions of FLSA. Despite the importance that WHD places on ensuring the safety of children who work, it faces difficulty in showing that its efforts have made a difference in improving the working conditions of children, the report says. The report says WHD’s ability to effectively enforce the Child Labor Prevention Act is a major challenge. work and ensuring that students’ education should be everyone’s first priority. WHD has formed partnerships with all levels of government as well as businesses, unions, and advocacy groups to provide training and educational materials. The initiative includes bookmarks that list some of the rules regarding jobs in the U.S., such as the minimum wage and hours of work. It also includes a “No Child Left Behind’’ initiative to ensure that no child left behind is denied the chance to go to college. the decade, WHD’s measures of success have generally consisted of counting the number of its child labor compliance activities. WHD measured the success of Operation Child Watch in the early 1990s by citing the large number of violations and penalties produced. In our conversations with WHD headquarters officials and in WHD publications, the number. of investigations, violations found, and civil monetary penalties were frequently cited as indicators of the success. of the WHD's child labor enforcement efforts. In fact, on page 3 of of Tennessee to develop methods of measuring the success of all of their child labor compliance activities. WHD lacks a sound basis for determining, among other things, the extent to which it should devote resources to child labor investigations versus its education and outreach and other compliance assistance activities. To strengthen WHD’s ability to evaluate the effectiveness of its child labor Compliance efforts and ensure their success, WHD needs to train its staff on how to use its investigations database. WHd needs to develop a system to track and measure effectiveness of all its compliance activities, including education, outreach and compliance assistance. is also responsible for providing guidance and training to WHD’s regional and district offices and for assessing the results of their child labor compliance efforts. Much of the responsibility for planning and executing these efforts, however, is left to the discretion of WHD's five regional offices and the 50 district. The Secretary of Labor should establish additional specific, measurable goals for WHD. for industries in which children are most likely to be injured or killed. provide training to all WHD staff. provide guidance on how to improve employer compliance and specific guidance on when to assess penalties. appropriate amount of resources to devote to child labor compliance efforts to its regional and district offices. It does not provide them with criteria for targeting their efforts or data on industries and occupations in which children work and are most likely to be injured. "They may not be using.appropriate amounts of resources" to focus on child labor, the agency says. "It does not give them criteria fortargeting their efforts," the agency adds. "And it does not provides them with data on industry and occupations ... in which. children work"  WHD’s regional and district offices conduct many local child labor initiatives. WHD headquarters officials do not use the quarterly reports prepared by these offices on their local initiatives to ensure that, nationwide, local initiatives provide adequate protection for all children who work. The Child Labor Team Leader in the headquarters office is responsible for coordinating WHD's child labor compliance efforts, including disseminating information and guidance to the regional andDistrict offices. The WHD Web site has a section of the Web site with information on child labor. Some regional and district offices do not use data on previous child labor violations to target their compliance efforts. WHD has not provided all staff with adequate training on how to obtain reports from its investigations database. Officials at the district offices we visited told us they own investigations database to evaluate the child labor compliance efforts of its regional andDistrict offices. We continue to believe that WHD’s regional and District offices cannot target their resources in the most effective manner without having better criteria from WHD's national office. conduct investigations of employers that focus specifically on children they employ (“self-initiated” investigations) WHD officials told us that, although they review every complaint they receive about a possible child labor violation, they do not receive many complaints about child labor. WHD headquarters officials also do not use data from its investigations database to ensure that district offices nationwide are complying with child labor laws, WHD said. The only national initiative that required all district offices to conduct child labor investigations was the child labor compliance survey WHD conducted of the grocery and restaurant industries in 2000. investigations database to determine what types of strategies are most successful in detecting child labor violations in its investigations of employers. WHD conducts child labor investigations either as a result of a receiving a complaint about a possible child labor violation or from a decision by a WHD office to conduct an investigation of an employer. The WHD website is: http://www.whd.org/child-labor-investigation-and-monitoring/index.html. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. Labor considered setting specific goals for industries in which many children worked and were likely to be injured. It decided not to based on the results it received from a survey of employers. WHD has not developed methods of measuring the success of all of its child labor compliance efforts, the report says. It also conducted investigations of employer compliance, it is only one of the steps required, it says. The baseline data become the starting point for measuring progress in improving compliance, WHD says, but it has not conducted such a study. employers with prior child labor violations and found that the compliance rates for two of the three industries were still lower than the overall compliance rates. The rates had improved from 0 percent previously to 72 percent of supermarkets with prior violations, 52 percent of full-service restaurants, and 72 fiscal year 2001 and 2002 performance plans. It made this decision even though the rate of non-compliance for fast food restaurants was 30 percent, and the non- compliance rate for full service restaurants with previous child labour violations was almost 50 percent. to decrease the percentage of grocery stores and full-service restaurants with repeat child labor violations by 2 percent. We think these are positive steps and have revised our report to reflect these efforts. However, the draft performance plan does not include goals for other industries because Labor does not believe they need to be included in the plan. The draft plan is available on the Labor Department's website. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. has not developed methods of measuring the success of many of its child labor compliance efforts. Third, Labor does not use all available data to plan its future efforts or measure its progress in improving employer compliance and ensuring that all working children are adequately protected under the law. Finally, also disagreed with the conclusions supporting our recommendation to develop methods ofasuring the successful of Labor’s child labor efforts. In this regard, Labor noted that it had recently decided to repeat its compliance survey of grocery stores, full-service restaurants, and fast food restaurants in fiscal year 2004. At least 52,000 and as many as 220,000 children illegally employed in the three industries. The compliance rate in some segments of these industries was lower than the overall compliance rates. For example, although most children employed in full service restaurants, 89 percent, were employed in compliance with the child labor provisions of FLSA, the compliance rate was lower in this segment. In addition, the analysis stated that there were “still enormous child labor compliance issues that these industries need to address. indicator of compliance is the percentage of children who are employed illegally. Although we agree it is an indicator that should be reviewed, a few companies that employ large numbers of children can have a disproportionate effect on the numbers. Therefore, we believe the most important indicator of Compliance is the number of children employed illegally by a company. We believe this is the most accurate way to measure compliance with child labor laws. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. improving compliance in the transportation and public utilities industry would be unrealistic and counterproductive. Given the limitations of the estimates of illegal employment, we question the agency’s estimate that only 4,400 youth are employed illegally in this industry. The statistics cited by Labor on the number of violations found as found as violations would be counterproductive, we say. We ask that the agency release the statistics it cited as violations found to be found. The agency has not released the statistics, and we ask that they be released. The number of investigator hours devoted to child labor enforcement in fiscal year 2001, 74,000 hours, represents the largest investment of investigator time by WHD in the last 5 years. However, our report, which focuses on WHD’s efforts since 1990, shows that this is lower than the resources dedicated to childLabor enforcement in the first half of the decade. For example, in fiscal years 1990, 1991, and 1992, WHD investigators devoted 143,000, 83,000 and 105,000. hours, respectively, to child Labor Enforcement. its child labor enforcement activities. For example, Labor’s goals for fiscal years 1990 and 1992 focused on its plans to dramatically increase the number of child labor investigations. These high-visibility efforts involved sending out hundreds of investigators for 1- and 2-day periods. In fiscal year 2000, an increased rate of compliance among employers, the decrease in the number. of child labour investigations conducted by WHD, or other factors, may have contributed to the decline in investigator hours devoted to such investigations. reports we reviewed for fiscal years 1999 through 2002 showed that, in some years, many districts had no child labor initiatives. For example, in fiscal year 2000, almost all of the district offices in the northeast region had at least one child labor initiative. Two regions had regionwide initiatives that required all of their district offices to conduct child labor investigations. Some districts in the southwest region, however, had no local child labor Initiatives planned for fiscal year 1999-2002. The number of child labor Initiative in each region varied significantly from one region to another. providing an adequate level of protection to all children who work by ensuring that all district offices nationwide conduct at least some minimum number of child labor investigations. From the data we obtained for fiscal year 2001, we found that the number of investigations conducted by each district office and by complaints and self-initiated investigations) conducted by the district offices in each region varied widely. From a total of 942 child labor Investigations in the northeast region to atotal of 227 investigations in the southwest region. Self-initiated child labor investigations accounted for almost 40 percent of all cases in which child labor violations were found. WHD would have missed a by WHD’s five regions varied widely and that a few district offices accounted for a large number of the child labor investigation and cases that were found to be violations. WHd headquarters officials were not able to be reached for comment on this report. The report was based on data from the Department of Labor's child labor database for fiscal year 2001. District officials sometimes reduced the penalties for child labor violations or did not assess any penalties. Average percentage of the penalties collected varied significantly among the district offices we visited. District offices do not receive specific guidance from WHD’s national office about when to assess penalties. Staff in WHD's district offices don't receive adequate guidance from national office, authors say. They say WHD should give regional and district offices.specific guidance to regional andDistrict offices. As a result, district office practices for penalty assessment and collection vary significantly, they say. illegally, such as manufacturing and construction, or for industries in which children have the highest rates of fatalities and nonfatal injuries. WHD has not developed adequate methods of measuring the success of all of its child labor compliance efforts. As a result, WHD may not target sufficient resources to these areas. For example, we estimated that a significant proportion of illegally employed children worked in construction and manufacturing, industries WHD targets few of its Child Labor Department's child labor efforts. It is not possible to determine whether each child who works in a prohibited occupation category is actually performing prohibited activities. As a result, our estimates of illegal employment are both under- and overstated. The estimates are understated—probably by a significant amount—because many activities prohibited, particularly the many types many of the child labor violations found by WHD in its investigations of employers are violations of the restrictions on number of hours and times of day that children are allowed to work. And our estimates are overstated to the extent that they include children whose employment is not covered. our estimates of illegally employed children showed greater numbers of children in the South to be illegally employed than in the Northeast. While these estimates do not prove that illegal child labor was a problem in the area of the state covered by that district office, it is an indication that potential violations exist undetected. WHD leaves many of the decisions about how to deploy enforcement resources to its regional and district offices, it does not ensure that these offices receive sufficient to be injured.WHD’s national office also does not provide carrier’ in our estimates of illegal employment. However, these children could have been delivering mail within an office or sorting mail in a mailroom, activities that are allowed. It was not, however, possible for us to determine the extent to which our estimates are under- or overstated. It is not known whether the number of children in illegal employment is as high or as low as previously thought. The government has not released a full list of the children involved in illegal work. The maximum penalty for a child labor violation was raised from $10,000 to $11,000 in 2002. Labor cites the increase from fiscal years 2000 to 2001 in the number of child labor violations and the total amount of penalties assessed as evidence of “WHD’s continued strong commitment of resources to child labor compliance.” We did not recognize WHD's efforts to ensure compliance in 2001. 2001 indicates a growing problem with child labor, or improvements in WHD”s efforts to identify violations, or other factors. It is unclear whether the increase in the number of violations found by WHD in fiscal year 2002 compared to fiscal year 2001. It could have resulted from with the child labor provisions of FLSA. It is not clear, however, what factors led to the decrease in the Number of Violations. The numbers have dropped dramatically since the early 1990s, WHD says. The number of child labor violations found each year has been on the decline for the past few years, the agency says. To estimate illegal employment in each state, we combined CPS data for 4 years (48 monthly surveys) from 1998 to 2001. Because observations at the state level were relatively small, combining data for four years increased the sample size and allowed us to make estimates about the state population. The WHD also does not utilize information from its website or other public records. For example, we estimated the number of children illegally employed inEach state. (See app. I for detailed information on these estimates.) to develop estimates cited by BLS and WHD in several of their publications. WHD stated that his 1997 study provided “the best currently available estimate of the number of children employed in violation of Federal or State child labor laws.” 2. Labor cites the drop in workplace injuries indicated by the report on the Youth Labor Force, which was published in 2000. The report also cited the “Spring Into Safety’s’ “ spring into safety” child labor campaign, published in May 2000. we could not include them in our estimates. In developing our estimates, we worked with Douglas Kruse, Ph.D., a professor at Rutgers University’s School of Management and Labor Relations. Kruse updated our initial estimate of illegal child labor in the U.S. to include more than 1,000 children in the state of New Jersey. We are happy to share our findings with the National Bureau of Economic Research, which updated our estimate of the number of children in need of child labor. survey of children born from 1980 to 1984, to estimate the number of 12- to 14-year-olds who work. In NLSY, children are asked whether or not they worked in each of the 52 weeks in a given year. Most employment questions in NLSy deal with events that take place after the child’s 14th birthday. As a result, we used a different method to estimate employment for children younger than 14 years of age. We identified those weeks that contained the 12th day of the month. from a job in the previous year (1996) We coded children born in 1983 and 1984 as being 13 years of age and 12 years of Age. We coded these children who said they had received income from a job as having been employed at some point in the past year (1995-96) We also coded children who were born in 1982 and 1983 as being 12 and 13 years old, respectively, and coded them as being born in 1981 and 1982, respectively. We then coded the children who had been born in 1984 and 1987 as being between the ages of 13 and 12. “NLSY97’; it contains data on one group of approximately 9,000 children born from 1980 to 1984. NLSY provides detailed information on the work experiences of this group of children over time. It captures data not collected in CPS, such as information on children younger than 15 and in-depth information on 14-year-olds who work. We recognize, however, that collecting these data will require additional resources. Regional and district offices also need sufficient guidance and training to effectively carry out their mission. to include 14-year-olds or beginning additional cohorts of NLSY cannot be implemented without additional study and resources. We clarified our conclusions to acknowledge that collecting these data may require additional resources. 29. We recommended that the Secretary “consider” these actions instead of recommending that they be taken. 30. We said that the secretary should ‘consider’ these actions rather than ‘recommend’ them. 31. We suggested the secretary ‘ consider’ the actions, rather than recommending them. used to show how the number and characteristics of working children have changed over time. Labor also compiles two additional sources of nationally representative data on working children. The most recent NLSY began in 1997 and is referred to as children’s work habits, education, and personal lives. The second set is the National Agricultural Workers (NAW) which includes information on children born from 1980 to 1984. It is not possible to use the NAW data to show the change in working children over time because it only includes children born between 1980 and 1984. activities, information about the child’s employment may be underreported or omitted, or the adult may incorrectly identify the industry, occupation, or hours worked. In NLSY, children are directly asked by interviewers to describe their jobs as well as their activities at work. Because children are asked directly about their work and are asked more detailed questions about employment throughout the year, the percentage of children who work reported in NLSy is higher than in the BLS survey. The BLS report is based on a survey of more than 2,000 children. Most children working in crop agriculture throughout the decade were boys aged 16 and 17. The percentage of younger children (14- and 15-year-olds) who work in agriculture has increased, from 17 percent to 30 percent. In addition, both the percentage of children who entered the country illegally and children who were foreign-born and newcomers to this country have increased over the past decade, according to the survey. The survey was conducted by the National Agricultural Statistics Service (NAS) in 2007 and 2008. Survey in which data are collected several times each year from a sample of crop agricultural workers. According to CPS data tabulated by GAO, about 4 percent of all children who worked were employed in agriculture in 2001. Another data set, the National Agricultural Workers Survey, provides more detailed information on the characteristics of children who work in crop agriculture. The information can be used to supplement data on children in CPS and NLSY but it is limited. Labor added questions to the survey in fiscal year 2000 to obtain additional data. much higher than in CPS. In addition, NLSY collects data on younger children who work. For example, about 24 percent of all 15-year-olds worked in a particular week during the summer of 1996,while CPS data showed that 18 percent of 15-years-old worked in that same period. NLSy97 also reported that as many as 44 percent of. all 13- year-olds and 34 percent of 14-year.-olds worked for an employer in a. particular week. Data on children who work has been collected in CPS for 50 years. 15-year-olds who lived in metropolitan areas were 1.4 times more likely to work more hours than allowed. Data on children younger than age 15 are not collected. In 1989, Labor stopped collecting data on 14- year-olds in CPS, although these children are as result of these limitations.. CPS does not capture information necessary to determine the number of 15- years-old who work more than allowed on a daily basis or at prohibited times of day. While some data are collected directly from children who work, most of the information in CPS on working children is provided by an adult member of the household. Because the adult answering the questions may not be aware of the full extent of the child’s which children work, the information is not easily accessible. The data do not provide information at the local level that could be used to help plan local compliance efforts. However, CPS data is available at the regional level and we developed state-level information by combining several years. Because CPS does not gather data on 14-year-olds, the estimates presented in this report paint an incomplete picture of the employment patterns for younger children. Another limitation of CPS is the method used to capture information on working children. FLSA and implementing regulations and guidance describe activities that children are prohibited from performing. Although CPS data on occupations are fairly specific, they do not list the actual activities children perform on the job.allowed under FLSA to work in many jobs. specific nature of child labor laws makes it difficult to reconcile them with generalized data sources. nationwide are protected under the child labor provisions of FLSA. Consider enhancing the data collected on children who work by expanding CPS to include 14-year olds or beginning additional cohorts of NLSY at regular intervals, such as every five years. To provide WHD’s regional and district offices with the information, visit www.whd.org/childlabor or call 1-800-273-8255. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org. In 2001, working children were as sizable a part of the United States labor force as they were in 1990. Most children worked in a variety of occupations concentrated in a few select industries. The Bureau of Labor Statistics’s (BLS) Current Population Survey (CPS) on children in the U.S. who work to the child labor provisions of FLSA. CPS does not capture data on children who work in occupations that are illegal under criminal statutes, such as drug dealing and prostitution. the 1991 GAO report on child labor using CPS data from January 1995 to September 1997. We compared CPS data for 1990, 1996, and 2001 to the child labor provisions of FLSA by defining the base population and identifying illegal employment by occupation and hours. In fact, we used the same methods as those used by the GAO in the 1991 report. We continue to believe that our analysis provides the best estimates that can be made with available data. We further refined this analysis by looking at the limitations of using CPSData to provide such estimates. We defined the base population by using the child labor provisions of FLSA as a guide. Because FLSA does not apply to children who are self-employed and the provisions are much less stringent for children who work in agriculture, we eliminated children. We eliminated children who worked in nonagricultural jobs as well as those who worked for the government. We also eliminated children working for the U.S. government as a result of the Affordable Care Act, which requires the government to provide health care to all Americans. who were self-employed and those who worked in agriculture from the data set. Key questions concerning child employment in a family business were not added to CPS until 1994. Therefore, in order to compare. results for 2001 with results for 1990, we included children who worked. in family business in the 2001 data set to compare results. for 2001 and 1990. For more information, visit www.cps.org.uk/child-employment-in-a-family-business or call the National Child Employment Helpline on 1-800-273-8255. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here. most children work part-time, many children who are injured may not miss a full day of work because they were not scheduled to work after being injured. In addition, BLS does not collect data on children who work in federal, state, or local government; those who are self-employed; or those who work for a non-profit or for a private company. BLS also does not track children who do not live in the U.S. because they are under the age of 18. who worked for the government or were self-employed because they are excluded from the data for nonfatal injuries. We totaled the hours worked each week by all children for each year and totaled the Hours worked Each Week for children of different sexes, races, and those who worked in certain areas of the country. We also totaled hours worked per week for children who were of different ages, races and worked in different parts of the U.S. than the rest of the population. For the full report, go to CNN.com/sport. older, including data on where children work, the types of jobs they hold, and how many hours a week they work. In addition, it provides demographic information on children such as age, race, ethnicity, and family income. Because the data have been collected for over 50 years, they can be accessed by anyone who wants to see them. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. were employed in this industry, mostly in eating and drinking places. Children generally held jobs in sales occupations, such as running a cash register or clerking at a store. They also worked in services such as waiting tables or cleaning hotel rooms. Various data sets provide information about children in the food industry. For more information, visit the Food and Beverage Industry Association (FBA) or the National Restaurant Association (NRA) for information about food and beverage industry jobs for children. for more information about the NRA, see fig. 2. 1990, their average hourly earnings increased by 10 percent. The older a child is, the more likely he or she is to work. In 1990, children paid an hourly salary earned an average of $5.70 an hour; in 2001, the average hourly salary was $6.36. The amount by which their earnings exceeded the minimum wage increased by $1.21. By 2001, children’s average hourly Earnings exceeded the Minimum Wage of $ 5.15 an hour. white children. Children in families with annual incomes below $25,000 worked an average of 21 hours a week in 2001. Children whose families had annual incomes of $75,000 or more worked more. Hispanic children who were employed worked more hours than other children. In 2001, Hispanic children worked anAverage of 24 hours. a week, at least 5 more hours a. week than white children. All minority children were less likely to work than white kids, but Hispanic children were more likely to be employed. In 2001, as in 1990, minority children and children from families with annual incomes below $25,000 were more likely than 52,000 (2 percent) to be self-employed. The percentage of children who worked illegally, either because they worked in occupations prohibited under the law or more hours than allowed, also did not change. Throughout the decade, children primarily worked in retail trade, in businesses such as department stores, grocery stores, and restaurants. In 2001, 15 percent of black children and 17 percent of Hispanic children worked. nine school months to obtain the number of children who worked illegally in school months (defined in our report as September through May) and the three summer months. To simplify the discussion on this topic, the report has been broken up into nine different school months. The report has also been broken into three different summer months: June through August, June through July, and July through August. This article has been updated to make clear that the report was broken into nine separate school months, not three. We are happy to clarify this. a week in summer months, June through August, were also included in our estimates. We further refined this analysis of the number of 15-year-olds who worked more hours than allowed under the law by conducting cross tabulations for race, industry, occupation, sex, geographic region, metropolitan area, and income. To estimate how many of these children worked more than allowed, we used a combination of age, gender, race, and industry, as well as occupation, occupation and geographic region. particular month. We determined the frequency of employed children in each of the 16 weeks and averaged the result over the total number of months in each period. We performed these calculations for three periods in 1996 and one period in 1997 as shown in table 4 in this report. We found that the number of children employed in each month was higher than the number employed in the previous 16 weeks. We also found that there were more children employed than there were employed in any one month in each year. The percentage of children who worked in summer months fluctuated over the decade from a high of 36 percent in 1990 to a low of 30 percent in 2001. In 2001, 30 percent of all children worked for an employer. The percentage of those who were not accompanied by their parents or other family members rose over the year. The number of children working in the summer months remained relatively stable over the past decade. More children work in summer. months when school is out of session than in school months. aged 15 to 17 worked in summer months, compared to 23 percent who worked in school months. 87 percent of all working children worked part-time in 2001. Children worked about the same number of hours in 2001 as in 1990, but more in the summer when more children work. For example, in 2001, 17-year-olds worked an average of 23 hours a week inSummer months, while only 15 percent of 15-year -olds worked. In school months, children worked about 16 hours per week. child labor provisions of FLSA for 15-year-olds are more restrictive. Nearly 80 percent worked an excessive number of hours, on average, 10 hours more than the maximum. Children who worked over 18 hours in a week in school months, from September to May, were included in our estimates of illegal employment. ChildrenWho worked over 40 hours were also included in estimates ofillegal employment. For example, in 2001, over 21 percent of all employed 15- year-olds worked illegally. As many as 4 percent of all 15- to 17-year-olds who worked in 2001 worked illegally. Children who worked illegally not only worked more than the allowed number of hours, they also worked in prohibited industries and occupations. Most of the children who worked illegal were 15- year-old who worked more hours than allowed illegally in school months than in summer months. Although most children worked in the retail trade industry during the past decade, a substantial percentage of the illegal employment was in hazardous occupations. allowed during school months, compared to 16 percent of whites and 18 percent of blacks. The region of the country in which children live as well as the type of area in which they live (metropolitan or nonmetropolitan) are also associated with illegal employment. A higher proportion of employed 15-year-olds are black than are white, according to a study by the Pew Research Center. The study also found that black and white teenagers were more likely to be unemployed than non-whites. hours, and times of day that children younger than 16 years of age can work. Children who are 14 and 15 years old may work in many jobs in retail stores, restaurants, and gas stations. They may not, however, work in any job considered hazardous, including jobs in manufacturing, mining, construction, transportation, warehousing, communications, and public utilities. The provisions also prohibit 14- and 15-year-olds from working during school hours and limit the number of hours child labor provisions are much less restrictive. Older children are more likely to work in the retail trade industry than younger children. 15-year-olds more likely than older children toWork in agriculture, possibly because of the looser age restrictions that provide younger children with opportunities for employment in agriculture that older children do not. In summer months in 2001, nearly 60 percent of employed 17-year.olds worked in retail trade, whereas 38 percent of. employed 15- year-old worked in this industry. In the same period, 16-year old children worked 2.5 more hours a week than 15-Year-olds. In school months in 2001, 32 percent of all employed 15-year-olds with family incomes less than $25,000 a year worked more hours than allowed under the law. In contrast, only 9 percent of those with family income over $75,000 worked more than allowed. In addition to income, race is also associated with the likelihood that a child will work more hours. Hispanic children are more likely to work too many hours than other children. In 2001, 42 percent of Hispanic 15- year-olds worked more. hours than who lived in the South and West. through the use of logistic regression for illegal occupations and cross- tabulations for hours. We used data from 36 monthly surveys from CPS for the following years: 1990, 1996 and 2001. For each year, we created data sets with children aged 15 to 17. Each year held roughly 70,000 observations. Due to the small sample sizes of children identified in these groups, cross tabulations were not statistically significant at the 0.05 level. In order to obtain information on the likelihood of children who were most likely to work in illegal occupations, we conducted a logistic regressions. determine demographic differences in the likelihood of working illegally, the following variables were included in the model: sex, race, urbanicity (metropolitan or non-metropolitan area), income, citizenship, and region. Differences that were found to be statistically significant are indicated in table 12 below. We used the CPS variable that describes the likelihood that a person will work in the U.S. illegally. The CPS variable is the same as the one used in the previous study to determine the odds that someone will work illegally. differences included in the report were tested for statistical significance at the 0.05 level. To estimate the number of children who are employed illegally in the United States, we compared data obtained from the Bureau of in the 2001 base population. These children are not covered by the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA), but they are employed in violation of the child labor provisions of the FLSA. We averaged the results of the data comparisons to obtain numbers of kids who worked illegally, which were then averaged. In 2001, as many as 3.7 million children between the ages of 15 and 17 worked, about 30 percent of all children in this age range. Because of limitations of the data available, we could not determine the full extent and nature of children’s employment in the United States. We used data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY) to estimate the number of 12- to 17-year-old children to work illegally. Between 1990 and 2001, children as a proportion of the total United States labor force, as contributors are listed in appendix. V. was found in other industries (see fig. 3). In 2001, although only 3 percent of all children worked in manufacturing, this industry accounted for 14 percent of. all illegally employed children. Children who were employed in prohibited occupations were most commonly employed illegally in transportation-related occupations. In each state, a larger proportion of 15-year-olds in that state were likely to be. illegally employed than in other states, because they that a large percentage of children working in this state worked in those industries where children were most likely to. be injured. levels of illegal employment in each region, we used data for the four regions defined in CPS: Midwest, Northeast, South, and West. Midwest: Illinois, Iowa, Kansas, Michigan, Minnesota, Missouri, Nebraska, North Dakota, Ohio, South Dakota, and Wisconsin; Northeast: Connecticut, Maine, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, and Pennsylvania. South: Florida, Georgia, South Carolina, Louisiana, Mississippi, Tennessee, and Texas. West: West Virginia, Nevada, New Mexico, Arizona, California, and Nevada. New Jersey, New York, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, and Vermont; South: Alabama, Arkansas, Delaware, District of Columbia, Florida, Georgia, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maryland, Mississippi, North Carolina, Oklahoma, South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, Virginia, and West Virginia. West: Alaska, Arizona, California, Colorado, Hawaii, Idaho, Montana, Nevada, New Mexico, Oregon, Utah, Washington, and Wyoming. North: Georgia, Alabama, Mississippi. South: Florida, Arkansas. racial differences, we combined race and ethnicity categories. To separately determine the effect of illegal employment on whites, blacks, and Hispanics, we coded children whose race was identified as “white” or “black” and whose ethnicity was identified. As a result, a child can be identified in CPS as both ‘white’ and ‘Hispanic,’ or as ‘black’and ‘ Hispanic.’ For children whose. race wasidentified as ”black“ or ”white,” we included them in the category of race identified (i.e., as   ”, “non-Hispanic”) For 1996 and 2001, “Other” included Asians and Native Americans. For 1990, ‘Other’ included anyone who identified a race that did not fall within the other categories listed. This resulted in four racial categories: white, black, Hispanic, and other. Only 15% of U.S. workers are considered “Hazardous Occupations,” according to the Bureau of Labor and Employment Statistics. For more information, visit the Bureau’s Hazardous Occupations website. worked in prohibited occupations worked as truck drivers. We determined that a child’s gender, race, and citizenship status were related to the likelihood that he or she worked in a prohibited occupation. In 2001, boys were more likely CPS data on occupations show that many children are employed as truck driver. However, our draft report incorrectly indicated that 43 percent of all children who are employed illegally are employed in truck driver jobs. We clarified the report to show that the percentage of children who were employed illegally as truckdrivers was 43 percent. than girls to work in prohibited occupations. There was no correlation between family income and children who worked in hazardous occupations. Children from families with lower annual incomes were not more or less likely than other children. Children who were not citizens were more likely than those who were citizens to be in a prohibited occupation. Black children were less likely to be employed in a hazardous occupation than children of other races, and black children were not as likely as other children to be unemployed. The study was published in the Journal of the American Medical Association. they do not have in other industries. In addition to age, family income and race are also related to children’s employment. Children from families with lower incomes are less likely to work than those from higher income families. Minority children are also less likely than white children to work, according to the study. The study was published in the Journal of Labor and Employment Studies, published by the University of California, Los Angeles. It was based on a survey of more than 2,000 parents of children in the U.S. WHD’s responses to complaints as much as the results of its efforts to target child labor violations in these industries. We disagree that our analysis of fatality rates is a “flawed interpretation of the BLS and NIOSH data” and that is more appropriate to use the actual numbers of evidence that violations are not prevalent in this industry. It is unclear whether WHD would have found more child labor. violations if it had targeted employers in the wholesale trade industry. Labor cites only thefatality rates and number of deaths in the wholesalers industry. working in this industry does not factor in these high injury and fatality rates. In fact, some of the most serious child labor violations WHD found occurred in sawmills and companies that produce wood pallets. We commend WHD’s recent decision to conduct a second compliance survey of the grocery, 25 years after the first one was conducted. The second survey is scheduled to be conducted on Nov. 25 and 26. The first survey was conducted on Dec. 4 and 5. We believe the anecdotal information on injuries and fatalities maintained by WHD’s national office does not provide enough information to be useful in making WHD's resource allocation decisions. The information on fatalities and serious injuries to children tracked by the WHD in May 2002 contained data on only 7 fatalities and 36 injuries reviewed in fiscal year 2001. We agree with Labor’S statement that our recommendation to consider enhancing the data collected on children who work by expanding CPS. 28. Reports. Reports: 28. Manufacturing has one of the highest injury rates for children. WHD should look to the extensive experience of of young workers in the industry. It is not clear that establishing a goal for. high fatality rates for this industry would be a wise resource investment and would have no impact on occupational injuries and fatalities for. children. The number of children working in this industry may be small, but we believe the injury rates to be sufficiently high to warrant further WHD attention. We believe that it is important for WHD to focus some of its resources on reviewing child labor. We question how WHD determined that “many of these specialty trade contractors are so small that they do not meet the FLSA coverage criteria” because this information is not tracked in the system. We noted that the injury rate for children who work in this industry was relatively high. We also questioned WHD’s determination that many of these small contractors don’t meet the coverage criteria because they’re not large enough to be covered by the federal government. We asked WHD how they determined this. 23.truck drivers represents 42 percent of children who are employed in prohibited occupations. We continue to believe that the injury and fatality rates for children who work in the construction industry warrant WHD attention. We also commend WHD’s efforts to fund research by NIOSH on the health and safety of children working in construction. The National Institute of Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) is a non-profit organization that conducts research on occupational safety and health for children and young adults. its draft fiscal year 2003 annual performance plan. The draft plan includes goals for grocery stores, fast food restaurants, and full-service restaurants. WHD did not, however, establish goals for industries in which we found that children were likely to be employed establish specific, measurable goals for those industries. The agency noted that WHD’s draft fiscalyear 2003 performance plan includes specific goals for the industries that employ the most children. See GAO comment 10. 15. As noted previously, we have revised the report to reflect the goals contained in WHD's draft performance plan for fiscal Year 2003. nursing homes and residential care facilities. Labor recently established specific goals for fiscal year 2003 for the industries in which children are most likely to work. WHD’s national goals in the early part of the decade focused on increasing the number of children in the care industry. The goal is to increase the numbers of children working in those industries by 20 percent by the end of the next fiscal year, WHD said in a recent report. The report was based on investigations of employers in that industry. has taken some steps towards developing such a system, as reflected in the program goals it has established and refined in recent years. WHD continues to lack goals for industries that have high rates of injuries and fatalities. Further, WHD’s performance management system does not allow managers to fully manage their organizations. The company is currently looking for a new chief operating officer to take on the role of COO. The new COO will take on a variety of roles, including COO, CFO, COO and CFO. more specific, measurable goals, although it does not contain goals for some of the industries with high injury and fatality rates. 11. While the referenced employer compliance survey is an important step in setting goals for improving, we have revised the information in our report and the associated recommendations. 12. We have revised our recommendations on how to improve the health and safety of workers in certain industries. 13. We've revised the recommendations on what to do if a worker is injured or killed in a workplace accident. Using methods developed in our previous report and refined by Douglas Kruse, we defined a list of 100 occupational codes that correspond to activities prohibited by the Hazardous Occupations Orders. Any child in the base population with one of these codes was included in our estimates of children employed illegally. We used a similar method to identify occupations specifically prohibited for 15-year-olds. In this instance, 216 occupational codes matched the descriptions of activities prohibited to children under 16. Any. child identified in the Base population with a code that matched this description was included. of equipment children are prohibited from using detailed in the Hazardous Occupations Orders, cannot be gleaned by reviewing the occupational categories in CPS. The estimates are also overstated because they include some activities that are allowed in occupations that are prohibited. For example, because work as a public messenger is expressly prohibited for15-year- olds, we included children who worked in the occupation category “mail’s” The estimate of how many children work in “food services” does not indicate how many of them work with meat slicers. its staff cited on page 10 of Labor’s comments to identify the areas of the country in which children are most likely to work in these industries. As with the transportation and public utilities and the wholesale trade industries, Labor only cites the fatality rates for the construction industry. 21. The number of children killed in construction accidents in the U.S. in 2013 was the highest in the nation since records began in 1978. 21, the highest number of deaths in the construction sector since records started in 1978, according to the Labor Department. on the industries in which children work and those in which they are most likely to be injured or killed. Other major contributors to this report are Wendy Ahmed, Amy E. Buck, Beverly A. Crawford, Charla R. Gilbert, Julian P. Klazkin, Ellen L. Soltow, and Corinna A. Nicolaou. For more information, visit the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or go to www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org. improve employer compliance suffer from limitations that hamper its enforcement of the law. Labor has recently begun to identify specific, measurable goals for the industries in which children are most likely to work. For example, there are no specific goals for construction, which has high fatality and injury rates. We believe that this approach reduces attention to some of the industries that pose significant risks to children. It is important to ensure that there are sufficient numbers of children working in these industries to justify setting such goals. data on child labor from the states, including data on injuries and illnesses, and add additional restrictions. The legislation would prohibit children from making door-to-door sales for profit. (See app. II for a list of the legislative proposals introduced in the 107th Congress that would strengthen the child labor laws) The bill would also require the federal government to report on the number of children employed in child labor in the U.S. and its impact on the economy. The bill is expected to be introduced by the end of the year. 18 from working in the construction industry and from working at a height of 6 feet or higher on ladders, scaffolds, trees, and other structures. For jobs in agriculture, the 18 from working on a ladder or scaffold. Labor is in the process of reviewing the report and deciding what actions it will take in response to the recommendations. The report was released to the public on Wednesday. The Labor Department is expected to make a decision by the end of the month. For more information on the report, go to: http://www.labor.gov/. a public service announcement displayed on movie screens in 22 states and printed on 37 million shopping bags distributed by K-Mart. Labor’s newest national child labor initiative, “YouthRules!” announced by the Secretary in May 2002, is aimed at “educating young workers, parents and employers about workplace hazards, proper hours of work, and child labor laws.” The initiative was launched by the Department of Labor in 2002 to promote child labor in the workplace. of the occupations determined to be hazardous by the Secretary of Labor.) In 2002, NIOSH completed a review of the Hazardous Occupations Orders for Labor. Its report, issued in July 2002, made several recommendations for changes to the orders, including establishing new hazardous orders prohibiting all children younger than age 10. This statement is also misleading. Our draft report acknowledged that NIOSH. completed a Review of the hazardous occupations orders for Labor in 2002. We have not published a final rule on the 1999 regulatory proposal to update some of thehazardous occupations orders because these actions have not been completed. Labor, which made several recommendations for changes to the orders. Labor was in the process of reviewing the report and deciding the actions it would take in response to NIOSH’s recommendations. 9. We believe that our report provides a comprehensive and balanced picture of the effectiveness of the orders, we said. We said that we were ‘confident’ that the orders would be effective and that they would be ‘comprehensive’ and ‘balanced.’ equipment covered by these Hazardous Occupations Orders, they are not limited as to the number of hours or times of day they can work. These hazardous jobs and types of equipment are specified in 17 Hazardous occupations orders originally issued between 1939 and 1963. (See table 2 for a list of equipment covered by the orders. See table 1 for a full list of the orders and equipment covered. See the bottom of the page for more information on these orders and the equipment used to perform them. on either the length of the workday, nor its starting and ending times. As with prohibited occupations, however, it was not possible to determine the extent to which our estimates are understated as a result of these limitations. However, we believe that the amount of this understatement is large because of the limited information available at the time of this report. We are happy to make clear that this is not the case for all of the jobs listed in this report, and that we are not seeking to blame anyone in particular for any of the occupations. As noted in an article by a researcher at BLS about fatality rates, “although counts are informative in identifying worker groups that experience large numbers of fatalities, they do not by themselves measure risk.” To quantify risk, the data on workplace fatalities must be associated with a measure of worker safety, the BLS said. The BLS says it has no plans to change the way it calculates workplace fatalities. The study was published in the journal Occupational Health and Safety. It was based on data from the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. exposure to risk, such as employment or hours worked. The number of hours worked is preferable because different workers spend variable hours on the job in a given time period (e.g. year), and therefore have different lengths of exposure to workplace hazards. We believe it is particularly important to use the term 'hours worked' to refer to a person who has been employed for a period of time and has been exposed to a number of workplace hazards such as work-related injuries.” and can be used to complement each other. For example, certain types of injuries such as lacerations may be treated in emergency rooms but not necessitate one or more days away from work. Other injuries that may result in missed work days such as sprains and strains such as strains and sprains can be treated at a different time of the day or week. For more information on how to get the most out of your body, visit the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NAIDS) website. Children injured on the job most frequently sustained strains and tears, cuts and lacerations, and bruises and contusions. Data from one from 37 percent in 1992 to 52 percent in 2000. About 65 percent of the injuries from 1992 to 2000 required children to miss 5 or fewer days of work, while 20 percent of injuries required 20 or more days away from work. Children aged 16 and over sustained the vast majority of all work-related injuries over the past decade, according to BLS data. BLS reports all work-related fatalities, including those for children, in its Census of Fatal Occupational Injuries published each year. BLS captures only injuries serious enough to require at least one missed day of work; therefore, data on many injuries are not captured. Because treated in emergency rooms may not be accurately counted, it is difficult to determine the true extent of injuries to children who work. Both sets of data underreport injuries to kids, BLS and NIOSH officials say. NIOSH collects data on work- related injuries in its National Electronic Injury Surveillance System from a sample of emergency room records. The employment of working children is generally covered by FLSA and its implementing regulations. NIOSH data also underreport injuries because children who are injured may not inform hospital staff that their injuries are work-related and hospital staff may omit details of injuries that connect them to work. As a result, some injuries may not be reported. In the U.S., NIOSH is required to maintain.in private industry. for all work-related injuries serious enough to cause children to miss at least one day of work. NIOSH’s estimate was based on records of injuries treated in emergency rooms. BLS may be more commonly treated in physicians’ offices or outpatient clinics than in emergency Rooms. Different types of injuries were more prevalent among those reported by employers than those treated inEmergency Rooms. Although we highlighted many of Labor's efforts to. Labor’S efforts to make the workplace safer for young workers, they provide information the BLS data. In 2000, children who worked in eating and drinking places, food stores, general merchandise stores, and health services had the largest numbers of injuries. The injury rates per hours worked were lower for the retail trade and services industries than the rates for children who work in wholesale trade, transportation and public utilities, and manufacturing. However, as with fatalities, the likelihood of injury needs to be considered in addition to the actual number of injuries, the authors say. They found that the risk of injury was highest in some industries with the smallest number of injury to children. in wholesale trade, transportation and public utilities, and manufacturing had higher rates of injury than those working in retail trade or services. (See table 8.) Injuries are caused by a variety of factors, but most frequently from coming into contact with an object or equipment. For example, for example, in the manufacturing industry it is common to come in contact with parts of the manufacturing process that are then used in the production of other products. In the retail trade, injuries are more common to be caused by contact with other products or materials. accidents, including highway collisions and nonhighway incidents, such as a fall from a moving vehicle. Other common events included being caught or compressed by equipment or being struck by a falling or flying object. For example, in 2000, a 16-year-old boy who worked in a supermarket was killed in a car accident. (See fig. 7 for more information on car crashes and car accidents.) For more information about car accidents, visit the National Transportation Safety Board's website. in 1998 a 17-year-old worker fractured his hand when a piece of metal slipped off a power-driven machine he was operating and landed on his hand. Other common accidents were overexertion, falls, and contact with hot objects. The causes of work-related nonfatal injuries were fairly constant over this period. The most common cause of death was a heart attack, followed by a broken leg, a broken arm, or a broken shoulder. The highest number of deaths was a stroke. crushed to death by a cardboard box compactor, and another 16-year-old boy was crushed when the forklift he was operating flipped over and landed on his chest. Overall, the characteristics of children who died as a result of work- related injuries remained relatively constant, according to the study. The study found that the majority of the deaths were caused by work-related injuries, and that the number of fatalities was relatively low. The death toll for this year's study was 14, the study found. worked in family businesses accounted for less than 1 percent of all working children. They accounted for about one-third of all fatalities. Children who worked for small employers—those with 10 employees or less—accounted for nearly two-thirds of the fatalities for which employer size was reported. About 90 percent of the children killed who work for an agricultural employer worked for employers with 10 or fewer employees. The number of hours children work in each industry needs to be considered as well as the number of deaths. During the decade, over 40 percent of the children killed as a result of work-related injuries worked in agriculture. Retail trade and construction accounted for 20 percent and 14 percent of all fatalities, respectively. From 1992 to 2000, 44 percent of. all children killed in a work- related injury died as a. result of transportation-related. The percentage of children killed who worked in. agriculture generally ranged from 33 percent to 44 percent, although. it rose to 58 percent in 1998. While most characteristics changed little over the. decade, the number of children who died as the result of a work.related transportation incident increased. 62 and 73 children died from injuries sustained while working, a total of 613 children over the 9-year period. Although girls were as likely as boys to work from 1992 to 2000, boys were almost eight times more likely to die as a result of a work- related injury than girls. In addition, although most of the children killed (about 60 percent) were aged 16 and 17, a substantial number were 13 years of age. (See fig. 5 for more data on work-related injuries. In 1992 and 2000, 60 percent of the children who died as a result of work-related injuries were 16 and 17 years old. 75 percent of children killed for whom race was available were white. Hispanic children had a fatality rate that was twice as high as the rate for white children. In addition, certain industries and types of businesses pose a from 1992 to 2000, although transportation-related fatalities appeared to increase.or younger. In both 1992 and2000, 60 per cent of the kids who died were 16-17 years old, and 75 per cent werewhite. Most of the children younger than age 15 who died as the result of a work- related injury were employed in agriculture. About 50 percent of children who died in agriculture were 14 years old or younger. (See table 5.) The majority of those who died were in the U.S. born between the ages of 1 and 3. The majority were born in the United States born between 1981 and 1989. The average age of death was 14 years and 2 months. The median age of the death was 15 years and 3 months. fatalities in each year was relatively low, we aggregated the data over the decade to provide statistically reliable information. We calculated fatality and injury rates by using the total number industries. Because we were not able to obtain SOII data that only included 15- to 17-year-olds by industry, we calculated industry rates by industry. The data sets for fatal and nonfatal injuries use different industry groupings than CPS, we combined industries so that they would reflect the same industry groups. injuries have decreased by more than 40 percent. However, data from NIOSH suggest that injuries may have actually increased during the same period, from about 64,000 in 1992 to about 80,00 in 1999. (See fig. 8.) Due to limitations of NIOSH data, this article has been amended to make clear that injuries have decreased in the 1990s and increased in the 2000s. For more information on NIOSH, go to: http://www.nihos.org/. We used data from 108 monthly surveys to obtain the total number of hours worked by 15- to 17-year-olds between 1992 and 2000. In computing the rates for nonfatal injuries, we excluded children under 18. Since children under 15 make up less than 1 percent of all injuries to children, this discrepancy did not affect our estimates. For the transportation and public utilities industry, Labor mentions only fatality rates and the number of fatalities. In addition to the CPS data, we used the data from the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. The number and characteristics of work-related fatalities and fatality rates for working children remained relatively constant from 1992 to 2000. The characteristics of children injured have changed little over the decade. Most of the estimates in the report were calculated using data obtained from samples and, therefore, have sampling errors associated with them. All previous year’s fatality and injury rates for children were based on data from the Census of Fatal Occupational Injuries and the Survey of Occupational injuries and Illnesses. all 12-year-olds received income from freelance jobs at some point in 1997. The number and characteristics of children who die each year as a result of a work-related injury have changed little over the past decade. From 1992 to 2000, the number of fatalities and the fatality rates for working work from CPS were the same as in the 1990s and 2000s. We used the Census of Fatal Occupational Injuries and Survey of Occupational injuries and Illnesses to identify the number and. characteristics of 15- to 17- year-olds who died.