HRSA's analysis showed a wide variety in the scope and level of formality among interagency agreements. Most states specify the services provided by each agency under the agreement. Commonly, the Title V agency contracts with health providers to provide the services, and the agency administering the state's Medicaid program assumes the responsibility for reimbursement of those services. States may also include coordination with other services, such as WIC,. HRSA's 2008 analysis recommended specific components for interagency. agreements that outline the expected areas and levels of coordination. in the gaps left by Medicaid and CHIP is one such area, due to variable enrollment eligibility among the states. As mentioned earlier, the indicators discussed in this report are referred to as outcome measures and performance indicators by HRSA. improvement in these measures is an objective of Title II of the Health and Human Services Act (HHS Act), which provides funding for health insurance programs in the U.S. and abroad. The HHS Act provides funding to states for health care programs, such as Medicaid, CHIP, and Medicare. state's population. Direct health care services may cost more per person served than other services. Distribution of funds depends on the needs of the states' populations, and the gaps left by other health and social service programs that are identified by the states. (Data on state and national indicators, including health care costs, can be found at: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/29/healthcare/index.html#storylink=cpy. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. To facilitate access to coverage for maternal and child health services, state toll-free hotlines provide callers with state-specific Medicaid enrollment information. In 2012, state Toll-free Hotlines recorded 1.3 million calls regarding Medicaid enrollment. The Maternal and Child Health Services is a program of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. For confidential support call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. coordinating health care systems and data system architecture, providing funding for applied research, and developing guidelines. Population-based services promote core public health functions such as universal screening, health promotion, and disease prevention campaigns. Enabling services provide access to health care services, such as newborn screening, lead screening, immunization, oral health, and injury prevention, and health promotion campaigns. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. to services for vulnerable populations, including those with special health care needs. Enabling services are services that facilitate access to care, such as case management, transportation, purchase of insurance, and coordination with other programs. Direct health care services provided under Title V are intended to fill the gaps in primary care services. Title V is a federal program that provides health care assistance to low-income Americans. The program is funded by the federal government and the federal Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) direct health care, as illustrated in Figure 1 . Infrastructure building services, which are at the base of the pyramid, are foundation-building activities that provide for the development and maintenance of health services systems. infrastructure building services increase a health system capacity by supporting training and other workforce development activities, according to the World Health Organization (WHO) The World Health Organisation ( WHO) says health systems need to invest in their infrastructure to meet the needs of a growing population. The WHO says health system infrastructure needs to be built from the ground up to meet future needs. systems as reported to HRSA by the states. Data from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), when available, are also presented as a point of comparison. The most recent data reported to the states are shown in Figure D -1. CDC's National Center for Health Statistics has published the most recently available data for each state. For more information, visit the Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA) website or go to www.HRSA.gov. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here. pediatric and family practice workforce data to HRSA, including information on the number of obstetricians, family practitioners, certified nurse midwives, pediatricians, and certified pediatric nurse practitioners. They are also required to report data on whether individuals who are licensed in the state in that year are also practicing as a nurse midwife, nurse practitioner, or nurse practitioner in that state. The state is required to provide the data to the federal government by the end of the year. For confidential support call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or go to www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org. HRSA differentiates between health "performance" measures and health "outcome" measures. The performance measures include data on breastfeeding, oral health care, the suicide rate, and the teenage birth rate. Outcome measures include the infant mortality rate, the ratio of the black infant mortality rates to the white infant mortality.vaccination rates. The teen birth rate is a measure of how many teenagers are born to mothers who are under the age of 18. It is the lowest rate for girls and the highest for boys. Maternal and child health measures provide information on the overall health of mothers and children in each state. These measures include data on maternal mortality rates and infant mortality rates. The implications of these measures for the MCH Services Block Grant, as well as other maternal and child Health funding, are discussed in the following section. Although these and other indicators are referred to as outcome measures and performance indicators, they are also called outcome indicators and outcome measures. The impact of these indicators on the funding for MCH services is discussed later in this section. national health objectives, such as reduction of the infant mortality rate, has shown past improvement but has stagnated in recent years. Due to the flexibility of funding, varying circumstances in states, and other societal issues, it is impossible to globally track the direct impact of maternal and child health block. It is difficult to track the impact of the block on infant mortality rates in the U.S. due to funding, funding flexibility, and state-specific circumstances. It's impossible to track directly impact of block on the rate of infant mortality. The Maternal and Child Health Bureau administers two surveys. Each state must prepare states and a compilation of specified maternal and child health indicators, nationally and broken down by state. The Secretary must also provide a report on funded SPRANS and CISS projects to those committees. As noted above, a list of other maternal, child health measures is provided in Appendix E. The National Survey of Children's Health and the National Survey. of Children with Special Health Care Needs are described in the text box below. rate, and the child death rate. States are required to report data on these maternal and child health indicators by county, race, and ethnicity. These measures are compiled from a number of different sources, including state birth and death certificates, hospitalization data, and surveys. The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services releases its annual report on maternal, child, and infant health in the United States. The report is based on data from various sources, such as state birth, death, and hospitalization records, as well as surveys. pregnancy and sexually transmitted infections, including HIV/AIDS, and at least three of the six stipulated adulthood preparation subjects. The subjects are (1) healthy relationships, including marriage and family interactions; (2) adolescent development, including the development of healthy attitudes and values about adolescent growth and development; and (3) body image, racial and ethnic identity. The study was published in the Journal of Adolescent Health and Development, a peer-reviewed journal published by the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. and ethnic diversity, and other related subjects; (3) financial literacy; (4) parent-child communication; (5) educational and career success, including developing skills for employment preparation, job seeking, independent living, financial self-sufficiency, and workplace productivity; and (6) healthy life skills, including goal-setting, decisionmaking, negotiation, communication and interpersonal skills, and stress management. The study was based on a survey of more than 1,000 parents and children. Children with special health care needs (CSHCN) are defined by HRSA as "those who have or are at increased risk for a chronic physical, developmental, behavioral, or emotional condition and who also require health and related services of a type or amount beyond that required by children" CSHCN is a term used to refer to children who have a variety of health and care needs, including physical, mental, developmental and behavioral issues, as well as mental health issues. The term is also used to describe children who are at an increased risk of developing a chronic condition. health status goals (consistent with national health objectives, such as Healthy People 2020) The need for preventive and primary care services for pregnant women, mothers, infants, and children; and services for children with special health care needs. The plan to address the needs assessment must include a description of how it will be implemented in the state. It must also include a detailed plan of action for how the state will meet the needs assessed by the assessment. The assessment must be completed by the end of the year. generally." Over time, additional programs targeting children with special health care needs and low-income women and children were added to the Public Health Service Act (PHSA) and the SSA. These include certain services for children with disabilities who receive Supplemental Security Income (SSI, formerly §1615 [c] of the SBA) and lead-based paint. The SSA also provides certain services to children with disability who receive SSI. The PHSA and SSA are part of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. to enable states (1) to improve maternal and child health services, especially those in low-income and rural areas, and (2) to extend and improve services for crippled children. The Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1985 (COBRA, P.L. 99-272 ) replaced the term "crippled" with the term 'children with special needs' The term 'crippling' is now used to refer to children who are severely disabled. care services for certain blind and disabled children, as well as rehabilitative services. implement family-centered, community-based systems of coordinated care for children with special health care needs. provide toll-free hotlines and assistance in applying for services to pregnant women with infants and children who are eligible for Medicaid. The primary goal is to improve the quality of life for children and their families. The state's goal is also to reduce the number of children who need to be institutionalized in the first place. delivery systems; maternal and child health centers providing pregnancy services for women and preventive and primary care services for infants (up to one year) that operate under the direction of a not-for-profit hospital. Rural population health projects to serve rural populations; and outpatient and community-based services programs for children for children. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. low income or limited availability of care; reduce infant mortality;. provide and ensure access to comprehensive prenatal and postnatal care to women (especially low-income and at-risk pregnant women); increase the number of children receiving health assessments and follow-up diagnostic and treatment services; provide and ensuring access to preventive and health care services for women and children. The program is funded by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. Health care has long been considered a core component of child growth and development. Federal programs, including EPSDT, have been established to ensure that all children receive regular, quality care. Overall, 84% of children had regular health care visits in the U.S. in 2012. In 2013, the number of children who had regular care visits was up to 84%. In 2012, it was 83%. In 2013 and 2014, the figure was 82%. In 2015 and 2016, the percentage of children with regular health visits was down to 80%. In 2014 and 2015, the average number of visits was 81%. Childhood Home Visiting Program and Strong Start and targeted national public health initiatives such as CDC's Safe Motherhood and Infant Health program have been promoted by policymakers. Healthy Start, a national program that targets the infant mortality rate in selected communities, has also been promoted as a way to reduce infant mortality in certain communities. The CDC's Healthy Start program is aimed at reducing infant mortality rates in selected areas of the U.S. by 20 per cent by 2015. The goal is to reduce the rate of infant mortality by 30 per cent. evaluation, and 3% for making grants to tribal entities for home visitation services to Indian families. The new early childhood home visitation grant program is collaboratively administered by the Administration for Children and Families and the Maternal and Child Health Bureau at HRSA. SSA §512, Postpartum Depression. This program provides a grant of up to $10,000 to help families cope with the effects of postpartum depression. The program is funded by a combination of federal, state, and local grants. The proportion of children with health insurance coverage varies considerably by race, ethnicity, and poverty status. 81% of children living in households at or below the federal poverty level have health insurance. Children who were uninsured (54%) were less likely than those covered by public insurance (84%) to have received preventive health care in the past year. privately insured (88%) children were more likely to have gotten preventive care than those who were not insured (87%) Children in households with 400% or more children were most likely to be uninsured. The survey also found that 90% of Hispanic children had health insurance, compared with 96% of non-Hispanic white children. The infant mortality rate (IMR) is frequently used as a proxy indicator for the health status of children.or more of the federal poverty level. The survey was conducted by the National Center for Health Statistics and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Washington, D.C. and Atlanta, Georgia. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. one preventive health care visit in the year preceding the 2011-2012 National Survey of Children's Health. Non-Hispanic white children had the highest rate (86%) of preventive health Care visits in the preceding year, followed by non-Hispanic black children. There was slight variation among racial and ethnic groups; non- Hispanic white children were the most likely to visit a health care provider. For more information, go to www.childrenshealth.org or call 1-800-273-TALK (8255). an unmet health care need was much higher among children with no insurance than children with insurance. Shared decisionmaking between families of children with special health care needs and their children's health and whether the family felt like a partner in their child's health care. The 2009-2010 National Survey of Children with Special Health Care Needs found that families with insurance coverage were more likely to report family-centered coordinated care than families without insurance coverage. The Survey indicated that 45% of families had shared decisionmaking. the health and well-being of low-income children and their families. Access to quality health care for mothers and children is measured by several questions in the National Survey of Children's Health. Participants were asked whether they have public, private, or no insurance coverage. Participating families were also asked if their children had access to health care in the U.S., and if they had insurance coverage in the United States, and if it was available to them if they lived in a state that did not provide it. injuries that require medical care. Accessing these additional services may create additional access and financial burdens on families. Children with special health care needs may qualify for Medicaid or CHIP, and they are more likely to have health insurance. According to the 2011-2012 National Survey of Children's Health, 47% of children with specialhealth care needs had a medical home. Access to medical homes for children withSpecial Health Care Needs varies widely across states. In the 2009-2010 National Survey. of Children with Special Health Care Care health care among children withspecial health care. needs. children had at least one preventive care visit in the prior year, whether they had unmet health care needs, and whether or not they had a medical home. According to the 2011-2012 National Survey of Children's Health, almost 95% of all children have health insurance coverage. Older children and teenagers less likely to have received preventive care than infants and preschool-aged children. Children with special health careneeds often need health, mental, and social services beyond preventive care. They also are more likely to be uninsured. Needs, access to preventive and health care services is measured by a series of questions on use of services and unmet needs. Overall, 76% of children did not have an unmet need for specific health Care services in the year prior to the survey. However, the proportion of children with unmet health care needs was higher than the proportion with needs in the previous year, according to a survey by the National Institute for Health and Population Research. The survey asked children to rate their need for health care in a range of categories. with private insurance coverage reported that they received family-centered care. 25% of families without insurance coverage. Another approach to ensuring family- centered care is the medical home. Medical homes provide patients access to primary care medical providers and a coordinated care team. The medical homes have been associated with improved health outcomes for patients. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. single-year linked birth and death certificate information on IMR. IMR is generally higher in the South and Midwest, and lower in other regions. Of the 50 states, Mississippi had the highest IMR of the 50, according to HRSA data. Comparing data from both HRSA and CDC, the data show similar variability in rates by state and region. In the South, IMR was higher than in any other region but lower than in other parts of the U.S. (9.97 per 1,000 live births) and New Hampshire had the lowest (3.95) in 2008. A number of health and social factors affect IMR. Risk factors for infant mortality, including higher rates of teenage births, prematurity, and inadequate prenatal care in the first trimester, disproportionately affect low-income low- income families. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. In FY2012, 33% of pregnant women who received Title V-funded services were covered by private health insurance. 56% were enrolled in Medicaid, 4% had no insurance coverage, and the insurance coverage status of 7% of Title V clients was unknown. Among children ages 1 to 22 years old, 34% were covered. by Medicaid. 4% werecovered by CHIP, 29% were. covered byprivate health insurance, and 6% hadNo insurance coverage.as well as those who have no insurance Coverage. In 2012, the infant mortality rate for women enrolled in Medicaid was 10.3 infant deaths per 1,000 live births, compared with 7.7 for those not in the Medicaid program. Prenatal care is recognized as an important factor in the health and well-being offamilies. For more information, visit the Human ResourcesSA website or call 1-800-273-8255 or go to http://www.HRSA.org/. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch or click here. Women who receive late or no prenatal care are more likely to experience complications of childbirth, including low birth weight. The rate of pregnant women entering prenatal care in the first trimester is generally higher among non-Medicaid populations than among women enrolled in Medicaid. There may be a number of reasons women do not receive prenatal care, including lack of insurance. In Georgia in 2012, 45% of pregnant woman received care in. the firstTrimester; this rate was 41% among the Medicaid population and 52% among non.Medicaid population. Limited availability of maternity care providers, limited availability of transportation, and late enrollment in Medicaid are barriers to early prenatal care. These barriers tend to be higher among racial and ethnic minorities. Regular preventive care is a key part of a woman's health care plan, according to the National Institute on Pregnant Women and Infants (NMPI) The NMPI is a federal agency that provides health care services to women and children in the United States. It also provides health insurance coverage for pregnant women. are eligible for programs such as Medicaid and SSI are receiving services, or whether pregnant women have access to adequate prenatal care. For example, states report the number of Medicaid-eligible individuals who received a service paid for by the Medicaid program. (See Appendix E , Table E-3 andtable E-4) For more information, visit the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services' National Health Expenditure Survey (NHSES) website. For more details on the NHSES, visit its website. reported to HRSA show (see Figure D -2 ), these rates also vary by state. For example, in 2012, 92% of pregnant women in Maine received prenatal care in the first trimester. However, in the same state, this rate was 90% among those enrolled in Medicaid and 97% among the pregnant. In the U.S., the rate of prenatal care for pregnant women who are on Medicaid is 90% and 97%. In 2012, the rate for those on Medicaid was 97% and 90% for those who were on Medicare. Title V of the Social Security Act (SSA) authorizes funding for services and projects that are intended to improve the health of mothers and children. These include the Maternal and Child Health (MCH) Services Block Grant; the M maternal, Infant, and Early Childhood Home Visiting Program; and other funding related to in the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) Title V was enacted by Congress in 1935. Two grant programs were established under the original Title V. Marshall Islands, and Palau (referred to collectively as "states" in this report) through the block grant to states. Some of these funds are reserved for CISS grants, and others are devoted to research via the SPRANS grants. Title V of the Social Security Act established seven broad goals for states to achieve. These goals include education, health care, environment, economy, and social security. The U.S. also has a national health insurance program, the National Institutes of Health (NIH). HRSA: Title V funding is only one component affecting these measures. Other federal and state programs and policies, including Medicaid, and WIC, as well as complex societal issues, also substantially affect V funding, HRSA says. HRSA: Progress toward these measures is an objective of Title V funds, and improvement in these measures can be achieved with the help of the federal government and state and local governments. For more information, visit HRSA's website, or go to www.hrsa.org. defined as those with family income below 100% of federal poverty guidelines. However, due to the broad reach of Title V programs and services, this definition is used only in the allocation formula, and not as a criterion for receiving Title V-funded services. There is no federally prescribed means test, and there is no federal definition of "poverty" for Title V funding. There are no federal definitions of "income" or "wealth" for the Title V program or services, but there is a federal definition for "need" Maternal and Child Health Services Block Grant serves women and children covered by public and private insurance, as well as those who have no insurance coverage. For the purposes of allocating block grant funds for this program, low-income mothers and children are agencies administering the Title V program. The primary purpose of this coordination effort is to make Medicaid services accessible, to enroll those who are eligible, and to make the program available to those who need it. The goal is to create an agreement coordinating block grant services with the state's Medicaid program (specifically, the Early Periodic Screening, Diagnosis, and Treatment Program [EPSDT] Title V requires the state agency or tracked. The result of that Needs Assessment will be integrated into the Application/Annual Report for that reporting year, with updates to follow in the interim years. The existing data required by Title V may be used to determine whether states are efficiently funding their gap areas with block grant funds. In addition to the MCH Services Block Grant, Title V contains a. Programs in Title V Added or Amended by the ACA. The ACA also provides a number of other funding options. and submit an annual report to the Secretary on all Title V activities. The reports must be presented in a standardized format. States must provide a list of activities and recipients of Title V funding, along with a description of progress toward meeting national and state health objectives, and their progress toward achieving them. The report must be in a standard format and must include a summary of the state's progress toward reaching its objectives, as well as the recipients of the funding. The state must also provide a report on the progress it has made toward meeting its objectives. person or by phone, by the Title V block grant. The numbers provided by states may be estimates if the actual numbers are not available. States are also required to report expenditures by the four broad categories of service (direct health care services, enabling services, population-based services, and infrastructure-building services) The number of people served by the federal government by state and localities is based on the number of residents served by each state or localities. The total population served by a state or county is the total population for that state or territory. coverage status was unknown for 27% of children receiving Title V-funded services. As stated above, the proportion of the combined federal/state block grant partnership funds that are directed toward specific populations varies by state, depending on each state's needs. By law, at least 30% of federal block grant funds must must be directed to specific populations, according to the federal government's block grant program for children and young people. The program is funded by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. The Maternal and Child Health Bureau (MCHB) funds more than 700 projects each year through discretionary grants. The MCHB Discretionary Grant Information System (DGIS) electronically captures performance measures (see Table E-5 ), program, financial, and abstract data, and products and publications about these discretionary grants from the grantees. The data collected are used by M CHB project officers to monitor and assess grantee performance as well as assist in monitoring and evaluating MCHb's programs. accurate and detailed picture of the full scope of services provided through grant programs administered by MCHB. The grant programs provide an accurate and detailed pictures of the services provided by M CHB. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline on 1-800-273-8255 or visit www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org. The notice pertaining to changes in the DGIS was published in the Federal Register on March 15, 2016. MCHB's purpose in revising the performance measures is to better measure progress toward program goals. These program goals are to be achieved by the end of the year, the agency says. The DGIS is the federal government's system for monitoring and monitoring government programs. It was created in the 1990s by the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) to monitor and monitor the HHS's programs. Block Grant in 1981 by the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act (OBRA) OBRA 1981 consolidated the existing categorical programs listed above into a single block grant. The consolidated block grant was intended to give the states more flexibility in determining how to use federal funds to address maternal and child health needs. It required that each state receive, at a minimum, the combined funding of the programs that were consolidated under OBRA. Additional changes were made to the block grant under the omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1989. These changes increased the authorization of appropriations and called for greater accountability. include alignment with and support of the Title V Block Grant, specifically population domains and National Performance Measures, where reasonable. The overall number of performance measures has been reduced from prior DGIS data. Further, the revised measures will more accurately capture the scope of services provided through this grant funding. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. collection, and the average number of performance measures each grantee will be required to report is reduced. Further, the structure of the data collection has been revised to better measure the various models of programs and the services each funded program provides. This revision will allow a more accurate assessment of the effectiveness of each program, according to the report. The report was published by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) on October 1, 2013. It is the first of its kind and will be available to all NIH grantees for five years. has been successful in targeted communities. Some have argued that the decentralized nature of block grants makes it difficult to measure program performance and accountability. In addition, the quality of services provided under block grant funding is not currently currently known, according to the report. The report also found that block grants are not currently used to provide services as well as other funding sources such as grants for education, health care, infrastructure, and infrastructure projects. It concluded that the report's findings were not sufficient to determine whether block grants have been successful. their progress toward achieving the targets they set for 18 National Performance Measures (NPMs) that will end with the FY2015 annual report (see Table E -1 ). Changing trends in MCH risk factors, outcomes, health services, data sources, and advances in scientific knowledge, in conjunction with budgetary constraints, led the CDC to set targets for 18 NPMs. For more information, visit www.cdc.gov/mch. For confidential support, call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here. Maternal and Child Health Bureau (MCHB) to design a new performance measurement system. New system has three tiers: NPMs, national outcome measures (NOMs), and evidence-based/informed strategy measures (ESMs) Beginning with the annual report for FY2016, each state Title V program selects 8 out of 15 N PMs for each of its 15 Title V programs. The new system will be in place by the end of the year for all Title V Programs. progress and program impact (see Table E-2 ). The new performance measurement system is expected to increase the flexibility and reduce the reporting burden for states. The new system will allow states to choose eight NPMs to target, and increase accountability by having states develop actionable ESMs. A comprehensive list of national performance ESMs is available in the report. The report also includes a list of state-by-state ESMs that can be used to measure state performance. The full report can be downloaded from the report's website. performance measures (NPMs) for MCH were instituted in 1997. In 1998, HRSA introduced the Title V Information System (TVIS) to collect and publicly report state-level Title V data. This interactive, web-based system provides public access to Title V performance measures by state. Since 2011, all states have reported annually on MCH performance measures. For confidential support call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. For support in the UK, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch or click here. V Performance and Outcome Measures Table E -1 shows the national performance measures for Title V for FY2011-FY2015. Table E-2 shows theNational performance measures. for FY2016 and later years. In addition, the Maternal and Child Health Health in addition to the M maternal and child health measures are included. The national outcome measures are also included in the national outcomes measures. For more information, visit the National Title V performance and outcome measures website at: http://www.titlev.org/performance-and-outcome. to Congress on the activities carried out under the SPRANS and CISS programs. HRSA has developed national performance measures in coordination with states and grantees. States have also developed and reported additional state-level measures. The first national report on block grant activities will be sent to Congress in January. The report will provide a summary of state reports on blockGrant activities. It will also provide a national assessment of the effectiveness of the block grant programs. The national report will be delivered to Congress on January 20, 2015. reported to HRSA by the states can be found in Appendix E. Data on these measures as reported by theStates and aggregated by HRSA can be. found on the Title V Information System and Discretionary Grants Information System websites. In FY2014, 59 of the states reported that they had received more than $1 million from the federal government. The states reported a total of $1.2 billion in federal grants in FY2014. The number of states that reported this amount was 59, up from 59 in FY2013. ) HRSA must annually compile the information reported by states and present the data to the House Committee on Energy and Commerce and the Senate Committee on Finance in a Report to Congress. This report must include a summary of the information reporting to the Secretary of HHS by the HRSA..) HRSA is required to provide a report to Congress every year that includes the data reported by each state. The report must also include a report on the number of children who have been placed in foster care in the past year. HRSA must report consistency with the state's needs assessment. Annual reports must include program participation, standardized measures of maternal and child health. An independent audit must be performed every two years. While the measures are designed to standardize reporting across the states, they are not intended to replace the need for a state to have a needs assessment, the report says. The report also says the measures do not provide a full picture of the health of a state's population. The measures are intended to provide a partial picture of what the state needs to do. programmatic focus during the five-year reporting cycle (with at least one NPM from each of the following population groups/areas) Once its NPMs are selected, a state annually tracks them to determine its focus for the next five years. The state's focus is for maternal and women's health, perinatal health, child health, children with special health care needs, adolescent health, and cross-cutting areas. The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services tracks the state's NPM for five years to determine their focus. there is still variation among states in terms of capacity for collecting and reporting data. In addition to the above-mentioned annually reported indicators, states select and report 7 to 10 priority needs in their five-year strategic plans. States may annually adjust the strategic plans as their priorities change. The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services is the largest federal agency that collects and reports data on state and local health care needs. The agency has a budget of $1.2 billion for 2014-15. abstinence education, postpartum depression, and personal responsibility education programs. This report focuses on the MCH Services Block Grant, which receives the largest single appropriation under Title V. The grant is administered by the Maternal and Child Health Bureau (MCHB) of the Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA) through FY2017 (i.e., September 30, 2017). Appendix B. Source of Funding for Title V Block Grants to States, the District of Columbia, and Other Jurisdictions, by State, FY2015. Figure 4 shows the proportion of children, pregnant women, infants, children with special health care needs (CSHCN), and others served nationally by the MCH Services Block Grant. In FY2014, there were nearly 50.4 million persons served by Title V programs. The largest category of individuals served nationally are children aged 1 to 22, followed by women of childbearing age and infants, and pregnant women. Title V Programs serve women and children who are covered by private and public insurance. poisoning prevention programs (formerly §316 of the PHSA); genetic disease programs ( formerly §1101 of thePHSA); sudden infant death syndrome programs (Former PHSA): hemophilia treatment centers. Teenage pregnancy grants ( P.L. 95-626): adolescent pregnancy grants. Title V was converted to the MCH Services program. The PHSA was replaced by Title V of the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS). The HHS is now known as the HHS Division of Health Services. Maternal and child health services, research, training, demonstrations, and other activities funded by the block grant must be linked to one or more of these goals. The seven goals are as follows: ensure access to quality health care for mothers and children, especially those with care providers. Multiple components determine whether a family is receiving family-centered care. The issues related to the MCH Services Block Grant span the intersection of clinical health services,. prevention, and public health. The combination of approaches provides flexibility to states in achieving maternal and child. health goals. chosen to address through the MCH Services Block Grant. The indicators have been selected for this report based on their relevance to the seven goals. Although they do not represent the universe of relevant measures reported to HRSA, they do represent the relevance of these indicators to the goals of the Block Grant, as specified in Title V. For more information on the Block grant, visit www.mCHservicesblockgrant.org or go to www.hrsa.org. For confidential support on suicide matters call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. of transition, the MCH formula block grant and its discretionary grants are integral to assuring the continuity of care and to reducing coverage gaps. In addition, states may argue that block grant funds can and should be redirected to meet the needs of the transition, according to a report by the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) The report was published by the CMS, a nonprofit that provides health care services to the poor, disabled, elderly, and disabled, and their families. It was written by CMS Senior Vice President of Policy and Research, and was co-authored by CRS Senior Vice Vice President and Senior Director of Health Policy and Planning, John Sutter. created stricter rules for application and reporting requirements for the states. The MCH Services Block Grant currently has three components: block grants to states, a set-aside for Special Projects of Regional and National Significance (SPRANS), and another set- aside for the Community-Integrated support national needs and priorities or emerging issues. The statute has addressed the issue of national concerns with MCH services block grant by requiring the SPRANS set-Aside. However, states may be best suited to use block grant funds in situations where there is wide variability in burden and cost. state, or federal funds may be used to support MCH activities, and certain MCH programs generate income through insurance payments and Medicaid reimbursements. Figure 3 shows national Title V block grant partnership funding by source of funding for FY2015. The MCH Services Block Grant has several reporting mechanisms required by the federal government. The funding source for the MCH services block grant has been determined to be the federal Title V Block Grant partnership. The Block Grant is funded by a combination of state, federal, and local sources. avoid duplication of effort among the programs. State block grant administrators must also coordinate with other related programs, including the Special Supplemental Program for Women, Infants, and Children (WIC); related education programs. Coordination varies among states and jurisdictions. Most state MCH programs are funded through block grants. Most MCHs are funded by block grants from the federal government, not state and local governments. The federal government provides most of the funding for the MCH program. The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services provides the rest. The MCH Services Block Grant provided services to over 34 million children in FY2013. Of those children, nearly 15 million had Medicaid or CHIP coverage. These programs directly served 2.0 million pregnant women and 36.9 million children (aged 1 to 22), including 2.7 million children with special health care needs. States are required to provide $3 for every $4 of federal block grant funding. The statute requires states to provide the number of individuals served, either in states and jurisdictions. poverty level (FPL) as a proportion of the total number of children below 100% of the FPL nationally. In addition, the MCH Services Block Grant requires a state match. Each state must contribute $3 for every $4 of federal funds awarded. States may use no more than 10% of their federal funds for MCH services, but must contribute at least $3 per $4 awarded. For more information on MCH, visit: http://www.mch services.org/. Block grants to states provide funding for core public health services provided by maternal and child health agencies. One general concern with block grants may be that federal funds are being used to address state-specific issues and are not held accountable to national concerns. Block Grant is not a single program, but rather a combination of block grants toStates and two discretionary grant programs to achieve national maternal andChild health objectives. This other maternal and Child health goals, and not decreased, if Medicaid and CHIP coverage expands to those who currently receive block grant-funded services. with special health care needs (CSHCN), and 40% for services for either of these groups or for other appropriate maternal and child health activities. Services funded by the block grant may include prenatal care, well-child care, dental care, immunization, family planning, and vision and hearing screening services. Block grant funding is also used to support school-based health care services. They may also include inpatient services for children with special health needs, screening services for lead-based poisoning, and counseling services for parents of sudden infant death syndrome victims. and preventive health care that are not otherwise available through other funding sources or providers, such as private insurance, Medicaid, or the State Children's Health Insurance Program (CHIP) In FY2015, the largest category of expenditures nationwide under the block grant was direct health care services for low-income mothers and children, according to the Department of Health and Human Services. The block grant provides funding for health care programs for children under the age of 18 in the state of New Hampshire. The program also provides health care coverage for the elderly, disabled and pregnant women. to public and private insurance markets under the ACA may affect the number of pregnant women and children served by the block grant. Some policymakers contend that during this time, pregnant women should not be served by block grants. The block grants would also provide coverage of preventive care without cost-sharing, and provisions for coverage of individuals with preexisting conditions, the authors say. The cost of the block grants is expected to be about $1.5 billion a year for the first two years, they say. purchase of land, facilities, or major medical equipment. Further, states may not use funds to satisfy any requirement for the expenditure of federal funds. Block grant funds may not be used for research or training at a private. If a state chooses to not apply for block grant funds, is not qualified for such funds, or indicates that it does not plan to use its full allotment, that state's allotment is redistributed among the remaining states in the proportion otherwise allotted to the state. mothers and children (in particular those with low income or with limited availability of health services) access to quality maternal and child health services. States are required to use at least 30% of their block grant allocations for preventive and primary care services for children. Block grant funds are awarded each fiscal year in quarterly installments and remain available for expenditure for the current and subsequent fiscal year. If be used for primary and preventive care for children with special health care needs, unless a waiver is granted by HRSA. and funding are provided on HRSA's website, and summarized in the program participation and reporting section of this report. Although the formula block grants to states are intended to fill gaps in a broad range of health services provided to women and children, certain uses of block grant funds are not limited to these services. The report also includes information on how the federal government uses block grant money to pay for health care programs in the state and localities. The full report is available on the HRSA website and on CNN.com. block grant funds may not be used for inpatient services, other than for children with special health care needs, high-risk pregnant women, and infants. States may not use the block grant funds to provide cash payments to recipients of health services. Block grant funds cannot be used to pay for health care costs for the elderly, disabled, or children with developmental disabilities. The funds can only be spent on health care services that have been approved by the Secretary of HHS. They can't be spent to provide health care to the general public. for-profit entity. States must submit to the Secretary of HHS an application that includes a statewide needs assessment (to be conducted once every five years) and a plan for meeting the needs identified in the needs assessment. The needs assessment must identify statewide issues that need to be addressed in order for the state to receive block grant funds. The application must be submitted to the secretary of HHS by the end of the year or the application will be rejected. For confidential support call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. grant funds on national health indicators such as IMR. Congress and the executive branch cannot direct states to specifically target one data point. As an alternative to block grant funding, programs such as the Maternal, Infant, and Early programs can be used. For more information, visit the National Institutes of Health's IMR website. For confidential support, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. has sometimes provided specific directives for certain programs, including set-asides for the programs listed above. In FY2016, these congressional directives comprised about 16% of SPRANS funding. In addition, the Family-to-Family Health Information Centers program funds family-staffed and family-run centers. The F2F HICs provide information, education, technical assistance, and peer support to families of children with special health care needs. They also assist in ensuring that families and health professionals are partners in decisionmaking at all levels of care. with special health care needs. Public or nonprofit private institutions of higher learning that train health care and maternal and child health personnel are eligible for these grants. SPRANS projects must (1) be based in the U.S. and include at least one person with a disability. The grants are available to organizations that conduct maternal and children's health research. For more information, go to www.sprans.org or call 1-800-SPRANS (1-877-273-8255). SPRANS set-aside funds for oral health ($5.00 million); epilepsy ($3.64 million); sickle cell ($2.96 million); and fetal alcohol syndrome ($0.48 million). SPRANS may also be used for genetic disease testing, counseling, and information development and dissemination programs. For grants relating to hemophilia without regard to age, for the screening of sickle cells and for other genetic diseases. For more information on SPRANS, visit http://www.sprans.org. agreements and provided a model interagency agreement. Adoption of a model agreement could build upon the Title V effort to ensure coordination among the block grant, Medicaid, and other programs. The SPRANS program is a HRSA-administered discretionary grant program for research and training for maternal and child health and children. The program is administered by the Department of Health and Human Services' Office of Maternal and Child Health and is funded by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) newborns for sickle cell anemia and other genetic disorders; and for follow-up services. Preference is given to applicants who demonstrate that activities in these categories will be carried out in areas with a high infant mortality rate. Generally, the priority for funding SPRANS projects is determined by HRSA. However, Congress has the power to set the amount of money to be spent on the project. For more information on SPRANS, visit: www.sprans.org.uk. CISS grants and contracts support development and expansion of integrated services at the community level. Public or private organizations or institutions are eligible for these grants. Strategies used include maternal and infant health home visiting; projects to increase participation of obstetricians and pediatricians in Title V and Medicaid; integrated maternal and child health service. CISS is a HRSA-administered discretionary grant program that funds projects which seek to increase service delivery capacity at the local level and to promote community-based health systems. use of funds under the MCH Services Block Grant, including formula grants to states, discretionary grants for Special Projects of Regional and National Significance. Projects funded by SPRANS include MCH workforce development, genetic services, and diagnostic and treatment services for hemophilia. CISS grants fund projects that support integrated maternal and child health services at the community level. The law provides that block grant funds are to be used by the states "to provide and to assure after CISS funds are set aside" support in-home visits by health or social service professionals with at-risk families. The ACA appropriated $75 million annually for each of the five fiscal years FY2010 through FY2014. P.L. 113-93 (the Protecting Access to Medicare Act of 2014 extended PREP ($75 million per year) through FY2015. P-L. 114-10 (the Medicare Access and CHIP Reauthorization Act of 2015) extended PREp ($75million per year), through FY 2015. Most of the provisions created under the ACA included mandatory appropriations for FY2010 through FY2014, with the exception of the Postpartum Depression. The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA, P.L. 111-148) includes a number of provisions that were added or amended. This appendix provides a summary of those provisions. For more information, go to the Affordable Health Care Act appendix and the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act policies and procedures for FY2010-2014. grants for epidemiologic research, improved screening and diagnosis, clinical research, and public education to expand understanding of the causes and treatments for postpartum depression and related conditions. The ACA authorized funding of $3 million for these grants for FY2010, and such sums as necessary for each of FY2011 and FY2012. The grants will be used for research, education, and clinical research. They will also be used to improve screening, diagnosis, and treatment. The research will be done in the U.S. and abroad. by funding for new Title V programs authorized in the ACA, including the Maternal, Infant, and Early Childhood Home Visiting program, which is funded through FY2016. Title V Abstinence Education block grant increased to $75 million per year for FY2016 and FY2017. This program provides grants to states, territories, and tribes for the support of evidence-based early childhood home visiting programs. These programs are not intended as a flexible source of funds (as the block grant is) program, which was authorized but has not been funded. Abstinence from sexual activity outside of marriage must be the exclusive focus of the programs funded by these grants. The ACA appropriated $50 million for each of FY2010 for abstinence education programs. This program provides funding to states for abstinence Education. It has not yet been funded by the federal government. It was authorized, but not funded, by the Affordable Care Act in 2009. It provides funding for states to provide abstinence Education programs. The program has yet to be funded. through FY2014 for this program. P.L. 113-93 (the Protecting Access to Medicare Act of 2014), which was enacted on April 1, 2014, extended the Title V Abstinence Education block grant ($50 million per year) through FY2015 (i.e., September 30, 2015). P. l. 114-10 , the Medicare Access and CHIP Reauthorization Act of 2013, extended funding for the program through FY2013 through FY2014. P l l. Funds were not appropriated for this program. The Personal Responsibility Education program is administered by the Administration for Children and Families. The program is designed to educate adolescents on both abstinence and contraception for prevention of sexually transmitted diseases. It is not intended to replace abstinence education programs for girls and boys in the U.S. and is not a replacement for abstinence education for boys and girls in the United States and Canada. The Program is funded by the federal government through the Department of Health and Human Services and the federal Department of Education. The first $422 million is distributed to each state based on the amount the state received under the consolidated MCH programs in 1983. Any funds above that amount are distributed based upon the number of children in each state who are at or below 100% of the federal poverty level. States are given the money based on how many children they have in the state who have a poverty level of at least 100% or less.States are also given the funds based on their percentage of children who are in the poverty level or below. Of any amount appropriated over $600 million, 12.75% is set aside for CISS. CISS funds are distributed on a competitive basis to public and private organizations. entities that propose activities focusing on areas with a high infant mortality rate are given preference. The MCH Services Block is the largest CISS block in the U.S., with a budget of more than $1 billion. The CISS budget is $1.2 billion, or about 12% of the total budget for the United States. and children with special health care needs (63.3%), followed by enabling services (18.7%), population-based services (10.5%), and infrastructure (7.6%). Although the expenditures nationwide are inverse to their location in the MCH pyramid, the distribution of funds between service categories varies widely by state and depends on the needs of each state. In the U.S., the expenditures of the state-level MCH programs are inverse of their location on the pyramid. also requires that 12.75% of any amounts appropriated above $600 million must be reserved for CISS. Individual state allocations are determined by a formula that takes into consideration the proportion of the number of low-income children in a state compared to the total number ofLow Income Children in the U.S. CISS is funded by a combination of federal, state, and local sources, including grants, loans, and grants from the federal government, as well as other sources such as philanthropic foundations and foundations. Grant program is currently authorized to receive $850 million annually. The final appropriation for FY2016 was $638.2 million. Of the amount appropriated, an estimated $550.8 million was for block grants to states. The President's budget requested FY2014. P.L. 113-93 extended funding for the program through the first six months of FY2015. The bill also provided $400 million for FY 2016 and $400million for FY2017. Of that amount, 3% must be reserved for research and 3% for CISS. The MCH Services Block Grant is discretionary and subject to the annual appropriations process. Funding for the program peaked at $731.3 million in FY2002, and has seen an overall $93.1 million decrease since then. The program also receives 15% of funds remaining above $600 million $638.2 million for theProgram for FY 2017. Full-year appropriations for FY2017 have yet to be enacted. However, decreased federal funding for the block grant may be temporarily offset. Services Systems (CISS) program. The MCH Services Block Grant was appropriated $638.2 million in funding for FY2016. The majority of this funding is distributed to the 50 states, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, Guam, the Virgin Islands, the Northern Mariana Islands, American Samoa, the Federated States of Micronesia, and the United States Virgin Islands. The CISS program is funded by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.