our testimony. We are pleased to answer any questions you might have. For further information, please contact Mark L. Goldstein at (202) 512-2834 or by e-mail goldsteinm@gao.gov. Individuals making key contributions to this testimony include Tammy Conquest, John Cooney, Elizabeth Eisenstadt, Brandon Haller, Denise McCabe, David Sausville, and Tammy Conquest. For more information on this testimony, please visit our website at: http://www.gfo.gov/legislation. This work is a work of the U.S. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States. The published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from GAO. However, because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material, permission must be given for the use of such material. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org. from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. For more information on suicide prevention in the UK, visit www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org. The Samaritans can also be found on the Internet. it is crucial that federal agencies work together to share information to advance homeland security and critical infrastructure protection efforts. Information is a vital tool in fighting terrorism, and the timely dissemination of that information is absolutely critical to maintaining the security of our nation. The ability to share security-related information can unify the efforts of federal agencies in preventing or minimizing terrorist attacks. However, in the absence of comprehensive information-sharing plans, many aspects of homeland security information sharing can be ineffective and fragmented. In 2005, we designated information sharing for homeland security as a The Park Service does not manage risk servicewide protection of our national treasures is paramount. More emphasis on the key practices would provide greater assurance that Park Service assets are well protected. FPS faces challenges that are similar, in many respects, to those that agencies across the U.S. face in protecting the nation’s icon and park protection. We found that although the Park Service has implemented a range of security program improvements in recent years that reflected some aspects of key practices, there were also limitations. and have made recommendations to promote greater usage of key practices in ensuring the security of public spaces. For example, we have examined how DHS and the Smithsonian Institution secure their assets and identified challenges. Most recently, we evaluated the National Security Agency's security of the nation's airports, bridges, tunnels and other public places. We have also looked at how the U.S. Department of Homeland Security secures its assets, such as the National Mall, the White House, the Capitol and the National Museum of American History. or ensure the best return on security technology investments; (2) lacks a servicewide approach to sharing information internally and measuring performance; and (3) lacks clearly defined security roles and a security training curriculum. With millions of people visiting the nation’s nearly 400 park units annually, ensuring their security and the security of their visitors is a priority for the government. The National Park Service is responsible for the security and safety of the nation's park units. For more information, visit www.nps.gov.uk. submit a monthly report to the Secretary. Finally, as we stated at the outset, the protection of federal real property has been and continues to be a major concern. Therefore, we have used our key protection practices as criteria to evaluate the security efforts of other departments, agencies, and entities. We will continue to use this information to evaluate other departments and agencies' security efforts. We are proud to share this information with the Secretary of the Department of Homeland Security and the public. We hope this information will help you understand the security of U.S. real property. the government are facing. Our key practices provide a framework for assessing and improving protection practices. The Interagency Security Committee is using our key facility protection practices as key management practices to guide its priorities and work activities. For example, the committee established subcommittees for technology best practices, and the committee is using these practices to help with its work. The committee is also using these key facility Protection Practices to help it with work activities, and to help the government with its overall security strategy and plans for the future. to 5 years, depending on a building’s security level. We identified information sharing gaps at several level III and IV sites that we visited. These deficiencies led to decreased security awareness and increased risk. At one location, we observed during an interview with the owner that he had lost track of the number of people he was talking to about the security breach. We found that in some cases these deficiencies had led to a decrease in security awareness, and even a loss of security. In some cases, this led to an increase in the risk of a breach. adequately safeguarded; guidance for employees to use in deciding what information to protect with sensitive but unclassified designations. provisions for training on making designations, controlling, and sharing such information with GSA and other entities. A review process to evaluate how well this information sharing process is working, with results to be shown. and a review of how well it is working with the GSA, the agency says. The U.S. Department of Homeland Security is responsible for protecting classified information. Risk assessments must be completed before GSA can take possession of the property and lease it to tenant agencies. An inefficient risk assessment process for new lease projects can add costs for GSA and create problems for tenant agencies that have already leased the property. GSA is considering leasing.space to a tenant agency that has already leased it to another agency. The agency is also considering leasing the space to another tenant agency. It is not clear what the tenant agency will do with the space after GSA takes possession. physical security activities, such as conducting other types of risk assessments and determining security countermeasures for new facilities. tenant agencies have typically taken responsibility for assessing risk and securing the interior of their buildings. assessing exterior risks will require additional expertise and resources. This is an inefficient approach to securing a building and its occupants. It is also a waste of time and money to spend time and resources on the inside of a building rather than on the outside. It can also be costly and time-consuming to secure a building from the exterior. and executive summary, but did not include the estimated cost and risk of the following mail screening options: (1) usage of the dog and the additional countermeasure; (2) usage  of the additionalcountermeasure only; and (3) usage of the dog only. Consequently, tenant agency representatives would have to investigate the dog option, which would cost an estimated $2,000 to $3,000 per year. The dog could be used to screen mail for up to three years. to implement education and outreach initiatives to improve customer service to tenant agencies, it will face challenges because of its lack of complete and accurate contact data. During the course of our review, we found that approximately 53 percent of e-mail addresses and 27 percent of the telephone numbers were not accurate. We found that about 27 per cent of the phone numbers were inaccurate. We also found that over half of the e-mails addresses were not correct. We are working to correct these issues and provide more accurate contact information for tenant agencies. BSC that the committee members were confused about procedures for screening visitors who are passengers in employees’ cars that enter the building via the parking garage. One of the tenants recounted an incident in which a security guard directed the visitor to walk through the garage to an appropriate screening. A security guard told the tenant that the visitor would have to go through a different entrance. The committee is expected to meet again in the next few weeks to discuss the matter. The hearing is scheduled to begin at 9 a.m. on Tuesday. worked with the tenant agencies to develop a cost-sharing plan for the guard post. The plan made the primary tenant agency’s security expenses somewhat more equitable. BSC members told us that the committee met regularly. At one location, members of a BSC told us they met as needed, although even even if they were not needed, they said they would meet as needed to discuss the security situation in the building. The guard post is located on the second floor of a building on the third floor of the complex. guards had at least one expired certification, including a declaration that guards have not been convicted of domestic violence, which make them ineligible to carry firearms. Some guards were not provided building-specific training, such as what actions to take during a building evacuation or a building building fire. We also found that some guards had not been provided building specific training, including what actions they should take during an evacuation or building fire, or what they should do if a fire breaks out in the middle of the night. A lack of training may have contributed to several incidents where guards neglected their assigned responsibilities. For example, at a level IV facility, the guards did not follow evacuation procedures and left two access points unattended, thereby leaving the facility vulnerable. At a level III facility, a guard allowed a patient to leave the hospital in an emergency. A level IV guard allowed the patient to exit the hospital through an unsecured door. The hospital was evacuated and the patient was taken to a nearby hospital. facilities. The facilities included district offices of a U.S. Senator and a U,S. Representative as well as agencies of the Departments of Homeland Security, Transportation, Health and Human Services, Justice, State, and others. The two leased facilities did not have any guards at the access control points at the time. The buildings were built in the 1970s and 1980s. They were built on land that was then owned by the federal government and leased to private developers. without incident. Our investigators also placed their briefcases with the IED material on the conveyor belt of the X-ray machine, but the guards detected nothing. A guard questioned an item in the briefcase at one of the 10 facilities but the materials were subsequently allowed through theX-ray machines. At some of the facilities, the restrooms were locked. At each facility, once past the guard screening checkpoint, our investigators proceeded to a restroom and assembled the Ied. Our Investigators gained access by asking employees to let them in. of our testing. Using publicly available information, our investigators identified a type of device that a terrorist could use to cause damage to a federal facility and threaten the safety of federal workers and the general public. The device was an IED made up of two parts—a liquid explosive and a low-yield detonator—and included a variety of materials not typically brought into aFederal facility by employees or the public. Although the detonator itself could function as a IED, investigators determined that it could also be used to set off a liquid explosive to cause significantly more damage. not properly trained and did not comply with post orders. Investigators passed undetected through access points controlled by FPS guards at 10 of 10 level IV facilities in four major cities where GAO conducted covert tests. The specific components for this device, items used to conceal the device components, and the methods of concealment that we used during our covert testing are classified, and thus are not discussed in this testimony. Of the 10 level III facilities our investigators penetrated, 8 were government owned and 2 were leased. safety during this testing, we took precautions so that the IED would not explode. For example, we lowered the concentration level of the material. To gain entry into each of the 10 level IV facilities, our investigators showed a photo identification (a state driver’s license) and walked through the magnetometers. The testing was conducted at the U.S. Embassy in Kuwait, which is part of the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) and the Kuwaiti Embassy in Washington, D.C. An infant in a carrier was sent through an X-ray machine due to a guard's negligence. The guard was not paying attention and the machine's safety features had been disabled. FPS investigated the incident at a level IV federal facility in a major metropolitan area. The incident was investigated by the FPS and no charges were filed against the guard or the guard's family. The infant in the carrier was taken to a child care facility for evaluation. The woman was not charged with any crime. The facility has child care services. recommended, based on the results of its risk analysis, the use of this dog and an X-ray machine. The dog and handler work 12-hour shifts Monday through Friday when most mail is delivered and shipped. The GSA regional security officials we spoke with questioned whether this approach was more effective and efficient than using an on-site enhanced X-rays machine that could detect biological and chemical agents as well as explosives and could be used anytime. In accordance with the GSA's recommendation, the dog was being used at the time of our visit. FPS had anticipated that X-ray machine and magnetometer contracts would be awarded by December 2008. In May 2009, FPS officials told us that the X-rays machine contract was awarded on April 30, 2009. They anticipated awarding the magnetometer contract in the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2009 and an electronic security services contract for surveillance and intrusion detection systems during the second quarter of 2010. We recently recommended that FPS not rely on individual inspectors to make technology decisions. We recommend that FPS stop relying on individual Inspectors to make tech decisions. standardized contracts. According to FPS, the program will also include life-cycle management plans for countermeasures. FPS officials said they established an X-ray machine contract and that future program contracts will also explore the use of the schedule as a source for national purchase and service contracts. The program is expected to be completed by the end of the year, according to the agency's website. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. FPS requires that all prospective guards complete about 128 hours of training including 8 hours of X-ray and magnetometer training. However, in one region, FPS has not provided the X-rays or additional inspections and training to 15,000 guards, in addition to their current physical security and law enforcement responsibilities. According to the Director of FPS, while having more resources would help address the weaknesses in the guard program, the additional resources would have to be trained. In the U.S. more X-ray and magnetometer training for inspectors and guards. For example, FPS has recently issued an information bulletin to all inspectors and. guards to provide them with information about package screening. The bulletin includes examples of disguised items that may not be detected by magnetometers or X-rays. Moreover, FPS produced a training manual on how to use magnetometers and X-Ray equipment to detect hidden items in packages. For more information, visit: www.fps.org.uk. magnetometer training to its 1,500 guards since 2004. X-ray training is critical because guards control access points at buildings. Insufficient X-rays and magnetometer training may have contributed to several incidents at GSA buildings in which guards were negligent in carrying out their duties. These guards are assigned to posts at G SA buildings. The National Transportation Safety Board is investigating the incidents at the GSA. The NTSB is also investigating the incident at the U.S. Air Force Academy. the incident and dismissed the guard; however, the guard subsequently sued FPS for not providing the required X-ray training. The guard won the suit because FPS could not produce any documentation to show that the guard had received the training, according to an FPS official. In addition, FPS officials from the guard's agency were also involved in the incident and were involved in dismissing the guard, the official said. The incident was captured on video and uploaded to YouTube by a member of the public. The video has since been removed. that region could not tell us whether the X-ray machine’s safety features had been repaired. FPS does not have a fully reliable system for monitoring and verifying guard training and certification requirements. We reviewed 663 randomly selected guard records and found that 62 percent of the guard records were incomplete or inaccurate. We also found that FPS did not have an accurate record of how many guards had been trained or certified to carry out their duties. We found that the majority of guards had not been properly trained and certified. 15-minute training video designed to provide information on bomb component detection. According to FPS, each guard was required to read the information bulletin and watch the video within 30 days. Despite the steps FPS has taken, there are a number of factors that will make implementing and sustaining these actions a difficult task for the agency. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. FPS has identified some output measures that are a part of the Office of Management and Budget’s Performance Assessment Rating Tool. These measures include determining whether has not developed outcome measures to evaluate the net effect of its efforts to protect GSA buildings. While output measures are helpful, outcome measures are also important because they can provide FPS with broader information on program results, such as the extent to which its decision to move to an office was based on an outcome measure. To see the full report, go to: http://www.fps.gov/. create building security assessments (BSA), rather than taking a more comprehensive, strategic approach and assessing risks among all buildings in GSA’s inventory. As a result, the current approach provides less assurance that the most critical risks at federal buildings across the summaries across all regions. Instead, GSA wants to receive BSAs in their entirety so that it can better protect GSA buildings and the tenants who occupy them. According to GSA, building protection functions are an integral part of its property preservation, operation and management responsibilities. its workforce and contract guard program, recommending countermeasures, sharing information and coordinating with GSA and tenant agencies to secure GSA buildings. Measure and testing its performance as the security landscape changes and new threats emerge. Furthermore, implementing our specific recommendations related to areas such as human capital and risk. For confidential support call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. For support in the UK, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org. months. FPS does not fully ensure that its contract security guards have the training and certifications required to be deployed to a GSA building. We have noted that the effectiveness of a risk management approach depends on the involvement of experienced and professional security personnel. Further, that the chances of that the chance of a terrorist attack on a government building is very high, according to a report by the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives (ATF) The report was published by the American Institute of Certified Security Practitioners (AICP), a trade group. FPS does not have specific national guidance on when and how guard inspections should be performed. FPS’s inspections of guard posts at GSA buildings are inconsistent and the quality varied in the six regions we examined. We also found that guard inspections are typically completed by FPS during regular regular Orders.orders. The agency is responsible for inspecting guard posts in the U.S., Canada, Australia, New Zealand, South Africa, and the United Kingdom. It is also responsible for inspections in Europe, Africa, the Middle East and North Africa. GSA is updating a risk assessment tool that it began developing in 1998, but has not recently used. GSA officials told us that in the future they may use this tool for other risk assessments.been planning for a move. The tool will be used to better ensure the timeliness and comprehensiveness of these risk assessments, GSA said in a statement. It will also be used for risk assessment for other government agencies, the agency said. It is not clear when the new tool will go into use. reported to the Secretary of Homeland Security. While DHS concurred with this recommendation, we are concerned that the steps it described in its response were not comprehensive enough to address the intent of the recommendation. For example, DHS did not explicitly commit to reaching consensus with GSA in identifying building names. We are concerned the steps described in the response are not comprehensive and do not address the intended purpose of the recommendations. For more information, go to: http://www.gsa.gov/gsa-building-names. also said they do not receive timely incident information for the site from FPS. At one location, GSA undertook a major renovation project beginning in that they believed FPS was fully aware that the equipment had been removed in December 2007. GSA tenant agencies also found that they had mixed views about some of the services they pay FPS to provide. Notably, the survey results indicated that the roles of FPS and GSA tenants were not fully understood by GSA employees at the time of the project. The GSA believes that increased communication among the agencies would help them be more effective managers. location, FPS had received inaccurate square footage data from GSA and had therefore overcharged the primary tenant agency for a guard post that protected space shared by all the tenants. According to the GSA property manager, once GSA was made aware of the problem, the agency obtained updated information and the agency was able to make amends. The agency was also able to provide a new guard post for the building that would protect the tenants' shared space, the property manager said. The guard post is now in place. and responsibilities of FPS and tenant agencies are unclear. On average about one-third of tenant agencies could not comment on how satisfied or dissatisfied they were with FPS’s level of communication of its services. Although FPS plans to improve communication with tenant agencies, the plans are not yet fully implemented, the agency says. The agency says it is working on a plan to improve the communication between tenant agencies and FPS officers by the end of the first quarter of 2015. The plan is expected to be implemented by the second quarter of that year. some meetings. In May 2008, FPS discovered that specific surveillance equipment had been removed. As of May 2009, FPS officials told us they did not know who had removed the equipment and were working with tenant agency representatives to recover it. However, in June 2009 tenant agency reps told us that the equipment had not been removed and that FPS was working with them to get it back. The equipment has not been recovered, and FPS is still working to find out who removed it and how it was removed. practice in October 2008, GSA security officials said that these briefings mostly focused on crime statistics and did not constitute comprehensive threat analyses. FPS is only required to meet formally with GSA property managers and tenant agencies as part of the BSA process. GSA officials at this location told us that they invite FPS to their property management meetings for that location, but FPS does not attend. FPS officials told us they had not been invited to project meetings, although GSA said they had invited FPS and that FPS attended. when they hold meetings, one of the main tenant agencies typically does not participate. GSA officials commented that this tenant adheres to its agency's building security protocols and does not necessarily follow GSA’s tenant policies and procedures, which GSA thinks creates security risks for the entire building. At one location, GSA says, the tenant does not follow its own security protocols, which creates a security risk for the building as a whole. The tenant also does not adhere to GSA's tenant policies or procedures, according to the GSA. buildings, there is increased potential for illegal entry and other criminal activity. In one city we visited, a deceased individual had been found in a vacant GSA facility that was not regularly patrolled by FPS. FPS officials stated that the deceased person had been inside the building for approximately 3 hours. In another city, a dead person was found inside a GSA building that had been vacant for approximately three hours. The deceased individual was found to have been in the building at the time of his death. station. According to the GSA property manager, this action created a safety hazard. The BSC members told us that the committee met as needed. At one point, the BSC met in a meeting room at a hotel in Washington, D.C. The GSA's property manager knew the appropriate screening procedure, but told us there was no written policy on the procedure that members could access. He also told us the committee had no power to stop the screening process from taking place. staffing level in April 2009. FPS’s staff has steadily declined since 2004 and critical law enforcement services have been reduced or eliminated. For example, FPS has eliminated its use of proactive patrol to prevent or detect criminal violations at many GSA buildings. According to some FPS officials at regions we visited, not providing proactive patrol has limited its law enforcement personnel to a reactive force. Officials stated that in the past, proactive patrol permitted its police officers and inspectors to identify and apprehend individuals that were surveilling GSA building. inspector-based workforce will enhance security at GSA facilities or help identify the security gaps that remain. FPS does not have a reliable data management system that will allow it to accurately track these measures or other important measures. Without such a system, it is difficult for FPS to evaluate and improve the effectiveness of its efforts to protect federal employees and facilities, allocate its limited resources, or make informed risk management decisions. For example, weaknesses in one of FPS’s countermeasure tracking systems make it difficult to track the implementation status of recommended countermeasures such as security cameras. security countermeasures have been deployed and are fully operational, the amount of time it takes to respond to an incident, and the percentage of BSAs completed on time. Some of these measures are also included in FPS’s federal facilities security index, which is used to assess its performance. However, FPS says it has no plans to change any of the measures it has in place to protect its facilities. It says the measures have been in place for some time and that they are working well. terrorist attack. FPS is taking some steps in each of the key practice areas to improve its ability to better protect GSA buildings. GAO has recommended that FPS implement specific actions to promote greater usage of key protection practices and otherwise improve security. However, FPS has not completed many many of the tasks recommended by GAO, according to a report by the Government Accountability Office (GAO) The report also found that the GSA has not done enough to ensure the safety of its buildings and facilities. The report concluded that GSA needs to do more to protect against terrorist attacks. of providing security services to tenant agencies and ensuring that its fee structure takes into consideration the varying levels of risk and service provided at GSA facilities. We also recommended an evaluation of whether FPS’s current use of a fee-based system or an alternative funding mechanism is the most appropriate cost and risk implications of these options on their own to make an informed resource allocation decision. It is critical that FPS and GSA have well-established lines of communication with each other and with tenant agencies. FPS assesses risk and recommends countermeasures to GSA and tenant agencies. FPS’s ability to influence the allocation of resources using risk management is limited. GSA officials told us they have had difficulties receiving timely risk assessments from FPS. We have found country are being prioritized and mitigated, the report says. The report says GSA has concerns about the quality and timeliness of FPS's risk assessment services and are taking steps to obtain their own risk assessments. The agency says it is working with FPS to improve the quality of its risk assessment service. agencies to ensure that all parties are aware of the ever- changing risks in a dynamic threat environment. While FPS and GSA top management have established communication channels, the types of information shared at the regional and building level is still a work in progress, says the GSA. The GSA says it is taking appropriate actions to reduce vulnerabilities and is committed to working with the FPS to reduce the risk of cyber-attacks in the U.S. and around the world. For more information, visit www.gsa.gov. governmentwide high-risk area because of the significant challenges faced in this area. It is critical that FPS and GSA reach consensus on sharing information in a timely manner to support homeland security and critical infrastructure protection efforts. We recently recommended that FPS reach consensus with GSA on what information contained in the BSA is needed for GSA to fulfill its responsibilities related to the protection of federal buildings and occupants. We have reported that FPS is limited in its ability to identify what building security information can be shared and follow the information sharing and safeguarding steps. levels are inconsistent, and overall, FPS and GSA disagree over what information should be shared. FPS resumed the aware of the current roles, responsibilities, and services provided by FPS. DHS concurred with our recommendations. GSA officials at all levels cite limitations with the BSA executive summary. FPS believes that this document contains sufficient information for GSA to make decisions about purchasing and implementing FPS’s recommended countermeasures. The two organizations acknowledge that the two organizations are partners in protecting and securing GSA buildings. tenant agencies, we recommended that FPS collect and maintain an accurate and comprehensive list of all facility- designated points of contact, as well as a system for regularly updating this list. FPS will continue to rely on its disparate workforce data management systems and CERTS or localized databases that have proven to be inaccurate and unreliable. We recommend that FPS provide the Secretary of Homeland Security with regular updates on the status of the agency's workforce data collection and management system. We recently recommended that the FPS provide a program for education and outreach to GSA and tenant agencies to ensure they are tool, methodology, and process. for designated points of contacts were missing from FPS’s contact database. Complete and accurate contact information is critical for information sharing and an essential component of any customer service initiative. Therefore, to improve its services to GSA and GSA, FPS needed to revise its contact database to include more information about its customers. The database required a substantial amount of revising to add more contact information for FPS customers. For more information on FPS, visit its website or call 1-800-847-8255. by two high-security locations that, according to FPS officials, would cost around $650,000. While members of one building security committee (BSC) told us they approved spending between $350,000 and $375,000 to fund their agencies’ share of the countermeasure, they said that the BSC of the other location would not approve the measure. The measure is expected to be in place by the end of the year at a cost of $1.5 million to $2 million. the same basic security fee of 66 cents per square foot as a level IV facility that has a high volume of public contact and may contain high-risk law enforcement and intelligence agencies and highly sensitive government records. We also have reported that basing government fees on the cost of the facility's security is cheaper than basing the fee on the price of the building itself. The fee is based on a range of factors, including the size of the complex and the number of people living in the building. FPS faces challenges in ensuring that its fee-based funding structure accounts for the varying levels of risk and types of services provided at federal facilities. FPS charges federal agencies the same basic security fee regardless of the perceived threat to a particular building or agency. In fiscal year 2009, FPS charged 66 cents per square foot for basic security. Although FPS categorizes buildings according to security levels based on its assessment of the risk, it does not account for the level of service provided, or the cost of providing services. Each building’s risk and size, this assessment does not affect the security fee FPS charges. For example, level I facilities typically face less risk because they are generally small storefront-type operations with a low level of public contact, such as a Social Security Administration office. However, these facilities are charged for the security services they provide. For more information, visit the FPS website or call 1-800-273-8255. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. providing a service promotes equity, especially when the cost of providing the service differs significantly among different users, as is the case with FPS. In our June 2008 report, we recommended that FPS improve its use of the fee-based system by developing a method to accurately account for the cost. We recommend that FPS develop a method that accurately accounts for the costs of providing a service to different users in the same way as it does to provide a service for other users. We are happy to provide an example of how this can be done. FPS is also taking steps to implement a more systematic approach to technology acquisition. The agency is developing a National Countermeasures Program, which could help FPS leverage technology more cost-effectively. According to FPS, the program will establish standards and national procurement contracts for security equipment. Although the National Counter Measures Program includes improvements that may enhance FPS’s ability to leverage technology, it does not yet exist.and thus could not be deployed immediately. It does provide the agency with a framework to better manage its security equipment inventory. that under the current risk management approach, the security equipment that FPS recommends and is responsible for acquiring, installing, and maintaining may not be implemented if tenant agencies are unwilling to fund it. For example, in August 2007 FPS recommended a security equipment countermeasure—the upgrade of a surveillance system shared with other tenants. In August 2009 FPS recommended that tenants upgrade their surveillance systems to include a new camera system. In 2010 FPS recommended the upgrade of the surveillance system to include an additional camera system that could be used to monitor individual tenants. security countermeasures were not implemented at some of the buildings we visited. BSC members could not agree on which countermeasures to implement or were unable to obtain funding from their agencies. Compounding this situation, FPS takes a building-by-building approach to risk management, using an outdated risk assessment tool to assess the risk of a building. The report was published by the British Security Council (BSC), which is part of the International Council of Civil Aviation (ICC), and the British Institute of Architects (BIA) The document FPS uses to convey its countermeasure recommendations to GSA and tenant agencies includes cost estimates but no analysis of alternatives. GSA security officials told us that FPS does not consistently share BSA executive summary information on threats and vulnerabilities. The document does not contain enough contextual information to support FPS’s countermeasures recommendations and justify the expenses that GSA would incur by installing additional countermeasures, GSA officials said. The documents do not assist users in selecting cost-effective technologies. The National Countermeasures Program will enable inspectors to develop countermeasure cost estimates that can be shared with GSA and tenant agencies. However, incorporating a tool for evaluating which technologies most cost-effectively address identified vulnerabilities is a central component of the leveraging technology key practice, FPS officials said. The National Counter Measures Program will be rolled out over the next two years. The program will be funded by the federal government and will be administered by the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) and the National Security Agency (NSA) the cost-effectiveness of the security equipment that its inspectors recommend. Individual FPS inspectors have considerable latitude in determining which technologies and other countermeasures to recommend. The inspectors receive little training and guidance in how to assess the relative cost- effectiveness of these technologies or determine the expected return on investment. DHS concurred with our recommendation that FPS develop a methodology and guidance for assessing and comparing the cost- Effectiveness of technology alternatives, and FPS has agreed to do so. It would represent an enhanced application of this key practice for FPS’s planned improvements in the security acquisition area. Security professionals are faced with a multitude of technology options offered by private vendors. Having tools and guidance to assess the cost-effectiveness of competing technologies and countermeasures has been delayed. Security professionals need to be able to assess cost-effective options and countermeasure options and implement them, says the U.S. Department of Homeland Security. For more information, go to: http://www.dhs.gov.uk/security/security-technologies-and-countermeasures/countermeasures. agencies have limited assurance that the investments in technologies and other countermeasures that FPS inspectors recommend are cost-effective, consistent across buildings, and the best available alternatives. In 2006, FPS had including X-ray machines, magnetometers, surveillance systems, and intrusion detection systems. FPS officials told us that instead of having inspectors search for vendors to establish equipment acquisition, installation, and maintenance contracts, inspectors will call an FPS mission support center with their countermeasure recommendations and the center will procure the services. in a briefcase, our investigators walked freely around several floors of the facilities and into various executive and legislative branch offices. Leveraging technology is a key practice over which FPS has somewhat more control, but FPS does not have a comprehensive approach for identifying, acquiring, and assessing technology. FPS has no comprehensive approach to identify, acquire, and assess technology for use in the U.S. government. FPS does have a more comprehensive approach, however, for identifying and acquiring technology for uses in the government. with its policies, FPS conducted a BSA of the site in 2008 and determined that using an enhanced X-ray machine and an explosives detection dog would bring the projected threat rating down from moderate to low. FPS included estimated one-time installation and recurring costs in the BSA, which was conducted by the Bureau of Safety and Homeland Security (FPS) The BSA was conducted in 2008 by FPS, who determined that the use of an X-rays machine and a bomb-sniffing dog would reduce the threat rating.  audit showed that FPS was able to verify the status for about 7,600 of its 15,000 guards. According to an FPS official, one of its regions did not meet the deadline for submitting data to headquarters because its data were not accurate or reliable. About 1,500 guards were not included in the audit. In 2008, we recommended that FPS develop and implement specific guidelines and standards for measuring its performance and improve how it categorizes, collects, and analyzes data. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. of its legacy systems, including the Contract Guard Employment Requirements Tracking System (CERTS), into RAMP. In July 2009, we testified on the accuracy and reliability issues associated with CERTS. FPS subsequently conducted an audit of CERts to determine the status of its guard training and certification. However, the results of the audit were not released to the public until after RAMP was completed. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. employees to enter the building while an incident involving suspicious packages was being investigated. At a level III facility, the guard allowed employees to access the area affected by a suspicious package, which was required to be evacuated. FPS has limited assurance that its guards are complying with post high-security facilities where guards neglected or inadequately performed their assigned responsibilities. For example, a guard failed to recognize or did not properly X-ray a box containing handguns at the loading dock at a facility. FPS became aware of the situation because the handguns were delivered to FPS. business hours and in locations where FPS has a field office, and seldom on nights or weekends. FPS found a guard asleep at his post after taking a pain-killer prescription drug. FPS also found other incidents at businesses and locations where the agency has aField Office, and at locations where it has a Field Office, such as the Port of Los Angeles, San Diego, San Francisco, Los Angeles and San Diego. The agency has no plans to change any of its policies. It has no immediate plans to make any changes to its policies, however. hiring plan that does not include key human capital principles, such as determining an agency’s optimum staffing needs. FPS has been transitioning to an inspector-based workforce, thus eliminating the police officer position and relying primarily on FPS inspectors for both law enforcement and physical security activities. FPS believes that this change will ensure that its staff has the right mix of technical skills and training needed to accomplish its mission. However, FPS's ability to provide law enforcement services may be diminished because FPS will rely on its inspectors to provide these services. required oversight hours and officials in another region said they are struggling to monitor the delivery of contractor-provided training in the region. FPS has not completed any workforce analysis to determine if its current staff of about 930 law enforcement security officers will be able to effectively complete the task. FPS is a joint venture of the FBI and the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives. It is based in Washington, D.C. and is funded by the federal government, the State Department, the Export-Import Bank of the U.S. and other sources. FPS officials told us that inspectors make technology decisions based on the initial training they receive, personal knowledge and experience, and contacts with vendors. FPS inspectors receive some training in identifying and recommending security technologies as part of their initial FPS physical security training. Since FPS was transferred to DHS, the technology decisions have been made by the inspector's office, not the DHS office. The technology decisions were made by FPS inspectors, not by the DHS Office of Homeland Security, officials said. The decision-making process was based on initial training and personal knowledge, they said. in 2003, its refresher training program for inspectors has primarily focused on law enforcement. Consequently, inspectors lack recurring technology training. FPS does not provide inspectors with specialized guidance and standards for cost-effectively selecting technology. In the absence of specific guidance, inspectors follow the Department of Justice minimum countermeasure standards. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. For support in the U.S., call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. because new directives appear to be based primarily on what works well from a headquarters or National Capital Region perspective. In addition, another regional official estimated that his region is meeting about 10 percent of the federal government's goals. The new directives do not reflect local conditions and limitations in staffing resources, an official says. The directives also do not take into account the impact on the local economy of a change in direction the U.S. has taken in recent years. The directive also does not consider the impact of a shift in direction in the world's largest economy. related corrective actions and FPS faces implementation challenges as well. FPS is developing the Risk Assessment and Management Program (RAMP), which could enhance its approach to assessing risk, managing human capital, and measuring performance. It is not clear that FPS has fully addressed some implementation issues. According to FPS, the agency plans to transfer data from several other agencies to RAMP. The agency is designing RAMP so that it will produce risk assessments that are compliant with Interagency Security Committee standards, compatible with the risk management framework set forth by FPS. practices and training, and working groups in the areas of performance measures and strategic human capital management. The committee also issued performance measurement guidance in 2009. Without greater attention to key protection practices, FPS will be ill equipped to efficiently and effectively fulfill its responsibilities of assessing risk, strategically managing management. Overall, following this framework would enhance FPS’s chances for future success and could position FPS to become a leader and benchmark agency for facility protection in the federal government. Mr. Chairman, this concludes. example, FPS officials in some of the regions we visited said they implement their own procedures for managing their workforce. Additionally, FPS does not collect data on its workforce’s knowledge, skills, and abilities. These elements are necessary for successful workforce planning activities, such as identifying and filling skill gaps and succession planning. We recently recommended that FPS improve how it collects data to help it better manage and understand current and future workforce needs; and use these data in the development and implementation of a workforce plan. manner to fund the agency. DHS agreed with these recommendations, but FPS has not fully implemented them. FPS did not meet its fiscal year 2008 mandated deadline of increasing its staffing level to no fewer than 1,200 full-time employees by July 31, 2008. Instead, FPS has developed a short-term long-term strategic human capital plan that addresses key principles for effective strategic workforce planning. DHS concurred with our recommendations. FPS does not have a strategic humanCapital plan to guide its current and future workforce planning efforts. In the absence of a strategic human capital plan, it is difficult to discern how effective an inspector-based workforce approach will be. The lack of a humanCapital plan has also contributed to inconsistent approaches in how FPS regions and headquarters are managing human capital activities. For more information, visit www.fps.gov.uk/humancapital or call 020 3615 9090. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here. FPS believes RAMP will provide inspectors with the information needed to make more informed and defensible recommendations for security countermeasures. FPS also plans to use RAMP to track and analyze certain workforce data, contract guard program data, and other performance data such as the types and definitions of incidents and incident response times. Although FPS intends for RAMp to improve its approach, the agency says it will continue to work with RAMP on ways to improve the program's effectiveness. The program is expected to be fully operational by the end of the year. National Infrastructure Protection Plan, and consistent with the business processes outlined in the memorandum of agreement with GSA. According to FPS, RAMP will support all components of the BSA process. RAMP could be the vehicle through which FPS implements these recommendations, but the use of inaccurate and unreliable data will hamper performance measurement efforts. Furthermore, it could be used to assess threats, vulnerabilities, and consequences to develop a detailed risk analyzes data to help it better manage and understand the results of its efforts to protect GSA facilities. funding; therefore, FPS could not upgrade the system it had recommended. In November 2008 FPS officials told us that they were moving ahead with the project by drawing on unexpended revenues from the two locations’ building-specific fees and the funding that was approved by one of the BSCs. Furthermore, FPS said they were going to use the funding approved by a BSC to pay for the project. The project was never completed as originally planned, and the system was never fully upgraded. officials, in May 2009, told us that all cameras had been repaired and all monitoring and recording devices had been replaced. The two BSCs had approved additional upgrades and that FPS was implementing them. As we reported in June 2008, we have found other instances in which recommended upgrades have not been implemented. We are happy to make clear that this is not the only case in which this has been the case, and that the upgrades are being implemented as recommended by the BSC and FPS. FPS took on a number of that FPS provide the Secretary of Homeland Security with regular updates on the status of the National Countermeasures Program. DHS concurred with this recommendation and stated that FPS will submit a monthly report to the Secretary. FPS will provide clear timelines for completion of tasks and milestones, and plans for addressing any implementation obstacles. It will also provide regular reports on the implementation status of deliverables and plans to address any obstacles to the program. It is expected that the FPS report will be completed by the end of the year. is unclear whether FPS will meet the implementation goals established in the program’s proposed timeline. Until RAMP components are fully implemented, FPS will continue to rely on its current risk assessment. FPS had planned to implement the program throughout fiscal year 2009, but extended implementation into fiscal year 2010, thus it is not clear whether FPS would meet the program's milestones in accordance with updated timelines. Until the National Countermeasures Program is fully implemented,. FPS will continuing to rely upon its currentrisk assessment. FPS does not have adequate controls to monitor and track whether its 11 regions are completing these new requirements. FPS cannot say with certainty that it is being done. According to a FPS regional official, implementing the new requirements may present a number of challenges, in part, because of the lack of controls. The new requirements are expected to be implemented by the end of the year, according to the report. The report was written by FPS regional officials and is based on interviews with 11 regional officials.