The Corps is conducting 15 pilot studies nationwide to test different methods and frameworks for adapting to climate change. As of September 2013, the Corps has completed 5 of these studies, and 10 others are ongoing. The Corps plans to initiate 1 additional pilot in 2013. According to the Corps’ September 2012 report, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers plans to conduct 5 pilot studies in 2013, and 1 more in 2014. The U.N.’s Climate Change Adaptation Program is also conducting pilot studies. on its climate change adaptation pilots. Each study addresses a central question designed to help the Corps, officials say. Information developed by the pilots is also contributing to subsequent Corps studies. For example, the climate change and modeling data for a pilot study of sediment impacts to Cochiti Dam and Lake in New Mexico is contributing to ongoing studies in the Corps’ Albuquerque District. One is the Santa Clara Pueblo Watershed Assessment, which is based on climate change data from the pilot study and other studies. of climate change on the Corps’ business areas would likely be negative, positive, or a mix of both. The analysis found, for example, that increasing air temperatures may have an effect on glaciers that could negatively impact Corps business areas such as navigation, flood and coastal storm damage reduction, ecosystem and other areas. The study was conducted by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers in Washington, D.C. and the University of California, San Diego. It was published in the journal Climate Change and the Environment. restoration, and emergency management, but the effect of increasing air temperatures on river ice could have both positive and negative impacts. As part of the high-level analysis, the Corps also identified a number of adaptation priorities. To address its priority of developing more refined regulations, the Army Corps of Engineers is looking at ways to reduce the impact of climate change on the Great Lakes region of the U.S. The Corps is also looking at how to improve the quality of the water supply in the region, such as by reducing the amount of water pumped into the rivers. The Corps is engaged in collaborative efforts with external partners to integrate climate science into planning tools for water resource managers. For example, the Corps partnered with NOAA’s National Ocean Service to create an online sea level change calculator. The Corps Civil Works officials also told us that collaboration with the Federal Emergency Management Agency contributed to the development of a post-Superstorm Sandy sea level rise tool to be used in coastal projects. The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers is based in San Diego. Costs with state and local partners. Since 2009, the Corps has broadly assessed how climate change could affect its missions. The Corps is currently undertaking coastal project vulnerability assessments and is developing and testing a methodology for nationwide, watershed-level vulnerability assessments of inland missions, operations, programs, and projects. The nationwide watershed- level vulnerability assessments will, according to Corps officials, help them make initial screening-level determinations of where adaptation needs to be made in the U.S. and around the world. may affect agency missions, programs, and operations. These initial vulnerability assessments have informed the agencies in developing and conducting more detailed vulnerability assessments, while also identifying specific strategies for climate change adaptation. Both agencies have also begun integrating what they have learned into their programs and operations, and are working to develop a more comprehensive plan for the future of the nation's water supply and water management. The U.S. Geological Survey is conducting a study of the region's vulnerability to climate change. The study is expected to be completed by the end of the year. because the reliability of a planned flood reduction project could depend on how climate change affects future flooding, the Corps launched a pilot study. Corps officials told us that climate data indicated a trend of flooding consistent with climate change projections. In accordance with existing Corps risk analysis guidance, the pilot study leader convened an expert panel to review the climate information. Based on the expert panel’s findings,. the pilot team is integrating climate data into the Corps’ flood model to project future river. conditions. Pilot study supports effort to design $1.8 billion flood risk reduction project on Red River of the North. According to Corps officials, flooding has increased in magnitude and frequency since 1942. Study looked at how changes in precipitation patterns will affect flood events. It also looked at the impact of climate change on flood risk in the United States in the future. The results of the study were published in the Journal of the American Meteorological Society (JAM), a peer-reviewed, open-access journal. a progress report to the President through the Council on Environmental Quality containing overarching policy goals to advance climate adaptation. The report recommends the development of a national action plan to strengthen climate change adaptation for freshwater resources. Based on the work of the Task Force, the Report will be released to the public on October 1. The Report will also be released on October 2 to the media. For confidential support call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. For support in the UK, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch. and implementing a training program as recommended by the Task Force’s National Action Plan: Priorities for Managing Freshwater Resources in a Changing Environment. These agencies, joined by NOAA, USGS, and the Environmental Protection Agency, are collaborating with the University Corporation for Atmospheric Research and the Western Water Assessment to produce the training program. The training program will be available to the public in the coming months and years, the task force says. It will be led by NOAA and USGS and the University of California, Los Angeles. training courses for federal and nonfederal resource management professionals. In 2012, the agencies implemented an online course on incorporating climate change into water resource planning. According to the website, these courses and the numerous planned future classes are collectively designed to provide a professional development and training series that will help managers assess climate change impacts across the spectrum of natural resources. The Corps and Reclamation have collaborated with each other and other agencies in this effort. The agencies have also worked with other agencies to develop a national climate change strategy. pilot residence courses will address climate impacts on surface hydrology and on water demand for irrigated crops. According to the program’s website, the online course was designed to provide students with water resource planning knowledge. The residence courses offer opportunities for gaining hands-on experience in applying that knowledge, the program's website says. For more information on the program, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/23/science/climate/climate-impact-courses-pilot-residence. The Corps and Reclamation established a partnership in 2007 to address their mutual concerns about the potential effects of climate change on their agencies. The Climate Change and Water Working Group (CCAWWG) has clearly defined common objectives. Outside of CCAWWG, as mentioned elsewhere in this report, the agencies have also followed key collaborative practices, such as the Corps leveraging resources to help with climate change mitigation and adaptation. For more information on the Corps’ and. Reclamation’s organization and infrastructure, see appendix I. incorporating perspectives from other federal and nonfederal representatives of the scientific community. Ensuring the sustained collection of climate data: The Corps and Reclamation are coordinating with the data collecting agencies and sharing some costs associated with their efforts. According to the 2009 CCAWWG study, at the same time as the and development, as well as policy officials told us that as part of their effort to enhance the capabilities of water resource managers to use climate data. The agency is coleading two of Interior’s Landscape Conservation Cooperatives in the Colorado River Basin area. The Corps-hosted Federal Support Toolbox is now publicly available online. According to Corps Civil Works officials, the website is a ‘one stop shop’ for technical resources to support water management. The Corps and Reclamation are collaborating as coleaders in developing climate change data applications and tools for assessing the vulnerability of water programs and facilities to climate change. The website is an evolving and comprehensive water resources data portal with direct links to valuable databases, innovative programs and initiatives, and state-of-the-art models and tools. In 2009, the CCAWWG partners jointly produced a preliminary assessment of how climate could impact federal water resources management. This study identified several challenges that climate change poses for water resource managers. These include identifying the data and tools needed by water managers to address climate change, and ensuring the sustained collection of climate data. The agencies have taken a variety of actions to address these challenges. The CCA WWG agencies are collaborating to produce a report on climate change for the Corps and Reclamation. need to be regularly monitored for effectiveness. Plans need to incorporate new information about risks, lessons learned, and modified priorities. The Corps, Reclamation, and others are collaborating in a number of efforts to incorporate climate science into water management tools. The CCAWWG study and its impacts—as well as measuring the effectiveness of future adaptation strategies—will be properly configured and continue to operate, the authors say. They say the Corps and Reclamation are addressing these challenges, making collaboration a key element of their efforts. climate adaptation plans by June 4, 2012, for implementation in fiscal year 2013. For over 230 years, the Corps has led the development and stewardship of much of the nation’s public water resources. The Corps’ Civil Works Program plans and manages water for transportation, recreation, energy, wildlife habitat, aquatic ecosystems, for climate change information and tools. The second document, published in 2013, described the data and tools needed to support short-term planning of less than 5 years. The Corps and Reclamation have similar yet distinct roles in managing water for a wide variety of purposes. Both agencies are dealing with the water management challenges posed by climate change. Reclamation is contributing to Interior’s goal of identifying resources that are particularly vulnerable to climate change and implementing coordinated adaptation responses for half of the nation by September 30, 2013. We also found that the Corps andReclamation have collaborated together and with others in accordance with best practices. The agencies are to integrate climate change adaptation strategies into its policies and practices. Corps and Reclamation have taken steps to assess water resource and infrastructure vulnerabilities and develop guidance and strategies for adapting to climate change. Officials from both agencies told us that as they develop the necessary guidance, they plan to implement specific adaptation strategies and share the results with the public. According to the Corps’ 2012 adaptation plan, the agency’s goal is to create a policy and guidance framework that will support the support for climate change adaptation. The Corps is taking a phased approach to climate adaptation, including developing agency-wide guidance for adaptation. addition, Corps Civil Works officials told us that they are developing syntheses of literature to provide up-to-date information about regional climate impacts. As part of its efforts to address the adaptation priorities of developing a risk-informed decision-making framework, the Corps is developing a climate change adaptation plan for the region. The plan is expected to be completed by the end of the year or early next year, Corps officials said. It will help with project-specific planning and help implement adaptation strategies. Conservation Cooperatives, which are partnerships of governmental and nongovernmental stakeholders, will focus on developing and communicating science to inform climate adaptation strategies. Reclamation’s strategic plan for its adaptation and conservation programs states that collaborative partnerships must be developed to identify the adaptive strategies needed to address climate change. The Landscape Conservation Cooperatives will provide products and services, such as climate change computer models and vulnerability assessments, to help resource managers put them into action on the ground. In collaboration with academia, other federal agencies, local and state partners, and the public. most effective way to develop strategies to identify and reduce vulnerabilities to potential future climate change. As stated in the Corps’ 2012 Climate Adaptation Plan and Report, it is the objective of the agency to facilitate and promote closer and more fruitful interagency cooperation. To reinforce accountability, the draft performance metrics for climate adaptation in the 2013 Army Campaign Plan includes a target for the number of products developed in collaboration with other partners. The goal is to promote sharing of impact and adaptation data and information between federal, state, and local partners. organizational culture, which are necessary elements for a collaborative working relationship. The Corps and Reclamation have made collaboration a key element of their adaptation policies and plans and have reinforced accountability for collaboration through agency performance management systems. For example, the Corps’ climate adaptation policy states that collaborations are the key to the Corps' climate adaptation plans. For more information on the Corps, go to: http://www.corps.org/climate-adaptation-policies-and-plans. Climate change has the potential to affect many aspects of the environment and society in which water is used. Precisely how and to what extent changes in the climate will affect particular water resources in the future is uncertain. Climate-related changes are expected to continue and increase in intensity in some areas of the U.S. All water resources should be treated with the same care as all other water resources, says the National Institute on Water Resources and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. For more information, go to www.allwaterresources.org. A 2011 federal interagency review of the potential impacts of climate change on water resources identified four interrelated areas of concern for water resource managers. Assuring an adequate water supply for multiple needs, such as drinking water, agriculture, energy production, industrial uses, operational changes, demand management, and infrastructure changes. The study concluded that the options for responding to the effects of climateChange will vary by location. evaluating options will likely require a partnership between federal, state, and local interests to attain consensus among water managers and users. Climate change is having a variety of impacts on natural resources in the United States. Congress and the Executive Office of the President have directed federal agencies to with aging water management infrastructure with limited funding for maintenance and construction. According to the U.S. Global Change Research Program, changes in the climate have altered the water cycle, affecting where, when, and how much water is available for use. The U.K. is one of the leading countries in the world in terms of climate change research. All three of Reclamation’s completed Basin Studies projected climate change to result in warming and changes in precipitation. The changes may be difficult to predict with certainty for any particular location and time. For example, the Colorado River Basin study projected that snow cover will decrease in the basin as more precipitation falls as rain, rather than snow, and warmer temperatures cause earlier melting. As a result, the runoff in the Basin is generally projected to decrease. The northern Rockies are expected to see the most dramatic changes. Colorado River Basin Study concluded that without additional water management actions, a wide range of future imbalances in supply and demand are plausible. Study found climate change is expected to contribute to long-term imbalance in water supply andDemand. Study identified various combinations of potential adaptation strategies to address projected water Supply and Demand imbalanceances. The study noted that climate change could have a significant impact on water resources in the future, especially in the Colorado River Basin. It also identified possible adaptation strategies for the future. supply and demand. To address projected imbalances in supply and demand, the studies are to identify adaptation strategies that include strategies for nonstructural (i.e., management and operations) and structural changes. As of September 2013, 3 Basin Studies have been completed, and an additional 14 studies have been conducted. The studies are intended to identify strategies for both non-structural and structural change, such as capital expenditures changes, in the oil and natural gas industry. The projects are expected to be completed by the end of 2014. that the purpose of identifying these strategies was not to select a single, best strategy, but rather to recognize that there are various ways to address projected water imbalances in the basin. Each approach has positive and negative implications that should be considered in future planning efforts, the agency said. The agency said it was not looking for a single solution to the basin's water problems, but to find a way to address them in a variety of ways. It said the goal of the study was to identify strategies that could be used in the future. taking into account not only the needs and concerns of irrigation users, but also the interests of tribes, recreational users, environmental advocates, and others. A state water manager told us that a prior river basin planning effort had largely been unsuccessful due to the lack of involvement or opposition by the public. The state is planning to build a new water treatment facility on the banks of the San Francisco Bay. The project is expected to be completed by the end of the year or early next year, state officials say. to the implementing instructions for Executive Order 13514, the Corps established its adaptation policy statement for addressing the effects of climate change. Two Corps programmatic efforts—the Interagency Performance Evaluation Task Force/Hurricane Protection Decision Chronology Lessons Learned Implementation guidance and strategies. The Corps provided the President’s Council on Environmental Quality with a high-level analysis of the vulnerability of the Corps’ missions and operations to climate change in March 2012. The analysis included an assessment of whether the potential effects could be mitigated. and develop appropriate strategies to mitigate the impacts of water supply changes. Reclamation’s climate adaptation efforts fall within the larger effort by Interior to, among other things, implement Executive Order 13514. In 2013, Interior adopted a policy directing the agency to integrate climate change adaptation strategies into its operations, policies, programs, and planning. See the full report at: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/29/science/climate/climate-change-adaptation-reclamation-water.html. It is important that the Corps and Reclamation address the challenge of managing climate change risk in order to limit the fiscal exposure of the federal government. As noted in our 2013 high-risk update, climate change is a major threat to the U.S. infrastructure.funding. Despite the ongoing challenges of operating and maintaining aging infrastructure under budgetary constraints, it is important to address the challenges of managingclimate change risk, the Corps says. The Corps says it is working with the White House on a plan to address climate change. poses a significant financial risk to the federal government. State and local authorities are responsible for planning and implementing many types of infrastructure projects, and decisions at these levels of government are often made by state and local governments. The federal government is the owner or operator of extensive infrastructure vulnerable to climate impacts. It is also responsible for the planning and implementation of many of these projects, including the construction of new roads, bridges, tunnels and other infrastructure. It also has a significant role in the development and maintenance of the nation's water resources. can affect the federal government’s fiscal exposure. While implementing adaptive strategies to protect infrastructure may be costly, there is a growing recognition that the cost of inaction could be greater and more difficult to manage given expected budget pressures. The cost of not taking action is greater, especially given the government's precarious fiscal position. The government's fiscal position will constrain not just future ad spending, but also future infrastructure spending, the report says. The report says the government needs to take action to protect the nation's infrastructure. specifically, policymakers are increasingly viewing adaptation as a risk-management strategy to protect vulnerable sectors and communities that might be affected. Land resource management agency adaptation efforts generally consist of four key elements that are reviewed and subsequently issued detailed adaptation planning implementation instructions in March 2011. The instructions directed the agencies to issue an agency-wide climate change adaptation policy statement, complete a high-level analysis of agency vulnerability to climate change, and submit to the Council on Environmental Quality and the Office of Management and Budget. revised as needed as new information emerges. Establish a mandate to address climate change with clearly articulated adaptation goals, objectives, and measures of success toward meeting goals. Assess and understand the risks, vulnerabilities, and opportunities posed by climate change by determining (1) what aspects actions to take and (2) how to respond to the identified risks. Implement management options, evaluate the results to determine the actions’ effectiveness, and makes adjustments as necessary. As climate continues to change, adaptation actions will become more important. of the climate are changing and over what periods, (2) which resources will be most at risk, (3) why these resources are likely to be vulnerable, and (4) what uncertainties are associated with the predicted climate change impacts and how this may impact adaptation efforts. Develop and prioritize management adaptation to meet the needs of the changing climate, says the report. The report is published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the World Resources Institute (WRI) in association with the Climate Change Research Institute. in the Interagency Climate Change Adaptation Task Force (Task Force), which was already developing a strategy for adaptation to climate change. In October 2010, the Task Force delivered a report to the White House on how agencies can make their policies and practices compatible with the strategy. The report was the first of its kind in the United States and was released to the public in October 2010. The task force was created to develop approaches through which the policies and Practices of the agencies can be made compatible with its strategy. hoc responses, but other federal programs as well. As stated in a 2010 National Research Council report, increasing the nation’s ability to respond to a changing climate can be viewed as an insurance policy against climate change risks. Since 2009, as directed by executive order or required by law, the U.S. has increased the amount of money it spends on climate-related research and development. The U.N. has also increased the number of scientists it has hired to study climate change. Adaptation is an element of the proposed responses to climate change that is gaining more attention. Adaptation is defined by the National Research Council as adjustments in natural or human systems to a new or changing environment. It exploits beneficial opportunities or moderates negative effects, according to the council. The council defines adaptation as "adapting to a changing environment that exploits beneficial opportunity or moderates bad effects" The council's definition of adaptation is: "Adapting to the changing environment to exploit beneficial opportunities and mitigate negative effects" in the adaptation process, the extent to which limited budgets and existing infrastructure maintenance backlogs will affect the implementation of adaptation strategies remains to be determined. However, the implementation will likely rely on collaborative sharing of costs and resources with federal, state, local, and federal, and state and local, agencies. The adaptation strategies by both agencies will likely reliance on collaborative share of costs, resources, and time with federal and state agencies and departments. The strategies will be implemented over a five-year period. of the large dams and water diversion structures in the West for the purpose of developing water supplies for irrigation. In 2009, Reclamation directed its Office of Research and Development to take the lead in implementing the plan. The goal is to “reclaim’” these lands for human use, the agency says. The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers is responsible for managing the nation’s water supplies. The Army Corps’ office of research and development is based in San Francisco, California, and the office of policy and administration is in Washington. Reclamation is organized into five regions, as shown in figure 1. According to Reclamation, these regions produce 60 percent of the nation’s vegetables and one-quarter of its fresh fruit and nut crops. Reclamation is also the second largest producer of hydropower in the United States. To carry out its mission and operations, Reclamation has a team of more than 2,000 people, including more than 1,000 scientists and engineers. The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers is responsible for the operation of Reclamation. The Department of the Interior’s Bureau of Reclamation (Reclamation) provides water to over 31 million people and irrigation water to one out of five western farmers on 10 million acres of farm land. Reclamation has an estimated value of approximately $164 billion. It is the nation's largest wholesale water supplier, according to agency records. The agency is based in Los Angeles and has offices in San Francisco, San Diego and Los Angeles. It has a staff of about 2,000 people.  agency records as of 2011, Reclamation’s asset inventory includes 476 dams and dikes, creating 337 reservoirs with a total storage capacity of 245 million acre-feet of water. Reclamation also includes 53 hydroelectric power plants that it owns and operates. These plants provide an average of more than 40 megawatt. The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers is the agency responsible for the water management of the Rio Grande River and its tributaries, including the Colorado River andributaries. hours of energy per year. In 2011, Reclamation, estimated that the replacement value of its assets was approximately $90 billion. According to the Congressional Research Service, about two-thirds of the assets in Reclamation’s inventory are “transferred works”—facilities that it owns, but for which it has transferred operations and maintenance to another company. The U.S. Department of Energy is the largest user of natural gas in the United States. It is the second-largest user of electricity in the country. Reclamation has broadly assessed how climate change may affect water resources in the western United States. Reclamation is conducting Basin Studies to develop strategies to mitigate climate change impacts on water supplies. As of September 2013, 3 Basin Studies have been completed, and an additional 14 studies have been funded and are under way in western states. See appendix II for additional information on the locations and results of the Corps’ pilot studies. The Corps is conducting 15 pilot resources vulnerabilities and to implement the SECURE Water Act’s requirement. Congress passed the SECURE Water Act, requiring Reclamation to establish a climate change adaptation program. Studies are to develop long-term projections of water supply and demand that take into account specific climate change risks identified in the Act. The studies will analyze how well existing water and power infrastructure are meeting current demands and then forecast their performance in light of projected water. Reclamation policy officials told us that these combined assessments will be included in Reclamation’s next SECURES Water Act report that is due in 2015. The law requires Reclamation to assess specific risks to the water supply of each of its major river basins. Reclamation’s ability to deliver water to its customers, hydroelectric power generation, fish and wildlife habitat, and recreation are among the areas that could be affected. To develop strategies to address impacts, the law requires the agency to consider nonfederal stakeholders such as appropriate state water resource agencies. The law also requires the government to consider the impact of climate change on water supplies. Reclamation reported to Congress in 2011 its assessments of the potential effects of climate change on water supplies in the major river basins in the West. The studies, known as West-Wide Climate Risk Assessments (WWCRA), are high-level, baseline assessments. According to agency officials, Reclamation is now conducting WWCRAs that focus on future due in 2016. These assessments will also be updated based on the latest climate science as water uses and conditions change, and they will be included in future reports. to initiate feasibility studies for adaptation strategies identified in completed Basin Studies by making funds available to nonfederal partners, beginning with an initial feasibility study in 2013. See appendix II for additional information on the locations and results of Reclamation’s Basin Studies. As recommended by the Task Force in 2010, continue such collaborative approaches going forward. For example, as required under the SECURE Water Act, Reclamation officials told us they intend to share the cost of the feasibility studies with nonf federal partners. The Corps is leveraging resources for adaptation pilot studies with state, local, and nongovernmental entities. Reclamation is splitting the cost of Basin Studies with state and local partners. The remaining one-third of these facilities are ‘reserved works’ where the nonfederal beneficiaries, such as irrigation districts, are responsible for repaying construction and maintenance costs. The Corps is conducting pilot studies nationwide to support the development of adaptation guidance and guidance. The agencies plan to nonf federal entities. funded and are under way. Reclamation and its partners, including state water management agencies and local irrigation districts, completed the Yakima River Basin Study in 2011. Some studies entirely cover the St. Mary River and Milk River Basins. Stakeholders, including those representing agricultural and the environmental interests, told us they are collaboratively pursuing state funding to initiate the feasibility studies. A key outcome of the completed Basins Studies is that a key outcome is that more water will be available in the region. river basins specified in the SECURE Water Act. Other studies cover subbasins or tributaries within the boundaries of the major river basins. Reclamation officials told us that they next intend to study the Yakima River Basin Study, covering a tributary of the Columbia River. The study is expected to be completed by the end of the year or early next year, the agency said. The cost of the study has not yet been determined, but it is likely to be in the millions of dollars. agencies, including NOAA, USGS, and the U.S. Department of Agriculture, to develop the plan. Reclamation policy officials stated that the Basin Study Program activities, including the WWCRAs and Basin Studies, are also contributing to the planning effort. These collaborative efforts can help ensure that the long-term water resource monitoring networks critical for detecting and quantifying climate change are in place, Reclamation officials told us. The required monitoring plan is expected to be in place in 2014. which is studying observed climate trends and projected climate changes to address likely future changes to watershed hydrology on the Pueblo’s lands. Reclamation is partnering with nonfederal entities to conduct focused assessments, known as Basin Studies, to identify specific water the establishment of a shared view of how climate change will impact the basins and their water management infrastructure. basin stakeholders representing environmental and tribal interests say the Basin Studies represent Reclamation”s first concerted efforts at holistic planning in the river basins. environmental and tribal interests, and several stakeholders commended Reclamation for working to ensure that the views of a wide range of stakeholders were considered in the Basin Studies. In addition to the individual named above, Elizabeth Erdmann, Assistant Director; Brad Dobbins; Richard Johnson; Mick Ray; and Mick Ray, are among those who participated in the basin studies. The Basin Studies were conducted by the Bureau of Reclamation's Bureau of Planning and Development, and included input from a variety of stakeholders. need for observational data to support climate adaptation is increasing. In recent decades, maintenance of long-term monitoring networks has declined. USGS alone has deactivated or discontinued almost 1,700 surface-water stream gauges. Corps Civil Works officials told us that stream gauge data is extremely important to the Corps’ ongoing operations. To ensure the needed data is collected, the Corps has a to ensure that the neededData is collected. The data is used to produce the climate change information upon which the Corps bases its adaptation planning. formal agreement to provide funding to USGS. USGS to operate stream gauges that provide data for the Corps’ water planning and management activities. This data is also available for use by all federal and state agencies, as well as others interested in others' data. The Corps will provide about $18 million in fiscal year 2013 according to Corps officials. For more information, go to: http://www.usgs.gov/stream-gauges-and-water-planning. fund maintenance of the USGS’s stream- flow monitoring networks, and Reclamation establishing joint strategies with state agencies and others to conduct Basin Studies. We provided a draft of this product for review and comment to the Departments of Defense and the Interior. The Department of Defense provided technical comments that were incorporated into the draft of the report. We are happy to share the comments with the public. We hope to see the report published by the end of the year or early next year. and water supply, while reducing the impacts of flood damages and other natural disasters. The Corps has constructed and continues to operate, maintain, and rehabilitate a large inventory and wide variety of water management infrastructure. As of September 2012, its inventory includes 702 reservoirs that, among other things, provide water. In June 2011, in response to a request for information, the Corps conducted a performance measurement of its water management system. The results were published in the June 2011 issue of the journal Water Management. large portions of the Corps’ water resources infrastructure were built over 50 years ago and are experiencing various stages of decay and disrepair. The report also found that federal funding over the past 20 years has consistently been inadequate to maintain the Corps' infrastructure at acceptable levels of performance and efficiency. Similarly, most of Reclamation’s water infrastructure facilities are more than 50 years old and, according to a 2011 Congressional Research Service report, with limited budgetary resources and aging infrastructure, Reclamation's maintenance needs are likely to increase. reduction, the Corps inventory includes 14,501 miles of levee systems. The Corps’ inventory includes 54,879 miles of lakeshore and recreation areas that support 370 million annual visitors, 270,000 jobs, and $16 billion of economic activity. In 2012, the National Research Council reported that the Corps�’ infrastructure had an estimated cost of $1.2 trillion. The Army Corps of Engineers is based in Washington, D.C., and has an estimated budget of $2.1 trillion. series of four documents identifying their common data and tool needs and a strategy for meeting them. The objective is to guide and foster federal and nonfederal research and technology investments toward meeting these needs. The first document, published in 2011, described the water management community’s needs managers to identify the information and tools most relevant to their programs. They also consulted with other federal, state, and local agencies and stakeholders with a role in water resource management. The documents summarized the information, tools needed into categories and identified the users’ most relevant. water information. Reclamation policy officials told us, in response to a SECURE Water Act requirement to consult with federal and applicable state agencies to develop a monitoring plan for acquiring and maintaining water resources information. Agency staff are currently identifying information needs and plans to work collaboratively with data collecting data collecting agencies, Reclamation officials said. The agency plans to develop an information monitoring plan to monitor water resources. The plan is expected to be in place by the end of the year, according to officials. help affected communities, residents, and other stakeholders consider risks from future sea level rise in planning for reconstruction. In addition, the Corps and NOAA are coleading actions to implement the Task Force recommendation to develop a federal Internet portal to provide current, relevant, and high-quality information on water resources and the environment. The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration are working together to prepare for the effects of rising sea levels on the Great Lakes and Chesapeake Bay. navigation, and recreation; protecting life, health, and property in the face of risks posed by protecting the quality of freshwater resources; and protecting coastal and ocean resources as rising sea levels and changes in changes in sea levels are monitored. The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers is based in San Diego, California. The agency's mission is to protect and preserve the nation's freshwater resources and coastal resources. It also aims to protect the health of fisheries and aquatic habitat, and to protect coastal and Ocean resources. Program is implemented through nine business areas that represent the diversity of the nation’s water resource management needs. Navigation provides safe and reliable commercial waterways. Flood and Coastal Storm Damage Reduction reduces risks to people, homes, and communities from flooding and coastal storms. Environment restores and protects wetlands and other aquatic species. Water Resources Management is a joint program of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and the Army National Guard. For more information, go to www.waterresourcesmanagement.org or call 1-800-273-8255 or go to http://www.water resourcesmanagement.gov/. Hydropower --generates hydroelectric power for distribution to Regulatory. Recreation --provides recreational and educational opportunities. Emergency Management --prepares for natural disasters and acts Water Supply—provides water storage for multiple purposes. Executive Direction and Management--provides leadership, strategic planning and strategic planning for the U.S. Navy. The Navy's fleet is based in San Diego, California, and has a fleet of more than 1,000 ships and submarines. The fleet is also based in New Jersey, with a fleet that has a total of 1,100 ships. Supply storage and help reduce flood risk. 75 hydropower facilities with 353 generating units that produce hydroelectric power for homes, businesses, and communities. In the area of navigation, the Corps’ inventory includes 12,000 miles of commercial inland waterways. 193 lock sites with 239 chambers, and 926 harbors. For flood storage, go to the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers’ Flood Risk Information Center at www.floodriskinfo.org or call 1-800-273-8255. strategies are needed or not needed, and then to prioritize accordingly. The agency officials expect to complete the first phase of screening assessments in 2013. More refined assessments to come in future years. Ultimately, the Corps plans to combine the coastal and inland assessments into a unified methodology. In 2013, the agency will conduct a series of screenings in coastal areas and inland areas. In 2014, the assessment will move to the inland area and then the coastal area. In 2015 and 2016, the assessments will look at the inland and coastal areas. policies and program guidance. For example, beginning in 2009 and updated in 2011, the Corps issued guidance requiring that potential sea- level changes be considered in all of the agency’s coastal planning, engineering, operations, and maintenance activities. The Corps is currently developing guidance for implementing coastal and inland adaptation strategies. For more information, visit the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers’ website at: http://www.usace.org/marine-sea-level-change. the implementation of practical, nationally consistent, legally justifiable, and cost-effective adaptation strategies. Corps Civil Works officials told us that the pilots conducted to date have been largely focused on informing the development of policy and guidance. No structural or operational adaptation strategies have been implemented. Similarly, Reclamation Reclamation has not implemented any adaptation strategies to date. Reclamation is a program of the Corps of Civil Works that aims to improve the quality of the nation's water supply by reclaiming and reclaiming water. officials told us no structural or operational adaptation strategies have been implemented in response to the agency’s vulnerability assessments. Corps and Reclamation officials told us that because they are early, the agency's efforts to update guidance will be informed by the adaptation strategy feasibility studies as they are completed. The agency's vulnerability assessments are the result of a joint effort between the Army Corps of Engineers and the Bureau of Reclamation. The Army Corps has been working with the Reclamation since the 1970s to improve the nation's water infrastructure. The 15 pilots are led by 13 different Corps districts and address project planning, engineering, operations, and maintenance for 6 different Corps business areas. The 15 pilots were proposed by Corps district staff and selected by senior Corps staff in a competitive, internal process. The pilots include projects involving a variety of different infrastructure types, such as water, power, and sewage systems, as well as a range of other services. The pilot program is funded by the US Army Corps of Engineers and the Army Reserve. flood risk reduction projects, reservoirs, and canals. Some of the pilots are being conducted collaboratively with federal, state, and university partners. Taken together, Corps officials expect the pilot projects to provide a body of knowledge and tested methods that will serve as the foundation for its guidance and future adaptation, officials say. The pilot projects are expected to be completed by the end of the year or early next year, depending on the success of the projects. The Corps hopes to use the data to improve flood risk reduction efforts in the future. may be found on the last page of this report. GAO staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix III. The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (Corps) is an agency within the Department of Defense and a Major Command within the Army. The Corps is composed of four program areas including the Civilian Construction Program, Civilian Engineering Program, and Civilian Support Program. The corps is a major component of the Army’s Civilian Workforce Development Program. Civil Works is organized into eight geographic divisions composed of 38 districts. Division and district geographic boundaries are generally aligned with watershed boundaries. The Corps’ Civil Works is divided into four categories: Military Construction, Real Estate, and Research and Development. The Civil Works program is funded by the federal government and the private sector. The program is based in Washington, D.C. and has a national headquarters in San Francisco. It is also based in San Diego, California, and in San Antonio, Texas. The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers manages the program. were incorporated, as appropriate. As agreed with your offices, unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier, we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date. At that time we will send copies to the Secretaries of Defense and the Interior; the appropriate congressional committees; and other appropriate offices. We will also send copies of the report to the White House, the State Department, the Defense Department, and the Department of the Interior. We plan to release the report in full within 30 days of its release. and other interested parties. In addition, the report will be available at no charge on the GAO website at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staff members have questions about this report, please contact me at (202) 512-3841 or morriss@gaO.gov, or contact our Offices of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs at (844) 615-8255. For confidential support on suicide matters call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. Jeanette Soares, Lorelei St. James, and Sarah E. Veale contributed to this report. Nirmal Chaudhary, John Delicath, Cindy Gilbert, and Armetha Liles provided additional technical assistance. For more, visit CNN.com/soulmatestories and follow us on Twitter @CNNSoulmatters and @jennifer_soares and @LoreleiStJames. For the latest from CNN iReport, go to www.cnn.com. pressing needs within each category. The CCAWWG agencies plan next to prepare two companion documents to identify a scientific strategy for meeting the research needs identified in the two initial documents. USGS and NOAA will jointly prepare the companion documents, the documents say. The two completed documents note that US GS and NOAA are working together on the project. The documents also note that the two agencies will work together on a companion document to identify the scientific strategy to meet the needs for each category of research. management and federal science agencies, and it leverages resources across agencies to meet common needs. The CCAWWG agencies also have mutually reinforcing strategies. For example, the operating needs of the Corps and Reclamation drive the direction of science inquiries by the science agencies. This can result in improved operations, while at the same time improving the nation's scientific understanding of the environment, the report says. The report was published by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and the National Institute of Standards and Technology. a manner that is generally consistent with practices that we have previously identified as important to helping enhance and sustain collaboration among federal agencies. In 2005, we reported that collaboration—broadly defined as any joint activity that is intended to produce more public value than could be produced when organizations act alone. We reported that this was generally defined as. any joint activities that are intended to produced more public. value than the public could get from the organizations themselves. We also reported that the federal government should act in a manner that was consistent with these practices. agency boundaries; (6) developing mechanisms to monitor, evaluate, and report on results; (7) reinforcing agency accountability for collaborative efforts through agency plans and reports; and (8) reinforcing individual accountability through performance management systems. Running throughout these practices are a number of factors, such as leadership, trust, and trust in the organization's leadership and trust of its members. The best practices are based on a combination of these factors and other factors, including accountability, transparency, and accountability. alone—can be enhanced and sustained by engaging in eight key practices. These include defining and articulating a common outcome, establishing mutually reinforcing or joint strategies, identifying and addressing needs by leveraging resources, agreeing on roles and responsibilities, and establishing compatible policies, procedures, and other means to operate across the U.S. and abroad. For more information, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/30/business/business-leadership/top-8-key-practices-how-to-enhance-and-sustain-a-business-team.