above the government SAPrate is often called "floor income" The SAP affords lenders necessary protection in high interest environments during which thestatutorily established borrower rate may provide lenders insufficient below-market rate returns. Some argue that since the SAP is designed to approximate fair market compensation it isunnecessary to compensate lenders at levels that exceed the SAP rate. It is often noted that in anearlier period, "excess interest provisions" were adopted that essentially installed the SAP in the system. difference between the below-market,statutorily set interest rate charged to borrowers and a market set interest rates that is intended as fairmarket compensation on the loan asset. In some instances lenders receive interest income from borrowers exceeding the amountcalled for by the SAP calculation. The amount of income lenders receive is the amount of interest income they receive for the loan they made to the borrower in the first place. Lenders are not required to pay interest on the loans they make to the borrowers. loans by reducing by half the SAP rate on loansoriginating from the proceeds of tax-exempt bonds. However, to ensure that student loan authoritieswere always able to cover their operating costs, the amendments also established minimum SAPs,for loans disbursed on or after October 1, 1980, which ensure a minimum return of 1993. These loans were afforded the same SAP rates as wereavailable for taxable loans. Different provisions were retained with regard to loans made or purchased with tax- exemptfunds obtained by holders from obligations originally issued on or afterwards. tax exempt funds provide lenders a guaranteed interest rate of atleast 9.5%. This guarantee is provided inthe SAP formula applied to these loans. The federal government requires the federal government to supplementborrower interest payments so as to insure a minimum 9. 5% rate. These loans are referred to as 9.4% floor loans. In the U.S. these loans are known as "9.5% floor loan" loans. They are not available in the UK, but are available in Australia. SAP rate as thesole lender reimbursement rate for loans. 9.5% floor loans comprise a relatively small percentage of all outstanding loans. In recent years they have accounted for a very large proportion of federal SAP subsidies. Some FFEL program loans are made or purchased with a variety of refinancing techniques, and also invested earnings from existing 9. 5% floorloans to make or purchase new ones. There appearsto be no plans to change the current SAP rate of 2.5%. loan subsidy known as a special allowance payment(SAP) The SAP amount is determined on a quarterly basis by a statutory formula which is tied to a financial index and ensures lenders receive, at a minimum, a specified level of interest income onloans. The SAP is designed to compensate lenders for the cost of paying off their loans with interest. The amount of the SAP is determined by a formula tied to an index and is based on a number of factors including the size of the loan and the interest rate. The interest rate issue was revisited in 2002 with the passage of P.L. 107-139. The formula for calculating interest rates on Stafford loans is based on the 91-day Treasurybill rate plus 1.7% while the borrower is in school. The removal of this benefit in a low interest environment would amount to dropping a large share of the interest subsidy currently available to borrowers. Those opposed to sustaining the existing rate setting formula suggest it would be a mistake to remove this subsidy. to undergraduate and graduate students. The interest rates onsubsidized and unsubsidized Stafford loans adjust annually, based on a statutorily established,market-indexed, rate setting formula, and may not exceed 8.25%. To qualify for a subsidized Stafford loan, astudent must establish financial need. The federal government pays the interest on the borrower'sbehalf on the subsidized Stafford loans while the borrower is in school (on at least a half-time basis)and during grace periods and deferment periods. available in only one of the two programs. As of July 2006, undercurrent law, new Stafford and PLUS loans will carry fixed interest rates. The desirability of thisplanned switch has been viewed as a major factor in the decision to switch to fixed rates. (5) Interest Rates on Stafford and Plus Loans. TheStafford and PLUS Loans currently being disbursed are variable rate loans. The Stafford andPlus Loans currently are fixed rate loans, with interest rates set at a fixed rate. Consolidation loans afford borrowers the opportunity to pursue a more favorable long term interestrate through locking in a fixed interest rate on their student loans. In the recent low interest rateenvironment consolidation volume has grown dramatically as borrowers have sought to lock in aspermanent the favorable rates currently in effect on their variable rate borrowers fare worse under the high fixed ratesthey lock in. This raises concern, particularly with regard to those using consolidation for repaymentrelief (i.e., extended repayment), because these borrowers may have to consolidate in years in which the fixed rate is disadvantageous. A consolidation loan may be comprised of one underlying loan or multipleunderlying loans. The current consolidation loan interest rate formula affords borrowers the opportunity tosecure a fixed rate equal to the weighted average interest rate. Not exceed 9% is the maximum interest rate for a consolidation loan that can be taken into account when applying for a new loan. A consolidation loan has evolved into a refinance benefit as well (i.e., a benefit thatenables a borrower to pursue a better interest rate) multiple refinanceopportunities (i.e., offering borrowers with relatively high fixed rates the prospect of securing abetter rate) Any added interest benefit for a borrower, however, would likely expand federal subsidycosts. Another way to address this is to eliminate consolidation loans' fixed rate benefit. Thiswould prevent borrowers from locking in disadvantageous rates. It would also prevent lenders from charging too high a rate for a loan to be taken out. It could also help borrowers avoid taking out too many loans at once.  fixed rate provides the borrower with a set of predictable monthly payments which manyborrowers desire. Others feel that a borrower is better served under a variable rate formula where the borrower is able to take advantage of low market rates when available. Borrowers who have lockedin fixed rates through consolidation in high interest periods sometimes miss out on moreadvantageous variable rates that they would have had on underlying loans. This introduces a facetof the fixed rate benefit some find troubling -- some find it unfair. escalatingstudent loan debt it provides important repayment relief and sends a signal to students and potentialstudents that repayment will be manageable. Proponents of the existing rate setting formulas say eliminating the opportunity to lock in a fixed rate would be tantamount to taking away a benefit that was available when students took out student loans in the 1980s and 1990s. It would also send a message to potential students that they can expect to pay back their loans in a reasonable amount of time and at a lower rate. Borrowers can lockin as permanent an in-school rate which is lower than the repayment rate. This affords borrowers greater opportunity to lock in as permanent favorablevariable rates in effect in years when the borrowers are still in school. Repayment term : Borrowers with a 1.7% repayment rate (T-bill + 1.6% as opposed to T-bill - 2.3%) can lock in a rate of 1.8%. Repayments term: Borrower with a 2.5% repayment rate can lock into a repayment rate of 2.4%. repayment plans offer a 10-year repayment term with the exception of extended repayment under which repayment must occur within a time period not toexceed 25 years. In DL, standard repayment offers a ten-year term. Under the income contingent repayment plan, repayment must be over a period of time not to exceed 25 years, with a maximum term of 10 years. Repayment must be made in full or in part every three years, depending on the amount of debt. periods for extended and graduated repayment plans vary with the size of the loan. It is likely that some attention may be devoted to adopting more comparable repaymentoptions across the two programs. Some interest exists in adding a new "interest only"repayment option. Under such an option, a borrower would be able to repay their loan with interest only, rather than the interest rate of the lender. The U.S. Federal Reserve is the largest lender of student loans in the world. It has more than 1.2 million students. loan terms andconditions. The two programs disburse the same set of loans, but loan terms and conditions are notperfectly parallel across the two programs. Each program has its supporters. Some favor promotingmore parallel terms and Conditions, others do not if parallel terms are achieved byreducing a benefit currently currently being offered to the public. The U.S. Federal Reserve is the largest lender of short-term loans to the private sector. It provides loans of up to $1.5 million to individuals and $1 million to families. the expansion of borrowing opportunities will have any positive effect on access, choice or persistence -- particularly for lower income students. Also at issue arefederal subsidy costs, because as borrowing opportunities are expanded so are federal subsidy costs. Repayment Plans. Issues concerning repaymentplans that surface with some regularity relate to differences between different repayment plans, such as those offered by the federal government and the state and local governments. The federal government has no obligation to help students pay back loans, but it can help them find alternative sources of income. offers an overlygenerous borrower benefit that is costly to the point of placing future aid in jeopardy. They alsoquestion whether it is necessary to offer a refinance benefit when the rate is already subsidized onStafford loans. Further they question whether a benefit received in the years after postsecondaryschooling contributes in any way to a student's financial well-being. The study was published in the online edition of the American Journal of Banking and Finance, which is published by Simon & Schuster. any way to students' postsecondary access, persistence, or choice. They notethe repayment period subsidy is provided without regard to need, over a lengthy period potentiallyextending up to 30 years beyond schooling. It disproportionately benefits students who attendedfour-year private institutions and/or graduate programs. Reconsolidation. In many ways the debate on"reconsolidation" is a debate on the future of postsecondary education in the United States. It is not a decision to be made in a vacuum. limit the amount of debt incurred by borrowers, annual and aggregate Staffordborrowing caps have been established. The current caps for undergraduate students, which were enacted in the HigherEducation Amendments of 1992 ( P.L. 102-325 ), are as follows. In general, those in favor of expanding loan limits suggest loan limits have not kept pace withtuition increases and thus constrain students' ability to finance their education. Those opposed suggest it is undesirable for students to incurmore debt, and question whether it is necessary. Dependency status is a key determinant of a student's personal borrowinglimits. Dependent students are therefore afforded lower personalborrowing limits than independent students. Parents of dependent students areafforded the opportunity to take out federal PLUS loans to support dependent students. Some have questioned,however, whether dependent students in particular are being provided adequate borrowingopportunities if they have to self-fund their education. The HEA, Section 428 (20 U.S.C. Â§ 1078) provides the funding for the Stafford loan program. 9.5% floor reimbursement structure. The statutory provisions adopted in P.L. 103-66 and ensuing regulatory guidance from ED have served to establish funds (derived from debt originally issued in the aforementioned period) that can be used by holders to finance 9. 5% floor loans on an ongoing basis. In recent years lenders have been using lenders havebeen using 9.5%, according to a report by the European Securities and Markets Authority (ESMA) The report was published by the ESMA on Wednesday. A phase out of the 9.5% guarantee would produce savings in mandatory spending. Thesesavings could be used to offset new expenditures. Proceeds from the sale of the bank would be used for new 9.4% loans. The proceeds from the sales of the Bank of Canada’s stake in the Bank for International Settlements (BOCS) would also be used as a source of funding for the Bank. The BOCS is a joint venture between the BSC and the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (BRC). loans. Currently, a borrower who consolidateswhile in the grace period can secure a 2.88% interest rate. Over the last two years, in which very lowrates have been available, an estimated $63 billion in loan volume has been taken out. This has enabled a largenumber of borrowers to secure a valuable refinance benefit, according to a report by the American Bankers Association (Bank of America, Merrill Lynch, and RBS) The Bank of America/Merrill Lynch report said that the low interest rates have enabled a large number of people to refinance their loans. loans, for one year, by eliminating the 9.5%guarantee on new loans stemming from any new refinancing of obligations originally issued on orafter October 1, 1980. However, it does not curtail the 9,5% guaranteeon new loans stemmed from "recycling"of proceeds from outstanding 9. 5% loans. These loans were issued before Oct. 1, 1993, and prior to Oct. 2, 1980, and are not subject to the guarantee. The guarantee does not apply to loans that are refinanced using proceeds from the refinancing, however. general consensus that no federal policy objective is served now by continually guaranteeinglenders a minimum return of 9.5%. However, there is some debate about how best to phase out theguarantee for nonprofit lenders. The Taxpayer-Teacher Protection Act of 2004 ( P.L. 108-409 );signed October 30, 2004, curbs growth in 9.4% to 9.6% loans. The bill was passed by Congress and signed by President Bush on October 31, 2004. of1%, capped at 8.25%. One pertains to program cost. It is generally thecase that the program cost is capped at 9% of the loan amount. There are underlying tensions inherent in the current design of theloan programs that affect many of the reauthorization issues considered in this report. It may be helpful to note that there are certain underlying tensions in the design of these programs that can be resolved by changing the program design. The program cost of a loan is generally capped at 7.5%. assessed lenders may opt to pay the fee or a portion of the fee on the borrower's behalf. It is likely that a reduction in borrower origination fees (particularly for student borrowers) will be considered in reauthorization. Helping students by reducing charges is a goal upon whichmany can agree, but finding offsetting costs is a challenge for lenders and borrowers. For confidential support call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. the upcoming reauthorization of the HEA it is likely that borrower interest rates will onceagain receive consideration. Some feel that the 6.8% fixed rate set to take effect for new loans madeon or after July 1, 2006 is a good rate in comparison to historical borrower rates in the program. The rate is expected to be in the range of 6.5 to 6.7% depending on the size of the loan and the amount of time it will take to pay it off. this year) but still receive protection against high rates thanks to the8.25% interest cap. It is likely that student loan interest rates will be hotly debated. Part of the debate is likelyto focus on enhancing or preserving borrower benefits. There will also likely be concerns about thefederal subsidy cost. This year's student loan rates are expected to be around 8.25%. This year’s student loan rate is likely to be about 7.5% to 8.5%. served to encourage the issuance of tax-exempt student loan bonds. Such bonds are exempt from federal taxation, and are used by states to finance below market interest rate loans for students. In essence, through theissuance of bonds with low tax- exempt interest rates, state authorities are able to raise "low cost"funds, and then re-lend the funds at higher rates. Soon after these provisions were passed, student bond volume began to grow rapidly, andconcerns about the profitability of tax exempt student loans surfaced. 9.5% on theseloans. The discourse on the profitability of tax-exempt student loans continued through the 1980son into the early 1990s. The Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1993 ( P.L. 103-66 ) containeda provision eliminating the floor on tax- exempt loans supported through tax- exempted financing forissuances on or after October 1, 1993. (16) The discourse. on the. profitability ofTax-exempt Student Loans continued through. the 1980s and into the 1990s, with the discourse. Student loan interest rates were a focal issue in the 1998 reauthorization. Ratesetting formulas are used to establish rates for loans disbursed from July 1, 1998 through June30, 2006. The statutory ratesetting formulas were initially enacted in June 1998 and extended in the HEA amendments of June 2006. They were the subject of considerable debate during the 1998 reauthorization of the Student Loan Act of 1998 and the subsequent HEA amendments of June 2005 and 2006. rate-setting formula was initially enacted in the Student Loan Reform Act of 1993. The formula afforded the Secretaryof Education a great deal of latitude in establishing borrower rates. The decision to move toward a comparable maturity rate was made in 1993 within the SLRA. The legislation that created the DL program was passed in 1993 and signed into law by President Clinton in 1994. The SLRA was passed with bipartisan support and passed by the House of Representatives in 1994 and the Senate in 1995. The Senate passed it in 1996 and the House passed it again in 1998. rate structure before it tookeffect. This led to the adoption of the rate setting formulas currently in effect. However, due to costconsiderations under prevailing budget scoring rules, the HEA amendments of 1998 were only able to install the current formula until June 30, 2003. After which the comparable maturity rates were once again adopted. The current formula is based on the U.S. Federal Reserve's benchmark interest rate of 2.5 per cent. It is currently set at 1.7 per cent for the next five years. based on the 91-day Treasury bill rate plus 3.1%, and the PLUS rates are cappedat 9%. (6) The current rate setting formulas were adopted as a result of deliberations that centered onhow to replace so called "comparable maturity rates" that were set to take effect July 1, 1998. Thecom comparable maturity rates were to be set at a rate of 1.5% to 1.7%. The current rates are set at 1.6% and 1.8%. There are several ways in which consolidation loan benefitsdiffer across the FFEL and DL programs. Borrowers seeking a FFEL consolidation loan are eligible to pursueconsolidation when the borrowers have entered the repayment or grace period on each loan they areseeking to consolidate. In contrast, borrowers seeking a DL consolidation loan may consolidate anyeligible loans that have been fully disbursed even if they have not yet entered a repaymentor grace period. Inpractical terms this affords DL consolidation borrowers a broader time period in which to consolidate elsewhere. not provide the borrower with an income sensitive repayment plan acceptable to theborrower, then the borrower may pursue other FFEL consolidation loans. Other FFEL borrowers,with loans from more than one FFEL lender, may seek a consolidation loan through any FFELlender. DL borrowers may pursue consolidation loans within the DL program.DL borrowers are also also eligible to apply for a loan from the Federal Reserve Bank of New York or the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) under certain circumstances. in the future, but would not offerassistance to those having already done so. FFEL borrowers whose loans are held by one holder must first attempt to consolidate theirloans with that holder. It is likely that proposals calling for the elimination of provisions that constrain borrowers'choice among consolidators will receive consideration during reauthorization. Those in favor ofsuch changes suggest it is important to afford all borrowers, not just some, the opportunity to shopamong consolidators. (11) If a consolidation loan is unavailable from that lender or thelender does able to consolidate its loans through FFEL lenders. one of the borrowers mustmeet the full set of individual eligibility requirements for a new consolidation loan. However, eachagrees to become jointly and severally liable for repayment of the note regardless of any changes inmarital status. It is likely that proposals to eliminate joint consolidations will receive consideration in the reauthorization of the CFPB. It can simplify repayment for a married couple but concerns have beenraised in recent years about disadvantages that may be associated with joint consolidation for someborrowers. Consolidation loans were originally introduced in the HEA Amendments of 1986 ( P.L.99-498 ). They were initially intended to simplify repayment for borrowers, simplify loan repaymentservicing for lenders, and offer relief in the form of extended repayment to those borrowers seekinglower monthly payments. As the. benefit centers on its cost, they are now seen as more of a financial burden than a financial aid tool for the poor and unemployed. They are also seen as a way for lenders to make more money from their customers. sharing" approach. Under this approach, uses ofreserves are restricted, and guarantors are afforded flexibility in the use of their operating funds. There is a clearer distinction between reserves and operating funds, and clearer direction about wherevarious revenue streams are to be deposited -- and ultimately about how these sources of revenueare to be used. It is likely that some attention will be devoted to the issue of how the federal government will manage its reserves in the event of an economic downturn in the U.S. reserves and robust Operating Funds. Some proposals have already called for mandatinginsurance premiums to strengthen reserves. Some observers have suggested guarantor fees for loancollections and defaulted loan rehabilitation work may be too high. Excess Interest Provisions. As has been noted,the federal government provides lenders with a huge amount of money. It is estimated that the federal government will borrow $1.2 trillion over the next 10 years. The U.S. economy is expected to grow at a rate of around 2.5% this year. solvency of Federal Funds (i.e., locallyheld federal reserve funds) and the size of Operating Funds -- which can be used to support agencyoperations and also for discretionary student financial aid expenditures. An overarching issue herepertains to the adequacy of revenues flowing into each fund. Some concerns have been raised aboutshrinking the federal reserve fund, which is held in the federal government's national bank account and is used to fund federal government operations and programs. The U.S. Treasury Department has said it has no plans to cut the reserve fund. evolved a good deal since the program's inception. Initially, the federal governmentintended to encourage the growth of state loan insurance programs. Over time the federalgovernment assumed the role of providing the insurance and now guaranty agencies service the federal guarantee and perform various program administrative tasks. In the 1998 reauthorization of the program, the U.S. government provided a guarantee of up to $1.5 billion to state and local governments. The federal government provided the guarantee in the form of a loan. A considerable attention was devoted to more clearly defining the role guaranty agencies playwithin the FFEL program. Changes adopted during the 1998 reauthorization focused on strengthening therelationship between revenues and activities, and improving efficiency. The 1998 amendments adopted a "risk-based" approach to the program, with the aim of reducing the risk of a failure to meet the program's goals. The FFEL was established in 1993 and has a budget of $1.2 billion. It is funded by the European Union, the United States, Canada and other countries. the assumption that the DL program would be phased in over a series of years andultimately replace the guaranteed loan system. In years following the enactment of the SLRA,Congressional support emerged for sustaining both loan programs and, within this context,considerable attention was devoted to replacing the comparable maturity of the DL with a similar maturity. The DL program was eventually phased out over a period of years, with the goal of replacing it with a comparable maturity for the DL system. TheDL program was phased out by the end of the decade. who becomes permanently disabled, a disability discharge is provided for that spouse. Each spouse remainsliable for repayment of the remaining loan amount. Guaranty agenciesadminister the federal government's loan guarantee. The role guarantors play within the FFELprogram has been described as the role of a "guarantor" in the federal loan program. The federal government has provided a loan guarantee to the families of veterans who have served in the U.S. armed forces during the Vietnam War. The government has also provided a guarantee to veterans who had served during the Korean War. replace the long-standing FFEL program, the 1998 HEA amendments removed theprovisions of the law that referred to a "phase in" of the DL program. Currently both programs areauthorized and the two programs compete for student loan business. In FY2003, these programsprovided $45.8 billion in new loans to students and their parents. In that year the FFEL programprovided 8,429,000 new loans averaging about $4,009 each. The DL program provided2,937,000new loans averaging approximately $4,.075 each. the HEA, and the WilliamD. Ford Direct Loan (DL) program, authorized by Part D of Title IV of the HEA. These programs provide loansto undergraduate and graduate students and the parents of undergraduate students to help them meet the costs of postsecondary education. Under the FFEL program, loan capital is available to students and their parents to help pay for their education. In the DL program, the loan capital can be used to help students pay for graduate and undergraduate studies. students' postsecondary educational pursuits than any othersource. In FY2003, the federal student loan programs provided $45.8 billion in new loans tostudents and their parents. This report discusses issues concerning the student loan Programs that are likely to be considered during reauthorization. The report is organized in the following manner. First it provides background informationon the student Loan programs and their loans. Then it provides an overview of many of the issueslikely to receive attention in the reauthorisation. The Higher Education Act of 1965 (HEA) is being considered for reauthorization. The HEAwas last reauthorized by the Higher Education Amendments of 1998 ( P.L. 105-244 ). Title IV of theact authorizes the major federal student aid programs, including the federal student loan programs, which provide more direct aid to support students. The act was passed in 1965 and has not been reauthorized since. The bill is expected to be voted on by the House of Representatives in the coming weeks. provided by private lenders, and the federalgovernment guarantees lenders against loss through borrower default, death, permanent disability,or, in limited instances, bankruptcy. Under the DL program, operated through the U.S. Departmentof Education (ED), the federal government provides the loans to students and their families. The federal government uses federal capital (i.e., funds from the United States) to pay for the loans. The loans are made to students using federal capital, using private lenders' loans. Treasury). The two programs rely on different sources ofcapital and different administrative structures, but essentially disburse the same set of loans. The DL program, established in 1993, was intended to streamline the student loan deliverysystem and achieve cost savings. While the DL program was originally introduced to graduallyexpand and, in part, to save money, it has since been expanded to cover a wider range of students. The two Programs rely on separate sources of capital and differentadministrative structures. that enhancements to borrower benefits increase federal subsidy costs. Several proposals have beenforwarded recently that call for reductions in borrower fees. Currently, Stafford borrowers in the DLprogram pay a 3% origination fee that goes to the federal government to help offset program costs. Statutory provisions call for DL borrowers to pay a lower percentage of their loans to the government to offset the cost of the program. For instance, in theFFEL program, where the government insures and subsidizes loans made by private lenders, federalsubsidy costs increase when less revenue is derived from borrower fees and when interest subsidayments to lenders are increased. ensures they receive thedifference between the statutorily set borrower rate and a fair market rate. In the DL program, where the federal government acts as lender, federalsubsidy costs increase when repayment revenues are reduced. Those in favor of the existing fixed rate setting formula assert that in the current low interestrate environment the fixed rate amounts to a valuable benefit to borrowers. At a time of low interest rates, fixed rates are a valuable tool for lenders. Across both and the rate the lender is guaranteed. DL PLUS borrowers pay a 4% origination fee. In the FFEL program, the origination fees for PLUS and Stafford borrowers is 3% which goesto the federal government. Lenders may opt to pay a higher fee. ED reduced the fee forStafford DL borrowers effective August 15, 1999. The fee for PLUS borrowers is 4% and for Stafford borrowers it is 3%. The fee is lower for DL borrowers, but not for PLUS or Stafford borrowers. It is higher for DL PLUS borrowers. the fee or a portion of the fee on the borrower'sbehalf in order to secure loan business. FFEL borrowers may be required to pay a 1%insurance premium. This fee goes to guaranty agencies to help offset loan insurance costs. Guarantors may wave the fee, and if the fee is not waived, the fee will be added to the borrowers' bill. For more information on FFEL, visit the FFEL website or call 1-800-FEL-LEND or visit www.fellend.org. revenues from other sources is often a challenge. In FY2003,borrower origination fees generated approximately $1.3 billion in revenue across the two programs. attention may be devoted to examining the comparability of borrower fees chargedacross and within the two loan programs. To limit the federal government'ssubsidy costs, and to to limit the government's borrowing costs, consider the cost of borrowing in the U.S. mortgage market. The cost of lending in the mortgage market has been estimated to be in the region of $100 billion per year. consolidated. Whenborrowers exercise their option to lock in low rates permanently the federal government is potentially exposed to high subsidy costs. In the FFEL program, this is so because the government hasaranteed the lenders a market rate of return. The government must make up the difference between the rate theborrower is paying and what the government is paying. The program is designed to help low-income families. It is also intended to help high-earners pay off their mortgages. for lenders. There seems to bebroad Congressional support for curbing this rate guarantee for future loans. The legislativedevelopments that led to the enactment of the guarantee are briefly described below. As part of an effort to ensure the FFEL program would be fully capitalized in the program'searly years, provisions that provisions that would help the program in the future were included in the bill. The bill was passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate and signed into law by President Obama. Some FFEL lenders object to making a change in this area, asserting they offersome up front discounts on Stafford and PLUS loans based on the assumption they will be able tohold the loan over its life, and their anticipated level of income from the loan will be jeopardized if the borrower is not able to repay the loan in full. Some FFEL lender object to changing this area because they believe they offer up front discount on Stafford loans. Some lenders also believe that if the loan is not repaid in full, the borrower will lose out on some of the discounts they offer.  FFEL borrowers are allowed to choose among standard, graduated, and income sensitive repayment plans. Income contingent repayment (as opposed to incomesensitive repayment) is available to all DL unsubsidized and subsidized Stafford borrowers. In FFEL, all new borrowers on repayment (thereare no restrictions similar to those in FFEL) are eligible for income contingent repayment. In the DL program, new borrowers are not allowed to take on income contingent repayments. The DL program does not offer income contingent recovery plans. or after October 7, 1998, who accumulate (after such date) loans totaling more than $30,000. Married persons, each ofwhom has eligible loans, are eligible for a joint consolidation loan. Borrowers with less than $7,500 in outstanding loans seeking toconsolidate in FFEL may receive a maximum repayment term of 10 years. A 12-year repaymentterm is available to borrowers with that level of debt in DL. Only married persons can take out joint consolidation loans.