ability to conduct objective inspections. FDA is missing opportunities to leverage inspection resources and possibly avoid duplication of effort. FDA rarely provides notification of seizure actions it takes against NMFS-inspected plants. NMFS officials said the agency would be willing to enter into such an agreement with FDA, thereby assisting FDA in reaching its goal of conducting annual inspections at all high-risk facilities.. Industry associations, food-processing companies, consumer groups, and academic experts we contacted contacted NMFS to discuss the issue.  NMFS conducts a fee-for-service inspection, and therefore, FDA officials believe that NMFS could have a conflict of interest because, as a nonregulatory body, it is paid for its services by the industry that it inspects. FDA does not know which firms NMFS is inspecting at any given time. NMFS officials said they maintain an up-to-date to help FDA meet its public health responsibilities. The Commissioner noted that using NMFS inspectors could be cost effective because the NM FS inspectors may already be on-site and the FDA inspector would not have to travel to conduct an inspection.  NMFS inspection schedules fluctuate often, according to changes in NMFS’s contracts with individual companies. FDA officials said that they already have a risk-based system in place to determine which firms to inspect, and at what frequencies. NMFS readily provided us with a list of the firms it was inspecting when we spoke with officials during the course of our review. Although FDA is not implementing the idea, NMFS does post this information on its Web site, most recently revised in January 2005.  NMFS currently inspects approximately 275 domestic seafood facilities that FDA also inspects. FDA does not take into account whether NMFS has already inspected a particular facility when determining how frequently its inspectors should visit that same facility. FDA officials said they do not rely on NMFS in order to satisfy both the USDA and FDA inspectors. In addition, at a seafood-processing plant that is inspected by both NMFS and FDA, the manager said that when FDA collects product samples for testing, it does not report test results in a timely fashion. for food safety. The majority of stakeholders we contacted said they believed that the federal food safety system needs to be modernized. The company produces smoked salmon—a high-risk food—and the manager noted that having inspections by FDA and NMFS helps to ensure that products are safe and of high quality. For more information, go to www.nfs.gov or call the National Restaurant Association at 1-800-273-8255. For confidential support on suicide matters call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. with the report’s recommendations that pertain to NMFS. NOAA also commented that our report does a fair and thorough job of describing the food safety activities of NM FS. NOAA stated that the positions expressed in GAO's previous work continue to be germane to the issue of coordination with FDA on food safety. The report also said that the position expressed in the GAO’S previous work continues to be relevant to the NMFS’ work with the FDA. also obtained data from the following FDA units: Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition, Center for Veterinary Medicine, National Center for Toxicological Research. EPA’s Office of Pesticide Prevention and Office of Water, as well as the NMFS’S Seafood Inspection Program and Office. of Sustainable. The report was published by the Food and Drug Administration on October 31, 2013. For confidential support, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. the agreement, the agency has recognized the potential benefits of working with NMFS to leverage resources. In a January 2004 letter to the Under Secretary of Commerce for Oceans and Atmosphere, the then-Commissioner of Food and Drugs proposed ways that the two agencies could enhance coordination. To better use FDA’s limited inspection resources and leverage NMFS’S resources, we recommend that the Commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration ensure the implementation of the interagency agreement that calls for FDA to recognize the results. standardization activities, and it details actions the agencies can take to enable each agency to discharge its responsibilities as effectively as possible. The agreement states that these actions should minimize FDA inspections in the approximately 275 domestic seafood facilities that NMFS inspects under contract. If either agency believes that a particular violation is occurring in several seafood- processing plants, it may request a meeting with the other agency to consider investigative steps and, when necessary, mutually agreeable remedial action. FDA officials said the agency does not recognize the NMFS inspections as aiding FDA in of NM FS inspections when determining the frequency of its seafood inspections. USDA, FDA, EPA, and NMFS are involved in key program functions related to food safety. USDA officials say their inspectors are capable of taking on FDA’s inspection responsibilities. FDA officials said the agency has not yet considered using the Bioterrorism Act to commission NMFS officials. The agencies have broad food safety-related inspection and enforcement related responsibilities, the function to which most federal food safety funding is dedicated. We defined overlaps and defined the areas where the agencies' responsibilities overlap. overlap might also prove fruitful. By not effectively implementing these agreements and by not exercising the new authorities under the Bioterrorism Act, agencies are missing opportunities to make the system more efficient and effective. We are making seven recommendations designed to reduce or eliminate duplication and overlaps, leverage existing existing agreements and leverage new authorities. We hope that these recommendations will help to reduce the risk of terrorist attacks in the UK and beyond in the coming years. We also hope that they will reduce the cost of the UK government's response to terrorism in the future. position on our recommendation for using the Bioterrorism Act authorities. HHS partially concurred with two other recommendations dealing with the implementation of two interagency agreements. HHS also provided technical comments which we incorporated in our report, as appropriate. HHS’s comments and our detailed response are contained in appendix VI of the report. The full report is available on the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services’ website at: http://www.hhs.gov/health. one agency. If we modified the title as HHS suggests, we would risk implying that the agencies are literally duplicating efforts in every instance. We are fully aware that, under the current statutory framework, the agencies do not exactly do the same thing, the report says. The report says that under the definitions we lay out in the report, there is no need to change the title of the agency. The agency says that the title should not be modified to suggest that agencies are duplicating their efforts. jurisdiction of both agencies. GAO: We disagree with HHS’s comment that our report’S title should substitute the word duplication for overlap. Given the definitions we lay out in the report, given the definitions of duplication and overlap, the word ‘overlap’ should not be used in the title of our report, GAO says. The GAO report was published on March 11, 2005, and was released on March 14, 2005. It was based on a letter from the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. as similar activities being performed by more than one agency, such as training food inspectors. In contrast, we defined duplication as essentially identical activities. Such as inspecting the same food- processing facility for compliance with sanitation and good manufacturing practices requirements. We used categories such as food inspection, food safety, food inspection and food safety training. For more information, visit the Food and Drug Administration's website or the Department of Health and Human Services' website. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. We disagree with HHS’s comment that our report overstates similarities in USDA and FDA inspections. We define “duplication” as essentially identical activities performed by more than one agency. First, our report clearly states that USDA and FAA inspections are not identical. We also disagree that the inspections are “similar’ or “inherently similar” to each other. The inspections are separate and independent of each other, we say. We’re happy to clarify this. overlapping activities. We disagree with HHS comment that our report’s title should substitute the word duplication for overlap. That is, our report distinguishes between ‘overlap’ and ‘duplication’ ‘Overlap” is those similar activities being performed by more than one agency. ‘Duplication,’ on the other hand, is essentially identical activities performed byMore than. one agency, we define as essentially identical Activities performed by. more than two agencies. budget data, we contacted agency budget and program officials to determine what activities were linked to the expenditure and staffing data. We categorized expenditures and staffing and asked agency officials if they considered our categorizations to be appropriate. We adjusted our categorization when agency officials told us it was inaccurate. which more than one agency performed similar activities. In some instances, the agencies estimated budget and staffing levels, or they were unable to separate budget data into specific categories. As a result, some agencies did not provide expenditures or staffing data for categories such as administration, food security, and rulemaking. Fisheries also provided data. To assess the reliability of the staffing and expenditure data, we questioned knowledgeable agency officials and reviewed existing documentation regarding the data and the systems that produced them. We determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of identifying overlaps. After the agencies provided the data, the data was used to identify overlaps in staffing and spending. The data was then used to determine overlaps between agencies and other agencies in the program. The results were published in a report published by the Government Accountability Office. the Consolidated Federal Law Enforcement Training Center (the Center) brought together the training programs of 75 federal law enforcement agencies that had maintained separate training programs. The Center provides standardized programs for criminal investigators and uniformed police officers across the federal government. While standardizing basic training, the Center also also standardizes basic training for officers in the military and civilian law enforcement. It also provides standardized training for law enforcement in the U.S. Department of Justice and the Department of Health and Human Services. offers specialized courses for individual agencies to address their particular needs. In addition, according to the Center, the interaction with students from other agencies promotes greater understanding of other agencies’ missions and duties, and therefore provides for a more cooperative federal law enforcement system. We identified overlapping activities in the federal government that need to be addressed, the Center says. The courses are offered to students from across the country, as well as in the U.S., Canada, Australia, New Zealand and South Africa. named above Lawrence J. Dyckman, Katheryn Hubbell, Jane Kim, Sara Margraf, Carol Herrnstadt Shulman, Michele Fejfar, Amy Webbink, and Katherine Raheb made key contributions to this report. The authors' names have been changed to protect the identity of those who contributed to the report. For more, go to CNN.com/Herrnstadt and follow us on Twitter @cnnherrnstadt, @KatherineRaheb and @larryjyckman. resources, and enhance coordination efforts among the principal federal food safety agencies. We recommend that the Secretary of Agriculture and the Commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration work together to ensure the implementation of the interagency agreement. The agencies’ officials explained that these expenditures are distributed among more than one of the other categories. We requested that agencies provide copies of all active interagency agreements. To examine the extent to which federal foodSafety agencies are using inter Agency agreements to leverage existing resources to reduce any such overlaps. USDA, FDA, EPA, and NMFS do not have adequate mechanisms to track interagency food safety agreements. The agencies could not readily identify the agreements that they have entered into, could not determine which agreements are still in effect. The agreement stated that the exchange of information will permit more efficient use of both agencies’ resources and contribute to improved public health protection. It was to be the first step toward allowing USDA’s of the Environmental Protection Agency, and the Under Secretary of Commerce for Oceans and Atmosphere to evaluate the need for these agreements. into 71 interagency agreements to coordinate the full range of their food safety activities. About one-third of the agreements include as objectives, the coordination of activities, reductions in overlaps, and/or leveraging of resources. The agencies also spent the largest share of food safety resources on these activities (as fig. 2 showed). Other agreements address activities such as education/outreach, food security, and monitoring/surveillance related to food safety and quality (as shown in fig. 6). Agency officials did not agree on the number of food safety-related agreements they have entered into. As a result, we could not determine which agreements are currently being used by the agencies. Twenty-four agreements state the need to reduce duplication of effort, reduce or clarify overlaps, or increase the efficient or effective use of resources between agencies. The federal framework for food safety is based on a patchwork of numerous laws. The bolded agreements are the two that were analyzed in-depth. 1999 interagency agreement has been largely successful. Report highlights several deficiencies, even as it gives the agencies credit for improved communication in times of crisis. These deficiencies include agencies’ (1) difficulty identifying the establishments to which this agreement pertains, (2) lack of routine communication, and (3) failure to identify the agreement’s purpose in the first place, the report says. The U.S. Department of Defense says the agreement is a success and that it will continue to make progress. or two separate training programs. We acknowledge that some elements of the 1999 interagency agreement on dual jurisdiction establishments have been implemented. However, we continue to believe that the agreement could be better implemented. We further disagree that the report does not mention the use of dual-jurisdiction training programs for law enforcement officers. We believe that this should be included in the report as part of the national training program. We also believe that it would be a mistake for the U.S. military to use two training programs at the same time. added to the list. The agreement calls for the district offices of each agency to share certain findings with their counterpart district offices. In some cases, we provided the agreement to an agency to obtain confirmation that it was a signatory to the agreement. We asked the agencies to categorize the agreements according to primary program function. We also independently categorized the agreements using information from their introduction and/or from the agreement's introduction. The agency receiving a finding of noncompliance to track and use that information in its program evaluation, work planning and consideration of whether action to reconcile the discrepancies. of these agreements is hampered by the absence of adequate mechanisms for tracking them and, in some cases, by ineffective implementation of the provisions of these agreements. Of the 71 interagency agreements we identified, the largest proportion (43 percent) reflect the agencies agreement to increase cooperation on inspection and enforcement. An electronic system to identify and track these agreements could offer one means of tracking and managing information related to, and contained in, inter Agency agreements. The weaknesses in tracking agreements may also affect the agencies’ ability to determine whether these agreements are still in effect. background to ensure consistent categorization across the agencies. If the agencies’ categorization differed with ours, we considered their rationale and changed the categorization as appropriate. We selected two inspection-related interagency agreements for in-depth review because the agencies spend most of their resources on inspection activities. One agreement that pertains to inspection activities; one agreement thatPertains to inspections of the U.S. Postal Service and other government agencies, including the Department of Health and Human Services and the State Department. training on each other's inspection techniques and processes did not continue past the first year of the agreement’s implementation. As a result, we continue to believe that the stated purpose of this agreement has not been maximized. We continue to think that this agreement would have allowed for more efficient use of both agencies’ resources. We believe that this is not the case and that the agreement should not be extended to the second year of its implementation. We are happy to make clear that this does not mean that we do not support the agreement. The report includes a footnote to indicate that FDA makes a distinction, which the other agencies do not, between interagency agreements and memoranda of understanding. FDA refers to agreements that involve exchanges of funds, personnel, or property as interagency. The footnote explains that, according to FDA, FDA memorenda of understanding do not provide for exchanges of Funds. The report also acknowledges that, as used in our report, the term interagency agreement refers generally to memoranda. of understanding, memorands of agreement, and inter Agency agreements identified by USDA, FDA, EPA, and NMFS. improved coordination and information sharing. In 1999, USDA and FDA signed an interagency agreement to authorizing FDA to commission other agencies’ officials to conduct FDA’s inspection activities. Other avenues are open to the agencies as well. For example, the two interagency agreements that we examined in detail, could address problems in duplicative inspections if they were more effectively implemented. Other inter agency agreements designed to reduce duplicate inspections are available on the FDA's website and on the USDA's website. identified to us by all signatory agencies. FDA and EPA provided a copy of an agreement they had entered into with USDA about residues in drugs, pesticides, and environmental contaminants in foods. USDA officials said the agency is not party to any agreement on residues. Of the agencies we reviewed, only USDA’s Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service maintained a database that allowed us to see the agreements. Forty-one additional agreements were identified to usby only one of the multiple signatories. In addition, we found three agreements—through our prior work or Internet searches—that none of the agencies had identified to ourselves. EPA officials said they had difficulty identifying the agreements they have entered into. Officials also said they are planning to develop a database to identify all the agreements it was party to. The other agencies did not have such databases, EPA officials said. The EPA is the largest agency in the U.S., followed by the Department of Health and Human Services, and then the Dept. of Justice. The agency has the highest level of transparency in the federal government, according to a review by the Center for American Progress. needed and whether specific provisions are still in effect. About one-third of the agreements we identified were created decades ago and may no longer be relevant to current needs. Technological and scientific advances have made some provisions of these agreements obsolete. Some agencies that were party to the agreements are no longer party to them and may not be able to participate in future negotiations. The agreements were signed in the 1950s, 1960s and 1970s. They were signed by the U.S., Canada, Australia, New Zealand and South Africa. agreements have ceased to exist because of internal reorganizations; but the agreements have not been modified to reflect such changes. This indicates that the agencies may not be actively monitoring the status and relevance of these agreements. For example, a 1978 agreement between USDA and FDA on education programs to assist was not updated to reflect the changes in the FDA's role. For more information, go to: http://www.fda.gov/agencies/food-and-beverage-regulations. such a list in 1999 when the agreement was signed, they had not updated it until 2004, when we brought the matter to their attention. As a result, the agencies had great difficulty identifying the current number of DJEs to which this agreement pertains. For example, during the course of the investigation, we found that there were more than 1,000 DJEs in the U.S. than there had been in 1999. We also found that many of the DJEs had not been identified until after 2004. Many federal agencies play a part in the U.S. food safety regulatory system. While the federal agencies regulate the food production chain from farms to food manufacturers, state and local agencies primarily regulate food safety in retail food establishments. As a result of the multiple laws and regulations governing food safety, several federal agencies conduct activities that can serve overlapping, if not identical, purposes. Table 1 summarizes the Food: From Production to Consumption (Washington, D.C.: 1998). The federal agencies spend millions of dollars each year on inspections of domestic and foreign foods. Following the events of September 11, 2001, these agencies began to address the potential for deliberate contamination of agriculture and food products. USDA’s carcass-by-carcass organoleptic inspections exemplify the outmoded requirements of the current food safety system. Even within the current statutory framework, the agencies can take practical steps to reduce overlap and duplication and thereby free resources for more effective oversight of food safety. The Congress has recognized this possibility in the Bioterrorism Act. GAO: We disagree with USDA’s assertion that our report overly simplifies the food safety regulatory functions within USDA and FDA. To identify overlaps that may exist in the federal food safety system, we collected fiscal year 2003 budget data for food safety-related activities from the U.S. Department of Agriculture. We detail all of the foodsafety provisions for those laws listed in appendix VIII of the report. If you have questions about this report, I can be reached at (202) 512-3841, or robinsonr@gao.gov. The agencies’ food safety authorities stem from 30 principal laws related to food safety. For a listing of the principal food safety laws, see appendix IV. This table does not provide an exhaustive list of all food safety-related laws and amendments, nor does it provide a list of each law’s food-safety-related provisions. Included in the table are several laws that primarily deal with health claims or labeling, which we consider to be food- Safety related laws include laws that are largely amendments of the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act. enforcement, research, risk assessment, education and outreach, rulemaking and standard setting, surveillance and monitoring, food security, and administration. Examples of activities under these functions include: inspecting domestic food-processing facilities and imported food items at U.S. ports of entry. We defined the categories of food safety activities into the following program functions: monitoring/surveillance, inspection/enforcement, education/outreach, research and risk assessment. We included three additional categories—food security, administration, and rulemaking/standard setting to capture other relevant activities. of foodborne physical, chemical, and biological contaminants to inform rulemaking, allocation of agency resources, or risk communication. developing and distributing guidance to consumers and industry related to food safety topics such as appropriate food temperatures. issuing/promulgating HACCP, sanitation, and good manufacturing practices regulations. These overlapping efforts, caused in part by the agencies’ divisions in the food safety field, can be traced back to the 1970s and 1980s. In fiscal year 2003, the FDA issued similar food safety guidance for consumers on general topics, such as cooking and chilling food, and safe handling practices. likelihood and severity of an adverse event (e.g., illness or death) on the public health as a result of the likelihood of exposure to a particular hazard. Food security: activities related to preparing for and responding to deliberate attacks on the food supply. Administration: supporting activities that enable the agencies to enable the agency to prepare for and respond to food security threats. The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services has a responsibility to protect the public from foodborne illnesses. but also the history of the plant—whether is has a track record for producing high quality, safe food. Resources for the Future stated that the current food safety laws undermine a successful food safety system. That is, the laws do not build prevention into the farm-to-table continuum and divide responsibility, the group said. The group also said that the laws don't take into account whether the plant has a history of producing safe, high-quality food. The laws also do not take into consideration the plant's history for producing safe food, it said. meat and poultry products, such as canned chicken or pork, since the canning process kills all the bacteria. Some stakeholders, including the Institute for Food Technologists, believe that modernizing the food safety system could be accomplished by rewriting the foodsafety statutes. Finally, some of the stakeholders that cited the food industry as a cause for concern are the pharmaceutical industry, which has been accused of over-prescription of drugs and lax regulation of food production and storage. The industry has also been criticized for lax enforcement of food safety laws. Most stakeholders agree that the laws and regulations governing the system should be modernized. Science and technological advancements can be used to more effectively control current and emerging food safety agencies. The Grocery Manufacturers of America said that the food safety system must be flexible enough to allow resources to be directed toward identifying and addressing serious food safety problems. The stakeholders identified a number of roadblocks to changing the system, whether or not they supported such consolidation.. Other stakeholders—including representatives from industry associations, food companies and food safety experts at the Center for Science at the Public Interest and Resources for the Future. academia, consumer groups, public policy organizations, and individual food companies—believe that the system needs to be modernized through statutory changes. According to the Consumer Federation of America, a science- or risk-based system should consider not only the risk posed by the food, but also the potential benefits of the food. The Food and Drug Administration says it is working on a new system that is more science and risk based. The FDA says it has no immediate plans to make changes to the current system. The agencies operate under a statutory framework that gives them different authorities and responsibilities to regulate different segments of the food supply. The activities they perform under these authorities are similar in nature, leading us to question why the federal agencies must continue to spend resources on overlapping, and sometimes duplicative, activities. The report contains a clear and accurate acknowledgment that the agencies operateunder different authorities. While we recognize that the agency operate under different authorities, the activities they performed under these Authorities are authorities to regulate different sectors of the food supply. current statutory authorities require the food safety agencies to carry out regulatory activities that have resulted in some overlapping or duplicative activities. We have recommended in the past that federal food safety statutes be streamlined and that food safety functions be consolidated into a single agency. We are fully aware that under the current statutory framework the agencies do not exactly replicate food safety activities. That is, our report distinguishes between “overlap”—which we define—and “ duplicative” activities, which we define. that agency may need to coordinate their activities. However, we believe that some economies of scale would be derived from combining overlapping activities, including those that our report highlights. For example, with a single food safety agency, the federal government would not need to have two separate food inspection workforces. We believe that with aSingleFoodSafetyAgency.com, the U.S. government would be able to reduce the cost of food inspections by up to 50 per cent. We are happy to share our findings with the Food and Drug Administration. industry is reluctant to change from a familiar regulatory framework to one that is untested. According to the Food Marketing Institute, food companies tend to prefer the inspection process that is known to them. Second, according to some industry associations, a transition to a single agency could create a period of uncertainty for the industry, which is used to having a single regulator for all its products and services. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration is set to announce its new inspection system on Monday. of uncertainty, as limited resources are diverted from the existing programs, and could therefore cause vulnerabilities in the food supply. Third, the transition costs to a single agency would be higher in the short term, according to food safety experts at the University of Illinois and the University Of California. The transition costs would also be more expensive in the long term, the experts say. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration says it has no immediate plans to change the way it manages food safety programs. The stakeholders we contacted disagree on whether federal agencies’ food safety functions overlap, specifically with regard to inspections. Industry associations that we though they did not agree on what direction this modernization should take. Stakeholders’ views included (1) minor changes to improve coordination among the food safety agencies, (2) statutory changes to make the system more science and risk based, and (3) consolidating federal foodSafety functions into a single agency, the authors say. The authors: Consolidation of functions could allow a single food agency to manage the safety of the whole food chain. Consolidation could generate substantial savings in terms of administrative efficiency and overall consistency. Current agency employees would be concerned that a consolidation would adversely change their working lives and that institutional knowledge would be lost. Some stakeholders, including the Consumer Federation of America, said that some congressional committees may be reluctant to lose jurisdiction over food safety functions. The Center for Science in the Public Interest and the University of Illinois are co-authors of the report. The report was published by the Center forScience in the public Interest, a nonprofit that promotes science and technology. The legislative changes needed to accomplish consolidation could also be used as the vehicle for modernizing the food safety statutes. The changes could establish a scientific basis for the application of policy, according to the Food Marketing Institute and food safety experts at Kansas State University and the University of Georgia. They could also establish a modernized food safety statute or establish a science-based basis for food safety policy, the experts say. The legislative changes could be used to establish a new food safety law, they say, or to modernize food safety laws. The regulations require the facility to maintain separate HACCP plans for each product. For example, at a facility that produces both crab cakes and breaded chicken, the manager is required to maintain a seafood and poultry plan. The manager said that although both plans have similar elements, each agency’s inspectors expect different levels of detail for the plans. USDA and FDA have new The HAC CP rules are based on the same model, though applied to the different food products each agency regulates. currently requires HACCP plans for seafood and juice products only. USDA noted that in order for meat and poultry and egg products to be eligible for import to the United products (i.e., seafood, juice, meat, or poultry) The report’s identification of HAC CP requirements as another area of overlap between the two agencies refers to the fact that both agencies have issued H ACCP regulations that are based on a similar model. We have modified our report to indicate that, short on common principles that can then be applied to specific products. At jointly regulated facilities, USDA and FDA inspectors also verify that HACCP systems are in place. In these instances, each agency verifies that the facility has created and implemented a HAC CP plan specific to the products common, such as certain sanitation and manufacturing processes. We believe it is possible to issue broad regulations based on HACC regulations. We further note that USDA’s H ACCP rule applies to both meat and poultry products, although these products present different hazards. We modified our report to indicate, as USDA suggests, that FDA of consolidating all inspection functions. order to meet USDA and FDA HACCP and sanitation requirements. Since the USDA inspector is at the facility every day, the manager said he does not see any value added by FDA’s inspection. That inspector examines the same areas of the facility—the processing lines and the refrigerated storage area—which are in the same area. The manager said the FDA inspection does not add any value to the facility because it focuses on the same parts of the plant that the USDA inspection does. assertion, our report does not suggest that USDA (FSIS) and FDA have comparable HACCP regulations. Our report acknowledges that while HAC CP principles are the same for both FDA and USDA, the H ACCP plans are different as they address different risks associated with different risks. For example, given the agencies’ different statutory authorities, both require agreements. We did not consider this type of agreement in our analysis. We understand the differences between HACC principles and plans. rule-making and standard-setting activities under their respective statutes. While the rulemakings USDA and FDA undertake vary under those statutes, there are some similarities. For example, both agencies’ regulations require food processors to incorporate certain sanitation processes into their HACCP systems. USDA itself notes that the two sets of HAC CP regulations (USDA and FDA) are quite similar, and as we point out, they have certain features in the same way as the other sets of regulations. USDA spent $7.8 million, while FDA spent about $1.5 million, during fiscal year 2003 to train their food inspection personnel. USDA estimates that it spends an average of about $900,000 per year on training-related travel, not including other costs related to replacing calculate. FDA’s comparatively lower training costs reflect a contractual agreement the company that developed FDA”s online curriculum to allow USDA inspectors access to some of this training. FDA could make more effective use of its resources if it redirected its inspectors to other facilities for which FDA has sole jurisdiction. USDA and FDA both inspect 1,451 known DJEs located across the country. Neither USDA nor FDA has estimated the total costs associated with inspecting jointly regulated facilities. Both USDA and FDA maintain inspectors at 18 U.S. ports of entry to inspect imported food products. In fiscal year 2003, USDA spent almost $16 million on these inspections, and FDA spent more than $115 million. FDA estimated that it spends about $4,000 per inspection. USDA spends almost $15 million on food safety inspections. about 7 times as much on import inspections because the agency is responsible for about 80 percent of the U.S. food supply. USDA’s responsibility for inspecting imports that come from 34 countries. However, the agencies are not leveraging inspection resources at these countries, the report says. The report also says that the USDA is not using the resources it does have to inspect imports from about 250 countries, compared with about 34 countries in the other direction. The agency is also not using its inspection resources to inspect the imports from 34 other countries. effort to conduct a risk assessment of salmonella in eggs and broiler chickens. USDA, FDA, and EPA spent more than $107 million in fiscal year 2003. In some cases, these agencies’ efforts overlap. For example, they create and distribute educational materials to schools and the public. They also conduct education and outreach on food safety on a national level. The agencies spent over $100 million in 2003 on education, outreach, and prevention efforts for food safety in the United States. requires all meat and poultry processing facilities to address contaminants, such as E. coli and salmonella, which are likely to be found in these products. FDA estimates that it spent between $650,000 and $800,000 on rule-making activities in 2013. The agency says it has spent $1 billion in the past five years on rules and regulations, and expects to spend more in 2014 and 2015 as it continues to work through the rule- making process. It says the cost to the government is in the region of $2 billion. almost $1 million to issue its seafood HACCP rule in 1995. NMFS officials said they spent $5 million to support the FDA rule by developing a model seafood surveillance project. USDA was unable to calculate how much it spent to develop its meat and poultry HAC CP rule. In some cases, some of the money went to developing a new model for seafood surveillance. In other cases, the money was used to develop a model for a new meat andoultry surveillance project, officials said. related to food safety activities they conducted in fiscal year 2003. Most agencies were able to identify expenditures and staffing levels related to inspection and enforcement, research, risk assessment, education and outreach, and monitoring and surveillance. Many agencies were unable to provide expenditures linked to rulemaking and standard setting, food security, and administration. For this reason, table 4 containing this data is included separately. As table 3 shows, inspection andenforcement-related spending accounts for most of these agencies’ food safety-related Spending in 2003. federal agencies spent nearly $1.7 billion on food safety-related activities. USDA and FDA are responsible for most federal food safety resources. These agencies spent about $921 million (55 percent) in fiscal year 2003 on inspection/enforcement functions, including inspections of domestic and imported food. FDA accounts for more than half of the agencies’ expenditures for food safety education/outreach programs. National Research Council and Institute of Medicine, Ensuring Safe resources on similar food safety activities. Each agency finds instances of noncompliance. As a result, work planning by each agency cannot take advantage of the other agency’s inspection findings. Because FDA inspectors visit DJEs less frequently than USDA inspectors, we believe that FDA staff could benefit from the compliance information that USDA inspectors collect. The agreement calls for the agencies to develop and provide appropriate training in the inspectional techniques and processes of each agency to ensure that that each agency can take full advantage of each other's inspection findings and techniques. most of their food safety resources on inspection and enforcement. We evaluated the implementation of two comprehensive inspection and Enforcement agreements. These agreements were established to make more efficient and effective use of agency resources through inspection andenforcement. We found that the agreements made more efficient use of resources through inspections of fishery products. We also found that inspections of DJEs were more effective than other types of food inspections. We concluded that these agreements were more efficient than other food inspection programs in the U.S. for fishery product inspections. Agreements encompass a broad range of intended coordination efforts between the agencies involved. We conducted site visits to three USDA and FDA field offices to obtain information related to implementation of the agreements. For dual jurisdiction establishments (DJE) and one that pertains to inspections of fishery products, we visited three field offices. The agreements encompassed a broadRange of intendedcoordination efforts between agencies involved, we found. We found that in some instances, agencies perform nearly identical activities, such as inspecting food-processing facilities that produce foods under the regulatory responsibility of each agency. own recommendations to realize resource savings. We found that the agencies are not systematically exchanging information about DJEs, as called for in the agreement. We also selected two to four DJEs at each location and visited them to discuss implementation of the agreements with plant managers and, in some cases, with USDA or FDA inspectors assigned to these facilities. The agreement called for USDA and FDA to develop, maintain, and annually update a list of such establishments. we found that although the agencies created the agreement’s implementation. USDA and FDA provided several different lists of jointly regulated establishments. The number of establishments that were listed ranged from 1,152 to 1,867. FDA headquarters officials provided a list of 1,451 known DJEs in December 2004. The agency is verifying approximately 400 establishments that may be DJEs, officials said. The list of DJEs was provided by the USDA and FDA in 2004, the FDA said in 2005. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. the Meat and Poultry Products Inspection Acts, the Secretary of Agriculture is required to certify that countries exporting meat and poultry to the United States have equivalent food safety systems. The main point of our report is that the agencies are not leveraging inspection resources at ports of entry, especially regarding FDA-regulated imported foods that, according to the report, are not safe for human consumption. That information could inform FDA’s decision making export meat andoultry into the U.S., the report says. to USDA officials, are being stored at USDA-approved inspection facilities. We continue to believe that there are opportunities to leverage inspection resources, as we are recommending. USDA’s comment that it shares the results of its overseas equivalency determinations contradicts what USDA and FDA officials told us during the course of our review. However, we note that USDA is now sharing this information. Any successful consolidation of inspectors’ training would of course require work. But we continue to think that, as USDA�s comments suggest, this is a good idea. with three of the report’s seven recommendations, including identifying and inventoring all interagency agreements. HHS disagreed with our recommendation regarding joint training of USDA and FDA food inspectors. HHS took no action on any of the seven recommendations made in the report, the authors said. The report was published by the Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition, a nonprofit based in Washington, D.C., on November 14. For more, visit www.foodforsenewspaper.org. In 2004, USDA determined that the food safety systems of 34 countries it evaluated were equivalent to that of the United States. A substantial portion of what USDA evaluates— sanitation procedures States, foreign food safety regulatory systems must employ equivalent sanitary measures. We disagree with USDA’s comment, because our report clearly and accurately describes the requirement for certification of those countries wishing to be inspected. The U.S. FDA currently visits foreign countries to inspect individual food-processing firms. It is unclear which countries to visit for its overseas inspections. and compliance with HACCP rules. That information could be useful to FDA in deciding what countries to visit when conducting inspections of foreign firms that export products under its jurisdiction. FDA officials told us, however, that the agency does not use that information when deciding which country to visit. As a result, FDA says it doesn't use the information to decide which countries it should visit in an inspection of a foreign firm that is exporting products under the agency's jurisdiction. The agency says it uses the information for other reasons, such as safety and effectiveness. FDA officials said these agencies do not share information from their overseas visits because their different statutory responsibilities make such information of little advantage. USDA’s focus during foreign country visits is to evaluate the meat and poultry inspection systems to determine if they are equivalent to that of the U.S., FDA officials said. The agency does not share this information with the media. The USDA does not release information from its overseas visits to the media, officials said, because it is not required by law to do so. agencies inspect. Depending on the type and layout of the facility, a USDA inspector may have a more regular presence in an area where FDA-regulated products are maintained. At an authorities, and certainly does not identify “significant” overlaps in authorities. In fact, because of the agencies’ split jurisdiction, they are each responsible for inspecting different food products at jointly regulated facilities. As a result, both agencies send inspectors into these facilities—USDA on a daily basis. Under the Bioterrorism Act, FDA could allow USDA inspectors, who are present every day at jointly regulated facilities, to inspect FDA-regulated food. FDA could reduce overlapping inspections and redirect resources to other facilities for which it has sole authority. The most effective inspection strategy would be to combine elements of both agencies’ inspections into a single inspection program, the authors say. The goal is to facilitate an exchange of information permitting more efficient use of the agencies' resources and contributing to improved public health protection. if appropriate and cost effective, the Commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration, as authorized under the Pubic Health Security and Bioterrorism Preparedness and Response Act of 2002, enter into an agreement to commission USDA inspectors to carry out FDA’s inspection responsibilities for food establishments that are under the jurisdiction of the FDA. We disagree with USDA's comment that our report inaccurately characterizes the Biotterrorism Act. As we state in the report, FDA is authorized to commission other agency officials, including USDA officials, to carryout inspections on its behalf. The company cans a variety of soups and bean products. USDA inspectors did not want the company to paint its sterilization equipment because they determined that paint chips could contaminate the food. Subsequently, the company was allowed to paint the equipment. The company was also allowed to spray the equipment with water. The facility was inspected by the USDA and the FDA during overlapping inspections. The inspection was conducted by a USDA inspector at a facility that cans soups, bean products and other products. The inspections were carried out by an FDA inspector. American Frozen Food Institute noted that USDA and FDA inspections and their complementary expertise provide value in addressing food safety issues. The quality assurance manager at a dual jurisdiction establishment with whom we spoke said he liked having a “second pair of eyes” inspecting the facilities. He said it was helpful to have a ‘second pair’ of eyes in the facility to ensure that food safety was being maintained. The agency also provides independent scientific assessment, research, and education to help with food safety. FDA-regulated, imported foods are sometimes stored in USDA- approved inspection facilities at these ports. USDA inspectors have no authority to inspect FDA-regulated products. FDA could leverage USDA’s efforts to ensure the safety of imported food by using information that USDA compiles in its determinations that exporting countries’ food safety systems are equivalent to the U.S. system. Under the Food and Drug Act, FDA has the authority to commission federal officials to conduct inspections at jointly regulated facilities. FDA would likely have to reimburse USDA for the costs of those inspections. USDA officials commented that their inspectors are fully occupied and that they would need to be trained before conducting joint inspections. FDA officials said that they do not currently plan to pursue this option and have not conducted any analyses of the costs or savings associated with authorizing USDA officials to conduct FDA inspections at these facilities. Overlaps also occur at other FDA-controlled facilities, such as at the Department of Health and Human Services and at the U.S. Postal Service. inspections are preferable because the agency is able to provide test results more rapidly than FDA, manager says. A few stakeholders also saw value in some of the overlapping activities. For example: The agency is able to provide test results more rapidly than FDA, which, according to the manager, allows the company to know its products are safe before they enter the market. The agency is also able to provide test results more rapidly than FDA, which allows the company to know its products are safe before they enter the market. calls for the agencies to explore the feasibility of granting each other access to appropriate computer-monitoring systems so each agency can track inspection findings. However, the agencies maintain separate databases, and the inspectors with whom we spoke continue to be largely unaware of a facility’s past history of compliance with the law. The agencies are exploring the possibility of sharing information with each other, the report says. The report was published by the Center for American Progress, a nonprofit that promotes transparency in government. on inspection findings between agencies’ inspection personnel. Lack of a system to track and exchange information when each agency finds instances of noncompliance. Agency’s efforts to develop and provide information on such findings of mutual concern as sanitation problems at jointly regulated facilities, and (3) lack of a systems to track, exchange information on each agency's findings of Mutual Concerns such as noncompliance at jointlyregulated facilities, we found. We also found that the agencies' efforts to development and provide. information about such findings were lacking. In some cases, the agencies’ preferred categorization of the same activity varied. For example, FDA considered inspector training as an education/outreach activity, whereas USDA considered it an inspection- related activity. These discrepancies are noted in appendix II. After we categorized the budget and staffing level data, we identified cases in which the agencies had different priorities for the same activities. For more information, visit the FDA’s inspector-training website or the US Department of Health and Human Services’ inspector training website. address specific areas where the agencies could improve coordination to better leverage resources. USDA did not comment directly on these recommendations. We believe that USDA mischaracterizes our report in noting that it states that a “significant’ overlap in inspection authorities exists. Specifically, our report examines inspection activities, not inspection activities. We think that the agency mischaracterized our report by saying there is a ‘significant” overlap in Inspection authorities. The report examined inspection activities and not inspection, and found that there was no overlap. features, including the verification of sanitation procedures and good manufacturing practices at food processing facilities that make them candidates for consolidation within one agency. USDA’s comments and our detailed response are contained in appendix V. In commenting on a draft of this report, HHS raised concerns about our terminology regarding as verifying proper sanitation procedures. To the contrary, our recommendations are to consolidate inspections activities under one agency, not two. We further disagree with USDA's comment that the report's recommendations rely upon overly simplistic interpretations of food safety authorities, regulations and inspection requirements. We disagree with USDA’s assertion that the agencies’ inspection activities are vastly different. As we document in our report, these inspections have sufficiently common features, such as sanitation, good manufacturing practices, and HACCP compliance oversight. We also disagree with HHS's comment that our report overstates similarities in USDA and FDA inspections because, as our report clearly states, they have similar key elements. It also makes it clear that USDA and food safety activities. for inspecting different food products at these facilities. Both USDA and FDA inspect facilities that make canned baked beans with 2 percent or more bacon. USDA inspects a canning facility at least daily if it produces food containing meat and poultry. If the facility also produces canned soups containing beans or seafood, FDA inspects it every 1 to 5 years. Because of their split jurisdiction, each agency is responsible for inspecting each other's food safety inspections. The frequency of their inspections varies. Generally, USDA inspectors have a more establishments with different frequencies. Daily inspections of meat and poultry products is wasteful and inefficient for most, if not all, heat-processed products, experts say. Such inspections waste resources because new technologies are more efficient and effective, they say. For example, the manager at a jointly regulated canned- goods company told us that daily inspections are inefficient for canned goods.products, such as E. coli O157:H7. The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services is investigating the use of daily inspections in the food industry. note, there is merit in examining the feasibility of conducting joint training activities when workable commonalities can be found. Our report identifies more than 100 courses in FDA’s inspector training curriculum that include topics common to both USDA and FDA. We disagree with USDA”s assertion that implementation of the merit. 2. If a single agency were to be responsible for the safety of all food products, different organization units within that agency would be responsible. 3. We agree with HHS’S comment that, if a single agencies were toBe responsible for. all food product safety. FDA inspections vary depending on whether the product is a USDA- or FDA-regulated food product. Overall, HHS agreed inspections have common key elements: sanitation, good manufacturing practices, and HACCP compliance oversight. Despite HHS’s disagreement with our recommendation that the agencies examine the feasibility of establishing a joint training program for food inspectors, we continue to believe that such an examination has been warranted. The report makes it clear that USDA and FDA inspections vary, depending on what product is being inspected. USDA and FDA provide similar training to their inspectors. Both agencies train inspectors on sanitation requirements, good manufacturing practices. A joint USDA-FDA training program could reduce duplication in developing training materials and in providing instruction, and potentially achieve some savings, the authors say. The authors recommend that FDA use its limited inspection resources and leverage USDA’s resources to better use its resources. They also recommend that USDA use its foreign country equivalency evaluations when determining which countries to visit to train inspectors in. both USDA and FDA—or facilities inspected by both FDA and NMFS. However, some overlaps occur outside these establishments. For example, although the United Fresh Fruit and Vegetable Association’s member companies are primarily inspected and regulated by FDA, companies that sell fruit and vegetables to the school meals programs are also inspected by USDA. UFFVA officials pointed out that USDA inspects fruits and veggies to be included in school lunches; and the companies, already subject to FDA inspections, incur additional expenses. with a private firm that has produced an online curriculum. This curriculum includes over 106 courses that address topics common to both USDA and FDA. Another agency, NMFS, uses 74 of these courses. The courses range from foodborne pathogens, HACCP requirements, and good manufacturing practices, to courses that are specific to FDA’s regulations and enforcement authorities. The online curriculum is available for free on the USDA website and for $99.99 on the FDA website. It is available in English, Spanish, and French.  NMFS officials cited accessibility to training materials at times other than when inspectors are “on duty” and no charge to NMFS for the training materials. USDA officials said they are exploring the possibility of entering into an agreement with NMFS.online courses to train its own seafood inspectors. The benefits NMFS cited include accessibility toTraining materials at. times otherthan when inspectors were "on duty" and no. charge toNMFS to provide the training. Online courses can be downloaded from www.nmsf.org. Some agreements have not been updated to account for changes in a signatory’s responsibilities since they were signed. For example, NMFS has not been modified to reflect the fact that USDA's Science and Education Administration no longer exists. NMFS is a federal agency that regulates animal drug use in the United States. It was created by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services in the early 1990s. The agency was created to regulate the use of animal drugs by livestock and poultry producers. with a facility’s manufacturing processes or sanitation procedures affect all products produced at the establishment. A rodent doesn’t distinguish between FDA-regulated products and USDA- regulated products, so a problem affecting one agency's product is likely to affect the other agency’'s product. Third, the agreement between the FDA and the USDA is that the FDA will not regulate food produced in the U.S. without the consent of the USDA. The agreement was reached in the 1990s and covers food production, processing and distribution. In 2000, USDA and FDA evaluated the agreement’s implementation and concluded that the experience had been largely successful. We conducted our review from May 2004 through March 2005 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. We asked agencies within USDA, FDA, EPA, and NMFS to provide all expenditures and staffing levels, in FTEs, in 2004 and 2005. We found that the agreement could be used to maximize use of federal resources without loss of inspection coverage for FSIS-regulated foods. and FDA less regularly. While we agree with USDA that the number of jointly regulated establishments may be a relatively small portion of all regulated food establishments, USDA and FDA had great difficulty identifying the current number of joint regulated facilities. Consequently, the magnitude of potential savings is difficult to estimate. We believe that the potential savings could be in the tens of millions of dollars per year, if not billions of dollars a year, over the long term. We are open to suggestions for how to achieve these savings, and will share our best ideas with you. FSIS inspectors to conduct FDA’s inspections at DJEs, according to a former USDA senior food safety official who signed the agreement. The agreement was developed in response to a 1997 report by the President's Food Safety Council, which recommended increased cooperation among agencies. The report stated that because FSIS inspectors are already in cooperate more effectively, the agreement should be maintained. However, the evaluation also included recommendations to strengthen, clarify, or otherwise improve the agreement”s implementation. Among other things, the report recommended that FDA provide FSIS with access to the inspection database, ensure more frequent updates to the list of jointly regulated facilities. In 2000, an evaluation cited the potential for significant resource savings over time as the agreement is implemented. Since the 2000 evaluation, officials at USDA and FDA said they have not again monitored the agreement’s effectiveness, nor have they implemented their.provisions of the agreement. The agreement is expected to be in place by the end of the first quarter of this year, according to the USDA. The agency says it will continue to monitor the agreement's effectiveness until it is fully implemented by July 1, 2015. The 2000 evaluation found that more training was needed, particularly at the field level, to achieve the results of the agreement. Although USDA and FDA held 28 joint training sessions during the 2000 evaluation, more training is needed, the evaluation found. The evaluation also found that the contacts for each agency have an appropriate understanding of the working of the other agency. The 2000 evaluation concluded that the agreement was a success and that the two agencies would continue to work together in the future to improve the health of the nation. first year of the agreement’s implementation, no additional training has been provided since then. Because USDA and FDA on-site inspectors are often the first agency staff to become aware of deficiencies at a plant, effective sharing of this type of information depends upon those inspectors being adequately trained. According to the agreement, no further training will be provided in the next year or so. The agreement is expected to be in place by the end of the year, according to the USDA. It is not known if the agreement will be implemented in the future. against the facility is warranted. The agreement also calls for the receiving agency to inform the notifying agency of the disposition of the notification, including any actions that it plans or takes, within 30 days. During field visits to three USDA and FDA district offices that, together, are responsible for the facility's care, the FDA and USDA officials will discuss the issue. The FDA and the USDA will also discuss how the facility will be used in the future, the agreement says. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. are nursing, as well as for young children. EPA said that the consumption guidance differs due to different mercury levels in recreationally and commercially caught fish. For fish purchased from a store, the guidance recommends up to 12 ounces per week. However, if the fish is recreationally caught, EPA recommends that women consume up to 6 ounces a week. The FDA and USDA are responsible for food safety, both USDA and FDA engage in food safety monitoring and education. For more information, go to www.fda.gov/foodsafety. EPA, and NOAA with a draft of this report for their review and comment. USDA expressed serious reservations about the report, asserting EPA did not provide official comments. EPA provided minor technical comments that we incorporated as appropriate. The technical comments noted that EPA will consider GAO’s recommendation for better tracking of interagency agreements when the agency sets priorities for future investments in information technology. NOAA provided written comments and agreed with the GAO's recommendation to improve interagency tracking of information technology investments. identified seven agreements that focus on seafood inspection and enforcement activities. Signatories to one or more of these agreements include USDA, FDA, NMFS, the Department of Defense, and the Interstate Shellfish Sanitation Conference (ISSC) In addition to these formal interagency agreements, the agencies cooperate through other mechanisms such as the officials said that the ISSC has taken on some responsibilities that once belonged to NMFS and that the 1985 agreement on shellfish-growing waters should be updated to reflect this change. developed the “Fight Bac’ program to educate the public about safe food handling to help reduce foodborne illness. In 2004, FDA and EPA issued a joint consumer advisory about mercury in fish and shellfish for women who might become pregnant, who are pregnant, and who are in the middle of a pregnancy. For the first time in 2004, the two agencies issued a jointly issued consumer advisory on mercury inFish and Shellfish. For more information, visit FightBac.org and EPA’s mercury advisory page. daily routine inspections he walks through the seafood processing and storage section of the plant. However, because FDA regulates seafood, the USDA inspector does not monitor or inspect the seafood storage section. The inspector noted that, with minimum training on seafood temperature controls, he could inspect this section with no training. (See fig. 7) The inspector said that he would be able to inspect the storage section with minimal training if he had the proper equipment and knowledge of the temperature controls in place. The USDA inspector said he would have to have the required training on the temperature control system. inspections of seafood. NOAA’s comments are contained in appendix VII. As agreed with your offices, unless you publicly release the contents of this report earlier, we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date. We are sending copies of this. report to the Secretary of Agriculture, the. Secretary of Food and Agriculture, and the. Director of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. Acting Commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration, the Acting Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, and the Under Secretary of Commerce for Oceans and Atmosphere. In addition, this report will be available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staffs have any questions about this report, please contact us at tips@gauonline.com or call (800) 615-4157. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. facilities. To obtain the views of regulated industry and other stakeholders regarding opportunities to reduce overlap by consolidating federal food safety functions, we contacted a total of 35 stakeholders from food industry associations, food manufacturers, consumer groups, and academic experts. We used a structured interview format consisting of 22 questions. In the interview, we asked each stakeholder a series of questions to get their views on the proposed changes to the food safety system. For more information, visit www.fda.gov/foodsafety. selecting associations, organizations, and experts, we included contacts from our previous reports and testimonies. We considered recommendations from USDA, FDA, EPA, and NMFS. In selecting which food manufacturers to interview, we used Food Processing’s Top 100 Companies to identify the largest food manufacturers. Of those companies, we selected and contacted some of the world's biggest food manufacturers, such as Kraft Heinz, Mondelez International, General Mills, and Unilever, to name a few. large industry associations (e.g., Grocery Manufacturers of America, the Food Products Association, the American Frozen Food Institute, the National Fisheries Institute, and the United Fresh Fruit and Vegetable Association) saw the need for only minor changes within the existing regulatory framework to enhance communication and coordination among the existing industry groups. The goal is to make it easier for consumers to buy fresh fruits and vegetables from the U.S. market and to make sure that they are safe and nutritious. types of activities. For example, because of the agencies’ split jurisdiction, both USDA and FDA maintain separate laboratory capability to sample and analyze the foods that they regulate for chemical contaminants such as pesticides and dioxins. EPA uses USDA and FAA data to inform EPA’s risk assessments on human exposure fill in the gaps with samples of food at different points in the distribution chain. In some cases, these efforts target the same food safety topic, such as Escherichia coli ( E. coli) site visits included USDA district offices in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania and Boulder, Colorado. FDA district offices were in Philadelphia; Denver, Colorado; and Seattle, Washington. USDA and FDA district managers, inspectors, and other staff met with CNN to discuss food safety issues. The USDA is responsible for food safety in a total of 13 states, including Colorado, Pennsylvania, and New Jersey. The FDA is responsible in part for the food safety of Americans in the U.S. and its territories, including Alaska, Hawaii, Mexico and Canada. Foodborne Diseases Active Surveillance Network (also known as FoodNet) that USDA, FDA, and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention use to help track the incidence of foodborne illness and track the effectiveness of food safety programs. Agency officials also noted that they informally cooperate and cooperate with each other. FoodNet is a joint effort of the FDA, USDA, and CDC to track foodborne illnesses and to improve food safety. It is also known as the Foodborne Diseases active Surveillance Network. USDA appears to have misinterpreted the focus of this report, and we disagree with USDA’s characterization. This report examines overlapping activities rather than the regulatory framework that allows these activities. Nevertheless, the report contains a clear and accurate acknowledgment that the agencies operate under a statutory framework that gives them different roles. it exaggerates the extent of regulatory overlap. that it oversimplifies food safety regulatory functions within USDA and FDA and that it exaggerate the amount of overlap between the two agencies. Jurisdiction, can be confusing to both consumers and industry representatives. For example, USDA and FDA participated in a joint Listeria monocytogenes (listeria) risk analysis of ready-to-eat foods. The agencies will promulgate separate listeria rules for the products under their jurisdiction. The principal food safety agencies—USDA, FDA, EPA, and NMFS—have entered agency officials, the agreement has helped agency coordination and communication, particularly when major public health concerns arise. spoke with, such as the Food Products Association, National Fisheries Institute, American Frozen Food Institute, and Grocery Manufacturers of America. These overlaps, they noted, occur primarily in dual jurisdiction establishments. Other stakeholders, including the U.S. Tuna Foundation and the American Meat Institute, reported that they do not think the federal agencies’ programs overlap because USDA and FDA have specific, defined areas of responsibility for their industries. The U.s. Poultry and Egg Association added that the overlaps are not significant. information on a greater range of foods and chemicals that EPA also uses to form its decisions. EPA officials said that the overlap in data collection and analysis adds value. USDA’s data comes from a well-controlled survey of food samples taken at the wholesale level, and FDA’S data helps EPA make its decisions, they said. The EPA says the overlap adds value because it allows it to make more informed decisions about food and chemical safety in the U.S. and around the world. In 1998, USDA and FDA jointly published an advance notice of proposed rulemaking. The agencies have not issued a joint rule to help eliminate foodborne illnesses caused by salmonella in eggs. In 2004, FDA issued a proposed rule that would require shell egg producers to implement measures. Although USDA released a new draft risk assessment in 2004, the department has not yet issued a proposal to help prevent salmonello from contaminating egg products. Both agencies have also committed personnel resources to a World Health Organization. The agencies also conduct joint risk assessments when addressing the same pathogen or the same food product. FDA released a draft risk assessment for Vibrio parahaemolyticus in raw molluscan shellfish. In the case of eggs, regulatory responsibility shifts as eggs make their way from egg yolks to egg whites. The agency also conducted a risk assessment when addressing E. coli O157:H7 in ground beef and, FDA released an assessment for E.coli (O157: H7) in raw beef. a sample of chicken salad tested positive for listeria and alerted USDA, resulting in a voluntary recall. In a second case, USDA and FDA cooperated by exchanging information on a severe rodent infestation at a DJE. This resulted in the seizure of millions of pounds of USDA- and FDA-regulated product. In the third case, the USDA and the FDA exchanged information on an outbreak of salmonella in a food product. This led to the recall of more than 100,000 pounds of food products. addition, USDA and FDA district managers were able to assist each other during the recall of beef and beef products. In December 2003, a cow infected with bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE, also known as mad cow disease). However, we found that the stated purpose of the agreement—which was to assist in the recall—was not achieved. We found that, despite the agreement's stated purpose, it did not achieve its goal of assisting in the Recall of Beef. An FDA inspector told the company to paint the same equipment because he determined that it would be easier to identify sanitation problems on lightly painted equipment than on the dark-colored metal. The manager of the facility said the company had to paint and then remove the paint from equipment. The company has not commented on whether the company is still using the paint on the equipment. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. In 1996, the agencies began regulatory delineations do not always make sense, citing the split jurisdiction between USDA and FDA over the regulation of eggs. FDA regulates an egg farm as a “food factory” within its area of jurisdiction, and USDA regulates plants that process eggs into products such as powdered eggs. Other stakeholders—generally the farm to the table -generally agree that the delineation does not make sense. The FDA is primarily responsible for the safe production and processing of eggs still in the shell (known as shell eggs), and USDA is responsible for food safety. Each agency uses different frequencies for monitoring and ensuring food safety. USDA inspecting the physical plant, usually daily, while FDA’s inspections usually take place annually. According to a senior plant manager, FDA's inspections place more responsibility for food safety on the company. For more information, visit FDA.gov or USDA.gov. for more information on each agency's inspection frequencies. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. In 2003, FDA analyzed 11,331 food samples for pesticides and chemical contaminants to help estimate the dietary intake of pesticide residues. In 2000, the most recent year for which data are available, USDA’s Food Safety and Inspection Service (FSIS) analyzed over 33,000 samples of meat, poultry, and other food. To see more information on this story, visit CNN.com/Pesticide-Ruptures-and-Dietary-Intolerance. To read more about this story and others, visit The Huffington Post. Back to the page you came from. EPA officials say USDA data are their primary source of information. USDA’s Agricultural Marketing Service (AMS) Pesticide Data Program samples and tests commodities across the food spectrum to help inform EPA in making decisions on acceptable levels of pesticide residues (tolerances) FDA provides additional information on the safety of egg products, according to EPA officials. The agency says it has no plans to change its policy on egg products. The EPA says it will continue to monitor egg products for any potential safety concerns. data in full-time equivalents (FTE) from the following USDA units: Agricultural Marketing Service, Agricultural Research Service, Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, Cooperative State Research, Education, and Extension Service. We also include data from the Economic Research Service and Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards Administration. Data from the Food Safety and Inspection Service; and National Agricultural Statistics Service. Data in FTEs from the Agriculture Marketing Service; Agricultural Research Services; Grain Inspection; and Economic Research Services.