later than April 1, 2001. RMA said it expects full implementation, as the act requires, by December 1,2001. Decisions on use of these accounts and funding are still pending. planning on how USDA will carry out the tasks needed to meet the June 20, 2002, deadline for implementing full electronic filing capabilities will not begin until January 2001. In response to the E-File Act, RMA has created a new agency, the E/F/A/F Administration. remaining e-file mandates to successfully establish effective and secure electronic filing capabilities by June 2002 poses far more complex and difficult tasks for USDA. USDA agreed that it had problems meeting the act’s initial December 18, 2000, deadline for deploying electronic forms on the Internet and that significant challenges remain to fully implement the act. USDA also stated that successful implementation of the act will require continued funding, along with providing customer assistance and publicizing USDA's new e- file services and notifying the public on how to use them. to E-File Act and GPEA in January 2001. USDA’s Acting CIO provided written comments on a draft of this report. USDA agreed with our recommendation for making RD forms available on the Internet as soon as possible. The department also agreed that comprehensive plans must be developed for implementing the Freedom to E- File Act andGPEA. The comments are summarized below and reproduced in appendix I and II of the 2001 USDA CIO draft report on RD forms and e-file technology. USDA’s CBAs provide services such as farm loans and conservation assistance. Under the E- File Act, these agencies were required to establish an electronic filing and retrieval system. Implementation of the plan is to be completed by December 1, 2001. In addition to addressing the mandates of the Freedom to E-File Act, USDA is—like other agencies—preparing to implement plans in accordance with the GPEA. The Secretary of Agriculture issued a memorandum to the undersecretaries of the affected agencies on August 30, 2000. which included two separate sections covering the CBAs and RMA, provides general information on USDA activities to address e-file requirements. establish and define all major activities and milestones, dependencies among activities, and resources necessary to complete them. assign a senior-level official with overall responsibility and accountability for managing and implementing all the separate activities. ensure that critical tasks are completed on time and within budget and that all federal mandates are met. USDA has also not yet developed and documented a comprehensive e- file implementation plan. The report was done in response to the Secretary’s request for a shared e-file plan. USDA has not assigned a senior-level official with overall responsibility, authority, and accountability for managing and carrying out implementation of the E-File Act requirements. The report recommends that the Secretary hold the senior official accountable for carrying out the comprehensive plan and require that this official provide quarterly reports on the results of these actions and all e- file requirements. We continue to believe that having a senior.level official vested with sufficient accountability and authority is important to the success of USDA’S e-File implementation efforts. different departmental entities, yet no single official has been so designated. A comprehensive implementation plan is critical to help the department achieve a more consistent approach in its entire e-government transformation. To ensure that USDA fully meets its E-File Act mandates, the assign a senior-level official with overall responsibility, authority, and accountability for managing and carrying out e-file programs. Finally, we recommend that are successful; and address OMB and GPEA requirements by coordinating actions across mission areas. GAO: USDA stopped short of describing extent to which its comprehensive plan will include all the detailed steps we recommended or what the department’s time frame is for completing it. The first copy of each GAO report is free. Additional copies of reports are $2 each. A check or money order should be made to the GAO at: http://www.gao.org/news/press-releases/2013/09/08/gao-press-release-e-government-transformation.html. carrying out our work, we obtained and reviewed USDA and contractor documents. We discussed actions planned or under way with department officials handling implementation of the act and assessed progress made. On November 15, 2000, we briefed your staff on the results of our review up to that point. Our work on the briefing was performed from August through October 2000. We performed follow-up work to update USDA’s progress implementing the act through December 31, 2000. The results of all of our work are summarized in this report. continue providing services through non electronic means as well, the department will also face increased workload demands supporting dual service delivery functions. At the end of our review in December 2000, USDA did not have a detailed plan for how it would implement these actions and the department did not know how to handle the increased demand for paper-based services. The department will now be able to provide services through both electronic and paper means, as well as through other means, the agency says. The agency says it will implement the changes as soon as possible. USDA building in solutions that also address GPEA and OMB requirements. reengineering numerous existing programs and systems. using multiple electronic submission processes to accommodate various categories of agency customers. designing and investing in technology to securely connect service center agencies to customers and to USDA’s national network. developing software to help agencies securely connect with customers and the national network, among other things. The USDA is also investing in the development of new technology to help it meet OMB and GPEa requirements. implemented to meet E-File Act requirements. The Secretary gave the Office of Chief Information Officer (OCIO) the role of coordinating and facilitating e-file implementation planning. Secretary required that the plan be submitted to OCIO no later than September 30, 2000. In response to the Secretary’s directive, the undersecretaries transmitted a “Mission Area Report on Freedom to E- File Legislation” to the CIO on October 17, 2000, the report says. “Mission Area Report on Freedom to E-File Legislation” to OCIO on October 17, 2000. While providing general information, it lacked specifics on activities and milestones, dependencies among USDA activities, and needed resources. It also did not assign a senior-level official with overall accountability for managing and ensuring the implementing of the law. USDA stated that OCIO will continue to ensure that the Secretary is fully informed on the department’s progress in meeting the E- File Act requirements. staff in the new e-file procedures, publicize the department’s e- file services, and notify the public on how to use them. A component critical to the success of any such initiative is the necessary authority and responsibility to manage it across document a comprehensive plan for implementing all E-File Act requirements. We further recommend that the Secretary of Agriculture direct the assigned senior official to document and track all critical activities and milestones, dependencies among major activities, and resources needed to complete these efforts. meets its E-File Act mandates. The Secretary of Agriculture should assign a senior-level official with overall responsibility, authority, and accountability for managing and carrying out implementation for both CBAs and RMA E- File Act requirements. Direct the assigned official to work with RD and OMB to expedite resubmission and resubmitting of CBAs, the report says. The report recommends that CBAs be made available to the public by the end of the year. For more information, go to: www.cban.org. e-file activities. E-File Act requires USDA to continue providing services in the traditional way to customers who choose not to use the Internet. CBAs must therefore support dual service delivery. For example, the CBAs purchased an on-line common forms software move and utilize data collected from customers to appropriate serving locations, and training employees in new roles, responsibilities, and technologies. The CBAs had two separate interagency teams working together to meet the act’s December 18, 2000, deadline. functions--one electronic and one paper-based. identified how much funding and staff resources will be needed to fully implement the act. The E-File Act provides that the Secretary is to reserve, from applicable accounts of the CBAs, not more than $3 million for fiscal year 2001 and $2 million for each of the next two years. The act also provides for the Secretary to reserve up to $1 million per year for the next three years for the purposes of the E- file program. issue any press releases publicizing the new e-file Web site. In addition, because the CBAs decided that training needs for service center employees were minimal at this phase of the project, informational directives on the new program were provided to employees in lieu of giving them training. Fully meeting all of the requirements for the e- file Web site is a high priority for the CB as well as for the service center staff. The CBAs are committed to fully meeting all the requirements, including the requirement to fully meet all the needs of the service centers. key agency offices involved in e- file activities in Fort Collins, Colorado, and Kansas City, Missouri. Our work was done in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. As agreed with your office, unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier, we plan no further distribution until 30 years after the date of the original release of the e-file. We apologize for any inconvenience this may have caused you or your family. We are working with you to correct any errors or omissions in this report. workday before the deadline, and some key technical staff who were implementing web farm hardware, software, and security had other full-time duties and had no replacements. plans still needed to be established to train county-based field office staff in the new e-filing procedures and in e-mailing. Plans still need to be set up for e- filing in the future, and for the web farm to be fully operational by the end of the year, if not sooner. The deadline for submitting e-mails to the state is September 30. days from its date. At that time, we will send copies to Representative Eva Clayton, Ranking Minority Member, Subcommittee on Department Operations, Oversight, Nutrition, and Forestry, House Committee on Agriculture. Senator Richard Lugar, Chairman, and Senator Tom Harkin, Ranking Member, Senate committee on Agriculture, Nutrition and Forestry; Representative Larry Combest, House Agriculture Committee Chairman; and other members of the House and Senate committees. We will also send copies of the bill to the White House and the Department of Agriculture. and Representative Janice Schakowski, Ranking Minority Member, Subcommittee on Government Efficiency, Financial Management and Intergovernmental Relations, House Committee on Government Reform. We will also send copies to the Honorable Ann M. Veneman, Secretary of Agriculture; the Hon honorable Mitchell E. Daniels, Jr., Director, Office of Management and Budget; and other interested parties. The bill is expected to be voted on by the House of Representatives in the coming weeks. It is expected that the bill will be approved on a bipartisan basis. Chairman, and Representative Charles Stenholm, Ranking Minority Member, House Committee on Agriculture. Representative Tom Davis, Chairman, Representative Jo Ann Davis, Vice Chairwoman. Representative Jim Turner, Ranking minority Member, Subcommittee on Technology and Procurement Policy, House committee on Government Reform. Representative Stephen Horn, Chairman,. Representative Ron Lewis, Vice Chairman, House committees on Agriculture, Government Reform, and subcommittee on technology andprocurement policy. Rep. Stephen Horn is Chairman, Rep. Ron Lewis is Vice Chairman and Rep. Jim Turner is Chairman. out to the Superintendent of Documents. VISA and MasterCard credit cards are accepted, also. Orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent. Orders by mail: U.S. General Accounting Office P.O. Box 37050 Washington, DC 20013 Orders by visiting: Room 1100 700 700, Room 1100. 700, or by calling 1-800-838-4747. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. Each day, GAO issues a list of newly available reports and testimony. To receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list, call (202) 512-6000 or fax (202), 512-6061. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S., call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. If you have any questions on matters discussed in this report, please contact me at (202) 512-6257 or Stephen A. Schwartz, Senior Assistant Director. We can also be reached by e-mail at mcclured@gao.gov and schwartzs@gaO.gov. Copies will also be made available to others upon request. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. from the past 30 days, please call (202) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone. A recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists. Web site: http://www.gao.gov/fraudnet/f fraudnet.htm e-mail: fraudnet@gaO.gov 1-800-424-5454 (automated answering system) or call the toll-free number at (1-800) 456-6000. able to file paperwork electronically with USDA if they choose to do so. RMA administers the federal crop insurance program, which helps protect producers against losses due to drought, flooding, and other unavoidable causes. By December 1, 2000, it was to submit to Congress a plan for enabling producers to file over the Internet. Not later than December 1,. 2001, RMA should complete implementation of the plan. *RMA said it approved plans from two participating insurance providers on September 26, 2000. had not identified how much funding or what staff resources would be required to carry out them out. RMA’s initial efforts focused on establishing and distributing guidelines and policies for crop insurance providers to follow in meeting their e-file responsibilities. By the time of our November briefing, RMA had issued its final e- file guidelines. R MA met the December 1, 2000, deadline for submitting a plan to Congress. This plan outlines the process the agency will use to ensure that insurance providers comply with the act's e-File requirements. via the Internet by December 18, 2000. The Secretary of Agriculture was also to report to Congress by that date on progress made in implementing the act. The law further mandated that by June 20, 2002, agricultural producers be enabling agricultural producers to access all forms and shall submit to Congress a report that describes the progress made. Not later than June 20,. 2002, the system shall be expanded to enable producers to. access and file all forms, and, at the option of the Secretary, selected records and information. program, under which insurance policies are sold and serviced by private companies to help protect agricultural producers against crop losses due to drought, flooding, and other unavoidable causes. requires that by 2003, federal agencies provide the public, where practicable, the option of submitting, maintaining, or disclosing information about their insurance policies. In 1998, the U.S. House of Representatives passed a bill that would require the federal government to disclose information about its insurance policies to the public. The bill was later passed by the Senate and signed by President Clinton. is working on a December 1, 2000, plan for allowing agricultural producers the option of obtaining, over the Internet from approved insurance providers, all forms and other information and filing all paperwork required for participation electronically. These were issued in final on November 1,2000. the location and type of the insurance provider. The plan would allow producers to get their insurance through the Internet, and file their paperwork electronically. It would also allow them to obtain their insurance via the Internet. The proposal is expected to be approved by the end of 2000. addition, the plan should clearly describe all project tasks, their priorities, and time frames and milestones for their completion. In addition, the comprehensive plan should cover both e-file and GPEA. We also need to identify required staff/budget resources for completing the plan; and document contingency actions planned to address unforeseen work delays or problems. We need to show critical dependencies and identify required resources to complete the plan. And we need to clearly describe the scope of the project and its goals. activities, dependencies and critical tasks among these activities, and resources required to complete them. Help identify priorities as to which activities must be completed first and where milestone and resource shifts may be made to ensure that the most critical activities are completed on time, within budget, and, more important, on time and on budget. help identify priorities and resources needed to complete these activities; help identify which activities are most critical and which are the most time-consuming and which require the most resources. tool for creating electronic forms, selected forms to post on the Web, and designed and begun implementing a common Internet Web site. At the time of our November briefing, the CBAs still needed to obtain OMB approval for each electronic form, complete testing of the Web page, train county-based field instructions. The CBAs are working with OMB to develop a user-friendly format and are working to get approval for new electronic forms. They are also working to implement a common Web site that can utilize a single Internet address to provide user access. By the December 18 deadline, the CBAs had successfully established a common Internet Web site. However, none of the 100-plus RD forms that theCBAs expected to have deployed on the Web site were available. CBAs still need to obtain final OMB approval for each of the contractor testing of the Web page design. That testing was scheduled to be completed December 15, the last day for CBAs to meet the deadline. The CBAs are expected to meet their deadline of December 18. by the deadline were available. According to USDA documentation, OMB had not approved these forms because some forms appeared to be for the department’s internal use, did not have clear and user-friendly instructions, or did not include forms instructions that conformed to the format standard established by OMB and the Department of Agriculture. The forms were not approved because they did not meet the standard, according to the USDA documentation. They were approved because the forms were for internal use and did not comply with the standard. agencies. As of December 31, 2000, RD had not resubmitted any of its forms for OMB review. A marketing brochure, being developed by the CBAs to promote public awareness of the e-file effort, was still in production at the end of December 2000. The CBAs had decided not to resubmit any of their forms to the OMB for review at the time of this article's publication. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. approval of all appropriate RD forms and ensure that these forms are made available over the Internet as soon as possible. Direct the assigned official, in cooperation with the undersecretaries for Farm and Foreign Agricultural Service, Natural Resources and Environment, and Rural Development, and the OCIO, to develop and develop the RD forms. The forms will be made available to the public on the Internet. The RD forms will also be available for download from the Internet, and will be available on a variety of government websites. implementing all the separate e-file activities. purchased an on-line common forms software tool for selected a total of 219 forms (57 from FSA, 6 from NRCS, and 156 from RD) to post on the Web (USDA believes customers can complete these on their own with assistance only from form completion) and posted them on the government's Web site. The tool is available for download from the USDA's Web page. For more information on the tool, visit: http://www.usda.gov/forms. information--such as employment records, tax forms, and loan applications-- electronically, instead of on paper. On the basis of guidance issued by the Office of Management and Budget (OMB), agencies are preparing plans for implementing GPEA, including the use of electronic signatures. *P.L. No. 105-277, Div.C, tit XVII. E-File Act, the E-file Act, and the Electronic Signatures Act of 1998, among other laws. Conservation Service (NRCS), and Rural Development (RD) mission area--hereafter referred to collectively as County- based Agencies (CBAs) and the Risk Management Agency (RMA) to establish an electronic filing and retrieval system enabling farmers and others to file paperwork electronically. Provides separate requirements for the CBAs and RMA. an Internet-based system. An electronic filing system to allow farmers to file documents electronically. An online filing system for farmers to upload and update documents.