knowledge through practices designed to collect other information. One way program offices obtained information on software suppliers was through requirements in their prime contracts. Many of the program offices in our review were able to obtain some information onSoftware suppliers, either directly or indirectly, because it was contractually required. It was also possible to obtain information about software suppliers that was not required by the government or by the software supplier. It could also be possible to get information about the software suppliers through other means, such as through other sources of information. selected, more information is often available to the program manager. For example, contracts for 12 programs contained a requirement that the contractors provide a software development plan that included information on some of their planned suppliers, development risks, and action plans for the contract period. In at least two cases, the contractors were required to provide more information than they had provided in the previous contract. The information included information about some of the contractors' planned suppliers and development risks. The contractors were also required to give more information about their plans for future software development. we solicited information and documentation from the prime contractor for each system using contacts provided by program office officials. We received information from 15 of the prime contractors through written responses, on-site interviews, and other means such as telephone conversations. We also obtained several security and software related documents such as the Program Protection Plan, the Software Development Plan and other program specific documents, like the contract, for the systems we looked at. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. effective in determining software suppliers at the prime and subcontractor levels. Only five of the prime contractors reported that they were required to notify the program office concerning their decisions on software subcontracting. Once a winning bidder is chosen, the contract is awarded to the prime contractor. The prime contractor is intimately involved with source selection and contract negotiation. The contract is expected to be awarded to a prime contractor by the end of the year or early next year, depending on the size of the project. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. program software managers became aware of foreign software suppliers while collecting information requested for this review. Program officials also said that some knowledge was available as a result of procedures in place because their programs contained classified or technical program information. Four programs reported they had very few foreign suppliers because handling restrictions for classified information precluded the involvement of such suppliers. Similarly, contractors for 12 programs had information available from the export license, the review found. The review was conducted by the National Security Agency and the National Institute of Standards and Technology. process. While limited information on the supplier and location of foreign. entities performing software work was available from export licenses, contractors. request approval directly from the State Department. The State Department may not refer the application to DOD or the individual program offices. Consequently, program managers likely did not have this information and did not know who was performing the software work for the U.S. Defense Department and other agencies that were using the software. The U.N.’s inspector general is investigating the issue. In some cases, this information was available early in the proposal process. Bidders were required to identify suppliers they intended to use in the development and manufacturing phases, including potential foreign suppliers and components they were expected to provide. For example, officials from one program office said they were in touch with potential suppliers in the Middle East, Africa and South Asia to help with the development of the program's components and systems. The U.S. government is considering a number of requests for information on foreign suppliers. software suppliers because acceptance testing was usually only performed to prove functionality and the software was not further evaluated to determine the actual source that developed the software code. Further, DOD and prime contractor officials told us that it is sometimes difficult to determine whether the actual hardware subcontractor developed the code. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. software they had developed, it was necessary to isolate test facilities to meet security requirements. This resulted in increased cost and delays to other test activities. The officials said that, in similar cases, contracting decisions might sometimes be made in favor of U.S. suppliers to avoid costs and delays. In this case, they said, the decision was made to avoid delays and costs to the company and to the taxpayers of the United States. In other cases, the decisions were made to save costs and avoid delays to the government. purchased from lower tier subcontractors. While we did not specifically ask for information on foreign suppliers responsible for embedded software, officials for two of the programs reviewed stated that this software tends to include more reused and COTS software. These officials indicated that this could limit the visibility of the embedded software or if it was done by a software developer hired by that subcontractor, thus further reducing visibility of software suppliers. Most of the program offices we reviewed didn't specifically track foreign software suppliers for security purposes, but almost all of them had opportunities to gain such information. into the existence of foreign-developed software. Officials for 13 of the programs reviewed had almost no insight into the use of foreign developers for any COTS software. Even when procured directly from a known supplier, program officials could not guarantee whether additional subcontractors were used for software product was not originally developed for DOD. DOD and program officials have indicated that commercial software producers often demand a cost premium for their software.. Officials from five programs told us that the cost of identifying and managing foreign software suppliers, especially for COTS. needed to meet mission requirements. Program offices were most knowledgeable about the foreign-developed software for the onboard portions of their programs. In 9 of the systems we reviewed, either prime contractors or major subcontractors conducted software development. However, in meeting with prime contractors, we found that while this increased their knowledge about foreign software suppliers, the information was not always shared with government program managers, and therefore was not available for them to use to make risk management decisions to address software security. We found that the information wasn't always shared. Onboard software is that which actually runs the weapon system, even if that software is not located on the main component. For example, onboard software for a missile system could include software located on a remote platform used to guide the missile toward its target. Software is also developed as part of the hardware components it is tasked with managing. This embedded software is used to control other electronic hardware products, either onboard or offboard the weapon systems. It is often often used by foreign suppliers, such as U.S. defense contractors. and contractors reported very little knowledge about the level of foreign involvement for offboard software. This software, sometimes referred to as ground based, interacts with the onboard system to provide updated information in support of operational activity. Offboard software is often used to check for errors or malicious code and to produce, maintain, or verify onboard software. Program officials from 10 of the programs we reviewed indicated they had verylittle knowledge of the offboard component of their programs. For example, one program uses standard mission planning software that interacts with onboard flight software. Legacy, or reused code, is most prevalent when software programs are updated into newer versions. Similar to COTS, software from other applications and embedded software is often accepted without full knowledge of the source of development. When asked to produce software similar to what they have developed previously, manufacturers can use all or part of the legacy code as a basis for developing or modifying the new code. To share software and source code information that would be required to determine this information, please contact jennifer.smith@dailymail.co.uk. developers for their offboard software, including those portions that may have been developed by foreign suppliers. According to DOD and program officials, visibility into COTS software is limited by the willingness of the producers of that software to share information on how the code was developed. For one program we reviewed, a substantial portion of the system was a commercial acquisition. As such, the increased use of COTSSoftware may introduce additional risks and further limit visibility software development, officials say. For more information, visit the Defense Department's website. certified or accredited environment. DOD software with coding done in foreign environments or by foreign nationals shall be reviewed by software quality assurance personnel for malicious code. Vendors that demonstrate efforts to minimize the security risks associated with foreign nationals that have developed, modified, or remediated the COTS software being offered shall be given preference during the contracting process in product selection or evaluation. While this guidance acknowledges the fact that foreign nationals may be involved in developing, modifying or remediation of COTS Software, it does not require them to be involved with the development of the software. vary across programs. DITSCAP requirements do not govern contractors in cases where the requirements were not included as part of the original contract. Program officials responsible for software development on one other program indicated that they had no knowledge of this process. In cases where DitSCAP is being implemented, the certification and accreditation process requirements are determined based on the program manager’s. For more information, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/28/technology/ditscap-guidance-for-contractors. DOD has developed the Defense Information Technology Security Certification and Accreditation Process (DITSCAP) DITSCAP includes a review by a designated approving official who certifies that the process is mandatory. The process may be tailored and, in some cases, integrated with other acquisition activities and documentation.specifically identify and manage the use of foreign software suppliers. According to DOD Software Assurance Program officials, the DitSCAP approving authority is not expected to evaluate whether the risks have been identified appropriately. assurance requirements. These measures included the use of password protection, firewalls, or encrypted software. However, they did not always focus on risks from foreign involvement in software development. Further, 11 programs mentioned using DITSCAP as a means for addressing general software security. But, interpretation and implementation of this requirement can be difficult to implement. For more information, visit the IT Security Institute's website or go to: http://www.techsecurityinstitute.org/security-guidance. DOD indicated its intent to develop a database to identify, track, and maintain information on security risks from specific software suppliers. The cost of collecting and maintaining this information would require resources and assets beyond those of individual program managers. DOD agreed that it should ensure that program risk assessments include specific attention to software development risks, including those from foreign suppliers. However, DOD said it would not require foreign suppliers to be included in the risk assessment process for new software. The agency said such a database could be used by program managers responsible for collecting this information until it is developed. These requirements should then be communicated as part of the prime development contract. Information should be solely responsible for defining security requirements, including those for identifying and managing software suppliers. DOD also agreed that information on software suppliers, including foreign suppliers, should be collected and that this information should be periodically assessed to determine if adjustments to security requirements are needed. However, DOD indicated that centralized information onSoftware suppliers should not be the only source of threat information. Instead, DOD stated that program managers should be able to rely on external resources to gain threat information on suppliers. Despite the risks associated with foreign access to defense systems, DOD acquisition policy does not require program managers to identify and manage the amount of foreign involvement for software development in weapon systems. Despite the global nature of the software industry, DOD also cannot afford to exclude all foreign suppliers from its programs. While program managers.focuses on improving overall quality, leaving decision making on software suppliers and security with individual program. managers. Law, requirements, and policies that are intended software development facilities or provide clearances for all potential software developers, especially for COTS software. DOD information system security requirements focus on operational software threats, rather than potential threats posed by software developers. Recent DOD initiatives could increase DOD’s focus on software security, but efforts to date have not translated into greater knowledge for program managers about foreign software development activities. DOD acquisition policy allows should be allowed discretion in managing their acquisitions, they are responsible for knowing more about who is developing software and where. Unless this is done early in the software acquisition process, it cannot be included as part of software source selection and risk mitigation decisions. program managers discretion in managing foreign suppliers used for software development. For software acquisition, program managers are across various weapon and other programs for developing acquisition strategies, plans, requests for proposals, and contracts. While we agree that such a database would be helpful to program managers in collecting and maintaining information on software suppliers, we made no change to the recommendation because the program managers should be able to make their own decisions about which suppliers to use. The policy consists of general guidance for meeting overall acquisition management principles and instructs program managers to use systems engineering practices. in 1999 to strengthen software acquisition and development as well as address repeated performance shortfalls attributed to software. Task forces conducted detailed assessments of software-intensive programs to identity potential improvements in overall software acquisition processes. A source selection criteria working group is tasked with clarifying the policy on source selection. A task force is also tasked with identifying potential improvements to the way software is acquired and developed. The task force's goal is to identify potential improvements that can be made to the software acquisition process to make it more efficient. required by DOD, and that such practices could indirectly address foreign software risks. For example, contractors for these eight programs were presumed to be addressing software security because they were employing practices such as peer review and software testing consistent with SEI development models. While SEI representatives were aware of the risks from foreign suppliers in software development, they tended to focus on development efforts aimed at meeting stated requirements, such as software quality and functionality. Officials from the 15 contractors that responded to our review indicated this was the focus of their software development activities. additional risks from using foreign nationals in software development. It is not mandatory and, according to the Guidebook, is to be used at the discretion of acquisition program managers as best practices or lessons learned. Even if the suggested guidance was implemented, the procedures for addressing software security are generally for use after software suppliers have been selected. Further, several of these procedures would not apply when contractors use foreign nationals to develop unclassified portions of the software for use in the U.S. government. ensure that risks associated with foreign participation on the program were addressed. Programs that identified software security as a risk focused on limiting foreign access to software development facilities. These programs employed various measures to address software security consistent with information mitigate their use of foreign-developed software. We then tailored follow-up questions to solicit information and documentation in areas such as program risk identification and management practices, security policies and procedures, and software contracting management practices. To learn more about program practices for managing and mitigating the use ofForeign-developed Software click here. impact when integrated with these system level risks and do not specifically focus on foreign suppliers used in software development. Software generally only becomes a concern for program managers as it begins to affect the cost or schedule of the program. For example, one of the programs we reviewed lists one of its suppliers as a supplier of software for the U.S. military. For more information, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/29/technology/top-five-foreign-software-suppliers-in-usa-2013/index.html. The government may restrict access to foreign suppliers for economic reasons, rather than security reasons. For example, prime contractors for two programs did not use foreign subcontractors for economic. reasons; namely the company wanted to maintain the software expertise within the company. While restricting foreign access solely for. economic reasons could result in a decrease in software development security risks, it might. also preclude foreign suppliers that could offer new capability or lower costs to the government. For. example, contractor officials for one program did not. use foreign. subcontractors because they did not want to lose the company's software expertise. contractor did not want to create dedicated partitions, such as firewalls, required to prevent employees from a foreign subcontractor from accessing unauthorized information in the system design database. Software managers for one program told us that when foreign nationals modify or update, it can be difficult to track down who is responsible for the changes. The company instead contracted with a domestic supplier to provide the software for the program. The program was shut down after the subcontractor was found to be working for a foreign company. The change control process shall indicate whether foreign nationals, in any way, participated in software development, modification, or remediation. Foreign nationals employed by contractors may be subject to the same requirements as foreign nationals working for other government agencies. DOD issued the Interim Defense Acquisition Guidebook, which contained the following security considerations to be used when foreign nationals participate inSoftware Development. The guidebook was issued on October 30, 2002, and is available on the DOD website at: http://www.dod.mil/acquisition/guidebook. or subcontractors to develop, modify, or remediate software code specifically for DOD shall each have a security clearance commensurate with the level of the program in which the software is being used. Primary vendors on DOD contracts may have subcontractors who employ cleared foreign nationals that work only in a specific program. Contractors may also employ foreign nationals who only work in the specific program they are employed to develop or modify software code for the Department of Defense. For more information, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/29/technology/top-secret/topsecret-security-code-for-defense-programs/story.html. We are sending copies of this report to interested congressional committees; the Secretary of Defense; the Secretaries of the Air Force, Army, and Navy; the Commandant of the Marine Corps; and the Director, Office of Management and Budget. We will also make copies available to others upon request. In the U.S. we will make copies of the report available to anyone who requests them. In. the United States, we will be making copies of our reports available to everyone who wants them. addition, this report will be available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staff have any questions about this report, please contact me at (202) 512- 4841. Staff acknowledgments are listed in appendix III. To determine how the Department of Defense (DOD) measures, visit the DOD's website at: www.dod.mil/defense/defense-surveillance-measures.html. reviewed. John Neumann, Brian Mullins, Delores Cohen, Shelby S. Oakley, Christopher Miller, Gary Middleton, and Marie Ahearn made key contributions to this report. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255 or visit www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org. The Program Protection Plan is to protect Critical Program Information from hostile collection efforts and unauthorized disclosure during the acquisition process. DOD has taken steps to strengthen software acquisition practices, but it has yet to implement practices to better prevent unauthorized access to classified or technical program information, the report says. The report says 12 of the programs used the Technology Assessment/Control Plan and the Program Protection plan to prevent compromise. It also says DOD has not implemented practices to provide security at contractor facilities and limit access to export-controlled technical information in accordance with ITAR license requirements. Assessment/Control Plan and the Program Protection Plan address the risks associated with the potential release of information to foreign governments. Documents do not provide information on specific suppliers who will be performing work, such as software developers. The Technology Assessment/ control Plan is designed to prevent the release of U.S. government information to other countries. The Program protection Plan is intended to protect the U.N.’s ability to share information with foreign governments, including through cooperative programs and foreign military sales. The National Industrial Security Program Operation Manual establishes mandatory procedures for the safeguarding of classified information. It generally limits access to U.S. citizens with appropriate security clearances and establishes eligibility policies for contractors determined to have foreign ownership, control, or influence. Further, an additional DOD directive requires programs containing classified military information to have controls to prevent the unauthorized release of this information to foreign recipients. For more information, go to: http://www.nationalindustrialsecurityprogram.org/operational-manual. with exploitation or insertion of malicious code with the use of foreign research facilities and software development companies located outside the United States. Multiple requirements and guidance are in place to ensure the protection of U.S. national security interests. They include requirements for companies working on commercial projects related to classified or sensitive programs. They also include guidance on how to deal with people who want to steal or steal software. They are also designed to prevent people from stealing or stealing software that could be used to spy on others. establishes planning requirements for the potential release of sensitive information to foreign entities. It evaluates the risk of releasing critical military capability or sensitive information and technology against the benefit of the sale to the United States. The plan also outlines the requirements for sharing information with foreign entities involved in cooperative programs or purchasing military equipment. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S., call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. DOD has reported that countries hostile to the United States are focusing resources on developing information warfare strategies. Information systems technology was the most sought after militarily critical technology by these entities. Forty-four countries were associated with attempts at accessing U.S. information technology, with 33 percent of the activity coming from foreign government-sponsored or affiliated entities. Because the U.s. defense industry is at the forefront, the trend is expected to continue. The report was published by the Defense Security Service. of advanced design and development of weapon systems that include militarily critical technologies, access is sought after for industrial and financial purposes. Access to these technologies by potential adversaries could enhance the performance of their military systems and may be used to counter U.S. capabilities. DSS specifically noted a concern that could be used against the United States by a potential adversary to enhance its military systems. The report was published by the Defense Threat Reduction Agency (DSS) and is available on the DSS website. U.S. entities, including defense contractors, may apply to the Department of State for authorization to export controlled information and technology to qualified foreign recipients. The International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) controls foreign access to defense articles and services through the establishment of the export license and authorization process. U.S.-based defense contractors can apply for export licenses from the State Department through the Defense Export Licensing Program (DELP), which is administered by the State Dept. The DELP allows for the export of controlled information, technology, and other items. be evaluated periodically to assess changes in the status of suppliers and adjustments to program security requirements. Require the Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Networks and Information Integration and the Undersecretary of Defense. for Acquisition Technology and Logistics, as part of their role to evaluate the program security needs of the DoD’s networks and information integration programs. The DoD has a network security program in place to ensure the security of its networks and IT systems. The program has been in place for more than 20 years. suggested that this might be best accomplished by collaboration between the Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Networks and Information Integration. This seemed reasonable, and we agreed to try it. We are pleased to announce that we have reached an agreement with the Department of Defense to collaborate on this issue. We look forward to working with the Defense Department on this matter in the coming weeks and months. We thank you for your support and interest in this matter, and for your continued support of the National Security Agency. Defense (Acquisition Technology & Logistics), the National Security Agency, the Defense Information Systems Agency, and the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency. The Department of the Army, the Department of Air Force, the Navy and the Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense (Networks and Information Integration) are among the agencies involved in the program. The program is funded by the U.S. Department of Defense and its various agencies, as well as private sector partners. We are happy to share information about the program with you. contractors. The systems reviewed were the Abrams System Enhancement Package, AH-64D Apache, Bradley Upgrade, C-130 Avionics Modernization Program and C-17 Globe Master. Other systems reviewed include the F/A-18 Super Hornet, F-A-22 Raptor, Future Combat Systems, Global Hawk Unmanned Aerial Vehicle, Joint Helmet Mounted Cueing System, Joint Strike Fighter, and F-16 Fighting Camouflage. The review was conducted by the U.S. Air Force’s Test and Evaluation Command. Patriot Missile System, Tactical Tomahawk Missile, and Wideband Gapfiller Satellites. Using their respective command liaisons to initially contact each office, we distributed a structured set of questions to solicit information from software managers designated by individual program managers. To further determine how programs manage and manage, we contacted each office using their respectivecommand liaisons and asked for information on how they manage their programs. We also sent out a questionnaire to each office asking for information about their software managers. always the case within the weapon programs where software is developed or acquired. Program officials for most of the systems we reviewed did not make foreign involvement in software development a specific element of their risk identification and mitigation efforts. As a result, program officials’ knowledge of the foreign-developed software and quality assurance, rather than specifically addressing software development risks associated with foreign suppliers. Three weapon systems told us that they restrict foreign involvement because it costs too much to develop and monitor security procedures to separate foreign nationals from classified and sensitive information. Systems are connected with other systems operated by contractors, other government agencies, and international organizations. Performance requirements for weapon systems have become increasingly demanding. Breakthroughs in software capability have led to a greater reliance on software to provide more weapon capability the manner in which it was acquired, and the specific handling requirements. None of these programs could fully identify all foreign-developed software for their systems, but six program offices had significant knowledge of foreign software developers. We identified 16 DOD weapon systems and solicited information from each program office and prime contractor. weapon systems based on recommendations from DOD officials and on our internal knowledge of the systems. While our selection of programs cannot be generalized to the population of all DOD systems, the systems selected varied by product type, represented each of the military services, and represented a range of DOD systems. We are happy to share our knowledge of these systems with anyone who is interested in learning more about them. We hope you will share your knowledge with us in the coming days and weeks as we continue to develop these systems. best practice for improving software development and is generally performed to improve the quality and functionality of software code. In terms of security, peer review can reduce the likelihood that an individual programmer can insert malicious or other harmful code. Through dedicated software testing, teams assess the quality of the software and improve its functionality and security. Throughded software testing is generally done by a team of software engineers and coders. It can also be carried out by individual programmers and can be done by teams of up to 10 people. software to uncover gaps and make it as defect-free as possible. However, on eight of the programs we reviewed, decisions on the amount of software code to test were made based upon the risks and benefits to the functionality of the system to be tested, not on the benefits of testing the software. We are happy to clarify that on all eight of these cases, the decision to test the software code was made based on the safety of the software, not the benefits to testing the code. Each of the military services is developing plans for improving software acquisition. The improvement plans are each at varying stages of development and include practices such as pilot programs for providing information on software metrics, additional training programs, and teaming arrangements software is increasingly responsible for advances in weapon system capabilities. It is essential that DOD and program managers take appropriate steps to identify and manage software-related risks. While DOD has made improvements to system engineering and software development practices that can reduce the likelihood of defects in software code, current practices are not sufficient. encouraged to develop open software systems architectures, use COTS computer system products, and allow incremental improvements based on reusable software. All of these practices, while having the potential to benefit cost and schedule for weapon programs, could result in greater software vulnerabilities by introducing potentially malicious code from unknown software, according to the U.S. National Security Agency (NSA) The NSA says it has no plans to release any information on the source code of any of its weapons to the public at this time. when hardware limitations are reached. Software code that is poorly developed or purposely injected with malicious code could be used to disrupt these and other DOD information systems. As the amount of software on weapon systems increases, it becomes more difficult and costly to test every line of code. Further, DOD cannot afford to monitor all worldwide and cannot guarantee the safety of its systems. The methods of testing focus on the quality of software and related functionality and failures, which will not necessarily uncover malicious intent. The DOD weapon systems are subject to many risks that arise from exploitable software vulnerabilities. DOD and SEI officials said that the amount of effort needed to comprehensively test every line of code to ensure complete security could be physically impossible and would require immense resources. Because contractors for the weapon systems had not received specific direction from program managers to address security concerns, they were not able to provide details on how they were going to test the systems. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. The process includes a requirement for a threat assessment, but does not articulate how this information should be developed or reported. If the program manager has not identified foreign software development as a program risk or threat, it will not be addressed by the process. Because security and software risks are generally defined in terms of programmatic elements, program managers often delegate the identification and mitigation responsibility to program managers. The process does not direct program managers to consider foreign involvement in software development. It does not specify how this should be reported. process will mitigate the risks identified. If the program manager has not identified risks from foreign suppliers, the process cannot be expected to mitigate them. DOD also requires weapon programs to protect certain types of information during transfer of technology to foreign entities. For example, documents such as the Technology will be protected in the transfer of the technology to a foreign entity. For more information, visit the Defense Department's website at: http://www.dod.mil/weapons/programs/weapons-and-missiles. software security and may lead to the development and identification of several potential software security best practices. For 11 of the 16 systems, program managers have not identified foreign supplier involvement in software development as a significant risk to the security working to strengthen software related risk management activities. DOD agreed that software security risks should be defined for DOD weapon programs, but noted that program managers should not use this information in software risk management decisions. DOD partially concurred with our three recommendations based on the concern that they include acquisition and other organizations to address this concern. development practices contain adequate security measures to address identified risks and threats. In written comments on a draft of this report, DOD agreed with our findings that malicious code is a threat that is not adequately addressed in current acquisition policies and security procedures. DOD stated that the department is not aware of any instances of malicious code being used by the military to communicate with the public. The report was published by the Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS) at the request of the Department of Defense (DOD) Risk mitigation efforts emphasized program level risks, such as meeting program cost and schedule goals, instead of software security risks. Program managers often delegated risk mitigation and source selection to their prime contractors who tended to be concerned with software functionality of their weapon systems. For these programs, security risks have generally been implemented to meet mission requirements. The risk is based on potential cost and. schedule overruns should the software not function as needed to allow related system components to meet. mission requirements, rather than potential vulnerabilities from foreign suppliers. number of software defects and therefore improve overall software quality, but alone the practices cannot be expected to address malicious software development activities intended to breach security. Require program managers, working with software assurance experts, acquisition personnel, and other organizations as necessary, to specifically define software security requirements, including those for identifying and managing software suppliers. We recommend that the Secretary of Defense take the following three actions to address risks attributable to software vulnerabilities and threats: Require programs to identify and manage software suppliers, work with them to define security requirements. place too much responsibility for risk mitigation on program managers. Software assurance experts from the Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Networks and Information Integration were necessary to support program managers in risk mitigation efforts. We broadened two of our recommendations to help program managers with risk mitigation. We also broadened the scope of two recommendations to include the use of software assurance experts to help manage risk in a variety of ways. The report was published by the National Security Council's Cybersecurity Working Group and the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency. met with software experts at the Software Engineering Institute of Carnegie Mellon University to obtain information on software development practices and risk identification and mitigation techniques. Also met with the Association of Old Crows (The Electronic Warfare and Information Operations Association) whose membership includes the U.S. Army, Air Force, Navy, Marines, and the National Institute of Standards and Technology. Also spoke with experts from the software industry and the software engineering community at Carnegie Mellon and the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. For more information, visit www.cyberwarfare.org. Rigorous software development could help improve the quality and functionality of software. It could also lead to an increase in security vulnerability by encouraging the use of legacy and COTS software, unless risks are managed appropriately. For several programs we reviewed, contractors made risk identification efforts to address software security risks. Officials from one contractor we interviewed that employs practices address risks related to software security. They also said that alone their models should never be expected to completely addressSoftware security risks, they said. In fact, it is possible that using software development practices to increase efficiency could lead to increased security vulnerability. the contractors who are developing the system and are therefore more knowledgeable about what functions are needed from the software. Officials from eight of the programs we reviewed said they expect contractors to ensure quality and security on their systems because their software development processes are more mature than those of the companies we reviewed. The companies are expected to make sure that their systems are secure and quality are maintained. The software development process for these programs is more matured than those for the other programs, the companies say. The programs are also expected to be more secure and reliable. consistent with SEI’s highest level indicated that unless software security is a specific contract requirement, they would not modify their practices to address associated risks. SEI experts confirmed that the models they have developed do not include a security element and are not intended to certify that improved processes will be improved. The models are not meant to be a guide to how to improve software security, but rather a tool to help people understand how to make changes to the software they are using to make it more secure. Under the Federal Information Security Management Act of 2002, all executive agencies, including DOD, are required to ensure that information security policies, procedures, and practices are adequate. In implementing its information assurance policy, DOD also relies on other governmentwide policies and standards. For example, DOD requires the evaluation and validation of its systems. However, they do not apply to internal threats that could affect the integrity of the software, such as the insertion of malicious code during software development. In this regard, DOD is required to carry systems. for all DOD information systems to achieve an appropriate level of confidentiality, integrity, knowledge of threats and vulnerabilities, trustworthiness of users and interconnecting systems. These procedures are intended to mitigate system vulnerabilities from operational threats, such as external hacking and unauthorized access to information. For confidential support, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. For support in the U.S., call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch or click here. To protect the U.S., DOD relies on a complex array of computer-dependent and mutually supportive organizational components. It also relies on weapon systems, command and control systems, financial systems, personnel systems, payment systems, among other things. It is a joint effort between the military services and defense agencies, and the federal government. It was created in 1947 to protect the United States from Soviet Union-led invasion and invasion of Afghanistan in the 1960s. It has been expanded in the 1990s to include a number of other countries. out an information assurance program that includes the development of essential information assurances technologies and programs. For example, DOD’s information assurance policy establishes procedures to maintain the integrity of DOD information systems. It sets out a process security features and information technology system safeguards will maintain information assurance through the life cycle of a system. The process results in an agreement between the program manager, the intended user of the system being certified, and the approval authorities that defines critical schedule, budget, security, functionality, and performance issues. of information assurance software products, such as firewalls and intrusion detection systems, in accordance with National Security Telecommunications and Information Systems Security Policy No. 11. This policy requires the use of one of three nationally recognized evaluation and validation standards. However, these policies and standards do not include criteria to determine whether a product meets security requirements. This article was amended on November 14, 2013, to make clear that the standards used in this article were those of the U.S. Department of Homeland Security. Information Integration) established the position of Deputy Director for Software Assurance. As part of its function, the office is to coordinate software security efforts with other existing initiatives concerning software protection, antitamper technologies, and software producibility. In addition, since its inception, the Office has initiated working groups intended to focus on software security and security-related issues. The office is based in Washington, D.C. and has offices in New York, Washington, DC, and San Francisco. mitigating software risks and improving software security. To date, while these initiatives have presented top level findings and recommendations within DOD and in public forums, they have not externally published reports or obtained funding for implementing the recommendations. While we continue to believe that program managers and software assurance experts play a critical role in defining software security requirements, we do see the value of involving other DOD resources to provide coordinated evaluation of broader security concerns. As such, we modified our recommendation to reflect that DOD resources should be involved. with SEI for improved overall software management. DOD has also begun policy-level initiatives focused on better software management and on identifying and specifying software security processes and technologies. The Tri-Service Assessment Initiative began with SEI. DOD is also focusing on protecting systems and network capabilities from various internal and external threats. Specific initiatives include the following: The Pentagon’s “Software Security Initiative” and the “DOD Software Security Initiative.” The Pentagon is also working with SEi to identify and specify software security process and technologies to protect systems and networks. Aviation Administration Chief Information Office are co- sponsoring, with the involvement of the Department of Energy, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, and SEI, a project aimed at developing ways to provide safety and security assurance extensions to integrated software maturity models. DOD’s approach to software development and acquisition generally criteria for software intensive systems and the application of software product maturity measures. Another working group is tasked with developing a proposal for a centralized clearinghouse of software best practices, but DOD has not approved any proposals. on reworking software because of quality-related issues. Carnegie Mellon University’s Software Engineering Institute (SEI) has developed models and methods that define and determine organizations’ software process maturity. Better software development practices are seen as a way to reduce the cost of software development for organizations. SEI is recognized for its expertise in developing best practices for software processes. For more information on SEI, visit: www.sei.org. for more information about SEI’S best practices in software development. DOD estimates that it spends about 40 percent of its Research, Development, Test, and Evaluation budget on software. DOD and industry experience indicates that about $8 billion of that amount may be spent on software for fiscal year 2003. DOD spends about $21 billion on research, development, test, and evaluation for fiscalyear 2003. The amount is determined through the approval or denial of license requests. The budget is $21.5 billion for the year 2003, according to the DOD.