Bankers attributed the CRE downturn to market factors such as problems in residential real estate that affected the CRE market and the severity of the broader financial and economic crisis. Many noted that examiner actions were exacerbating it and a few stated banks needed to be given time to work through their troubled assets so they could continue to lend and support the economy. Other bankers stated that regulatory policies were the cause of theCRE downturn, although they did not state that.examiner actions on such downturns—as evidenced in studies of the downturn of the 1990s—was minimal. Interviews with officials from 43 banks in different parts of the country identified multiple concerns with examiner treatment of CRE loans and related issues. Many bank officials’ overarching concern was that examiners have been applying guidance more stringently than before the financial crisis. A few others also noted that stricter scrutiny was appropriate given the current CRE market situation and the severity of the economic downturn. There is limited research on the effect of examiner actions economic upturns or downturns, the authors say. The authors urge examiners to work with borrowers until the currentCRE downturn passes. real-time and post-ROE quality processes. Some of these reviews identified inconsistencies or other needed improvements related to examiner treatment of CRE loans. For certain FDIC regions, reviews found that examiners could have better documented findings on CRE concentrations or could have provided earlier or harsher criticism of CRE changed before the ROEs were finalized and were consistent with the bank’s internal loan ratings. According to this official, the findings from this quality process will be used to improve the accuracy of CRE loan classification. senior official reviews the sufficiency of support for downgraded CRE loans for all issued ROEs. Of 11 CRE loan downgrades reviewed in the third and fourth quarter of 2010, this official stated that 2 should not have been downgraded. This was in response to criticism that examiners were being too harsh and curtailing credit. This official said that 2 downgrades should have been reviewed for all ROEs, not just for CRE loans. It was the first time that this had been done. Examiners made statements in ROEs related to the quality of banks’ loan workouts that were consistent with the 2009 guidance on CRE loan workouts. Almost half of the ROEs in our sample that raise concerns related to CRE or did not follow the 2009 CRE loan workout guidance. In our sample, most ROEs (44 of 55 sampled) raise concerns about CRE concentrations and how they are managed. In more than half of those, the concerns are supported by risk-management deficiencies and explicitly cite the 2006 policy guidance. findings related to CRE loans. We interviewed bank and regulatory officials and analyzed ROEs. We spoke with community bank officials affiliated with 43 community banks in a number of states. Most of the bank officials with whom we spoke were located in California, Georgia, and Texas. We reviewed how examiners supported statements related to banks’ CRE loan workouts. We discussed concerns about CRE concentrations, and how examiner calculated CRE concentrations. We also looked at ROEs based on our nonprobability sample, as described above. trends in the CRE market, we interviewed regulatory and bank officials and reviewed reports of examination (ROE) from a sample of banks. Our sample selection for bank interviews and reviews of ROEs started with a data request to FDIC, the Federal Reserve, and OCC on bank examinations for banks with to include only banks that had an examination conducted after October 2009. From that subset, we placed banks into four “pools” with the goal of speaking with officials from, and reviewing ROEs for, a breadth. Examiners say the examples have helped to resolve differences of opinion with bankers on how to treat certain CRE- related loans. Bankers with whom we spoke stated that the examples were helpful in understanding how to apply the guidance. In addition to the.restructurings (TDR), among other issues, the examples helped resolve differences in opinion on. how to deal with CRE-related loans, the examiners said. For more information on the CRE exam, visit the CRE Examining Committee's website. Examiner concerns include that the bank management or its board could have better identified, monitored, or tracked problem loan workouts. Improvements to managing loan workouts that examiners cited include (1) reporting on current loan status and related developments, and (2) better monitoring of loan workouts for potential problems. The report was released on Wednesday, July 25. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org for details. 97 percent of respondents stated that the 2009 CRE loan workout guidance has been helpful. Nearly 88 percent of banks stated that no specific guidance was inhibiting them from working with troubled borrowers. An internal review by OCC’s Midsize and Community Banks Division came to a similar conclusion and noted that examiners have become more consistent in their CRE loan treatment through internal discussions, training, and policy communication efforts. The regulators issued statements on lending to creditworthy borrowers and creditworthy small business borrowers to encourage prudent lending among banks. Based on a review of a nonprobability sample of 55 bank examinations, examiners’ findings were consistent with CRE loan workout guidance. In some instances examiners did not clearly support requirements for reduced CRE concentrations and did not calculate, for example, on what is considered to be satisfactory stress testing. To understand banks’ concerns, we observed examiner training at FFIEC provided to commissioned examiners, to include a week-long training on CRE and a day- long training on regulatory updates related to policy guidance on CRE loans. offered multiple training opportunities or conference calls on the 2006 CRE concentration and the 2009 CRE loan workout guidance. Federal Reserve and FDIC headquarters staff visited field offices. All regulators hosted conference calls with examiners to better ensure that the field examiners bank interviewees. We interviewed more than 230 regulatory field staff at FDIC, throughout the Federal Reserve System, and at OCC—along with additional staff at these regulators’ headquarters. We sought views and information about recent practices on CRE-specific guidance related to loan workouts and concentrations. and reporting of TDRs. Based on this information, regulatory officials from FDIC, the Federal Reserve, and OCC believe that the 2009 CRE loan workout guidance has been helpful. Comments provided to regulatory officials during the examination process and through the formal appeals process provide information about banks’ concerns on ratings. We collected and analyzed interagency policy guidance to examiners related to CRE loan treatment and interagency statements on lending. We also assessed regulatory efforts to address CRE-related concerns. As OCC, we reviewed reports from all four of its districts related to the agency’s quality assurance process. review process, ALLL assessment guidance, examiner training sessions on the use of interest reserves and TDRs, and contributions to the 2009 loan workout guidance. The San Francisco Federal Reserve Bank implemented a “look back’ process in June 2010 in which a review of the bank’s history was carried out. The review was part of a larger effort by the Federal Reserve to improve the quality of its loan books. The bank is now in the process of revising the loan books for the next five years. capital requirements, and liquidity issues. The interviews were conducted at headquarters offices in Washington, D.C., and by telephone, video teleconference, and in person at district, regional, and field offices in California, Colorado, Georgia, Massachusetts, and Texas. We sought to determine if there were different views or practices related to CRE and other companies in the U.S. and to see if there was a need for change. We are happy to answer any questions you may have about CRE or other companies. loan treatment among regulatory roles or between those in headquarters and the field offices. We interviewed staff in a range of roles and locations. The staff with whom we spoke in field locations included field examiners, their supervisors, case managers, analysts (at OCC), and senior management. Examiners were interviewed in the UK and the U.S. for the report, which is published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Bank of England. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. Regulators have been incorporating lessons from the financial crisis in their supervisory practices. The recent financial crisis underscored how important it is for regulators to evenly apply guidance during strong economic periods. Consistent application of guidance is something regulators consider in their supervision of banks, according to regulatory officials with whom we spoke. We are happy to clarify that this was not always the case, as previously noted. We would also like to make it clear that we do not believe that the 2006 CRE guidance was improperly applied. (4) ensure that supervisory practices do not inadvertently curtail the availability of credit to sound borrowers. Officials told us that the guidance was not intended as forbearance, but to encourage prudent loan workouts. While the 2009 guidance was similar to that issued in 1991 and 1993, regulatory officials noted that it was not the same guidance as in 1991 or 1993. The guidance was issued in response to the financial crisis of 2007-2008 and the Great Recession of 2008-2009. It was issued by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. provided specific suggestions on how to improve policy guidance. But a few others felt that some form of general regulatory reprieve was needed. The report also suggested clarifying what amount of debt service coverage is acceptable in a loan workout, how best to conduct global cash flow analysis, and when new appraisals are needed. For more information, visit the U.S. Federal Reserve's website or the American Bankers Association's website. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here. examination workpapers sometimes lacked sufficient documentation to determine if the examiner adequately assessed compliance with the guidance. According to Federal Reserve officials, Washington staff also coordinated separate reviews related to implementation of the 2006 guidance. Internal clarifications of the appraisal stated that this could lead to changes in OCC or interagency guidance. At the Federal Reserve, senior officials believed that the existing 2006 guidance was largely sufficient, but noted that efforts to clarify expectations for stress testing and capital planning were ongoing. The examiners and senior officials with whom we spoke said they believed the existing guidance was mostly sufficient. Examiners exercise significant judgment during examinations. Different perceptions about the 2006 guidance among regulators could send mixed signals to examiners. Regulators have mixed views about the adequacy of the2006 guidance. Our findings generally found examiners’ actions were accurate or well-supported. But some inaccuracies and inconsistencies were evident, particularly relating to the 2006 Guidance. We found that the regulators’ processes to review and monitor application of examiner guidance and our review of ROEs identified learned from the crisis. from an analysis of ROEs were similar to those of the regulators’ internal reviews and assessments, which raised questions about the consistency of policy guidance application. Given these findings, and in light of lessons learned from the recent financial crisis and CRE market downturn, the regulators could reassess the adequacy of the ROEs, according to the report. The report was published by the European Commission and the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) on Tuesday, November 14. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. All of the regulators’ processes were used in some form to implement CRE guidance and ensure consistent treatment of CRE loans. Some of the internal review processes have identified inconsistencies in the application of CRE guidance. Some field offices also included these CRE topics in their own training and team meetings. Regulators’ internal reviews include comprehensive audits that recur periodically, and quality assurance processes to help promote consistency, including consistent application of the CRE guidance, the report says. The report concludes that the regulators were implementing it as intended. The regulators’ examination drafting and review process is iterative, with multiple levels of internal review. According to regulatory staff, this design helps ensure consistent application of guidance and treatment of banks. We reviewed the examination report review process at all of the regulators based on regulatory guidance and interviews with regulatory officials. We also collected, compared, and analyzed examination review reports and quality assurance processes for the three regulators to determine what processes were in place. The process and the staff involved vary slightly, but the goal is the same. they are appropriate. These roles help ensure consistent application of guidance among various examiners. In certain instances, the regulators’ headquarters. offices in Washington, D.C., may participate to help ensure. consistent implementation of policy guidance. Regulators also provide training on new guidance to help ensuring consistent application. All the agencies all the agencies are appropriate for these roles. They help ensure consistency in the application of policy and guidance. They also help ensure that all examiners are trained to follow new guidance. Inquiry Commission report notes areas in which regulators could have been more proactive in using regulatory tools to address certain risks in the financial system. A number of nonmanagement regulatory staff in the field offices we visited acknowledged they could have better followed up on outstanding issues. In response to the report, the US Treasury Department issued a statement saying it was committed to working with regulators to address the issues raised in the report. It said it was working with the Treasury Department on a number of issues, including a review of the report’s recommendations. internal reviews. FDIC’s Internal Control and Review Section conducted reports for the Atlanta, Dallas, New York, and San Francisco regions. For FDIC, we reviewed reports conducted by FDIC's Internal Control & Review Section. Because these regions covered the states in our nonprobability sample, we included them in our sample. For all three regulators, our review of ROEs uncovered instances of inconsistency place to identify and address inconsistencies among examiners, and what findings had resulted from these reviews. following three federal regulators. FDIC supervises all FDIC-insured state-chartered banks that are not members of the Federal Reserve System. The Federal Reserve supervises commercial banks. OCC supervises federally chartered national banks. To avoid overweighting the sample with OCC- supervised banks, we randomly removed some O CC-led bank examinations for which we had a sufficient number of cases: banks rated 2 in Texas. To to avoid overeating the sample, some banks were randomly removed from the sample. lessons learned, regulatory officials stated that they have been following up more often on matters requiring attention (MRA) and refocusing their supervisory efforts. For example, OCC’s Midsize and Community Banks Division issued an MRA Reference Guide that provides examiners with OCC policy guidance on how to report, follow up on, and report on MRA matters. The OCC has also issued a MRA reference guide for examiners that provides them with policy guidance. and keep records related to MRAs. FDIC in June 2009 also implemented its “Forward Looking Supervision’ program that re-emphasizes reviewing all aspects of a bank’s risks during the examination process. The program focuses on helping ensure that (1) CAMELS ratings reflect consideration of bank management practices without relying solely on bank management. practices. and (2) the ratings are based on a combination of factors, including the bank's overall risk profile, as well as the individual bank's risk profile. information on the study cited by FDIC. We are sending copies of this report to FDIC, the Federal Reserve, OCC, and other interested parties. The report also is available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staffs have any questions about this report, contact us at tips@gao.gov or call 1-800-282-8255. For confidential support on suicide matters call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. the Federal Reserve, and previous GAO reports. We also spoke with and reviewed speeches and public comments from officials at FDIC, the Federal Reserve,. and OCC. academics and a think tank official with expertise on bank examinations or CRE. To determine how the banking regulators responded to the crisis, we looked at public comments, speeches and speeches from the FDIC and Federal Reserve. We looked at speeches and comments from the OCC and FDIC as well as from academics and think tank officials. surveys to gather information on how to improve the examination process and understand the impact of policies on the banking industry. For example, the regulators issued an interagency survey for examinations conducted between May 31 and July 9, 2010. According to an FDIC analysis of the resulting data, more than more than 1 million people were examined in that period. For more information, visit the FDIC's website or go to www.dfic.gov/bankexaminations. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here. IGs. of the banking regulators completed 106 MLRs in 2009 and 2010 for banks that failed during the recent financial crisis. FDIC determined based on the MLRs that earlier supervisory action could have been taken to prevent the collapse of some of the largest banks in the U.S. During the financial crisis, the FDIC took action to prevent many of the biggest banks from going bankrupt. The FDIC also took action against some banks that had failed in the past, including those that failed in 2008 and 2009. The purpose of federal banking supervision is to help ensure that banks throughout the financial system are operating in a safe and sound manner. As we have identified in previous work, financial regulation more broadly is a problem for the U.S. banking system. We are happy to clarify that the role of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation is to ensure the safety and soundness of the nation's financial system. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. impact of bank supervision is difficult. The recent severe cycle of credit upswings followed by the downturn serves as a useful reminder of the supervisory balance needed to help ensure the safety and soundness of the banking system and support economic recovery. To improve supervision of CRE-related risks, we recommend improving the supervision of banks with CRE exposures. We recommend improving supervision of bank exposures with CRE exposure, as well as with non-CRE exposures, to improve the safety of the CRE system. We also recommend improving bank exposures to non- CRE exposures to CRE. The federal government standards for internal control state that managers should have controls in place to compare actual performance some inconsistencies. Monitoring and revising existing controls, such as guidance, is a key component of a strong internal control system. Regulators require banks to maintain certain minimum capital requirements to help ensure the safety and soundness of the banking industry. The U.S. Federal Reserve is the world’s largest bank by assets, with $1.2 trillion in assets and $2.1 trillion in liabilities. of money that can cover losses the bank may face related to nonpayment of loans and other losses on assets. Capital can be measured as total capital or tier 1 capital. Regulators oversee the capital adequacy of their regulated institutions through ongoing monitoring, including on-site examinations and off-site tools. When a bank is found to be over-capitalized, it can be fined up to $1.5 billion by the Federal Reserve. When the bank is under-capitalised, the Fed can fine the bank as much as $5 billion. has sought to achieve four goals: to (1) ensure adequate consumer protections, (2) ensure the integrity and fairness of markets, (3) monitor the safety and soundness of institutions, and (4) act to ensure the stability of the overall financial system. Federal banking regulators use a number of tools to achieve these goals. They include the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, and the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) and whether regulatory guidance has been applied consistently. According to bank and regulatory officials with whom we spoke, when bank officials have raised concerns, they tend to first approach the examination team. Bank officials also can contact the ombudsman offices at the regulators to seek confidential assistance. In addition to officials when warranted, although a few raised concerns about the time and expense of pursuing formal appeals. Regulatory officials told us that many bank officials regularly reach out to them, and a few officials also noted that they provide information to bank officials. Bankers have multiple options for raising concerns about regulatory actions. Regulators have been incorporating into their regulatory processes a number of lessons learned from the financial crisis. A few bank officials stated that the regulators should focus on the community banks that caused the problems, rather than subjecting all community banks to such strict scrutiny.these avenues, banks formally can appeal regulatory decisions. Some were cautious about raising issues because of potential repercussions from regulatory officials. In contrast, other bank officials said that they do contact regulatory a few times. was needed to address banks with high risk profiles or weak risk-management practices. We also found in past work that regulators identified a number of weaknesses in institutions’ risk- management systems before the financial crisis began but did not always take forceful actions to address them. In addition, the Financial Crisis led to the creation of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) to protect depositors from losses. The FDIC was created to protect against losses caused by the failure of financial institutions to meet their obligations to depositors. interviewed both in group settings and individually. Of the field staff we interviewed, about 200 were directly involved in drafting or reviewing ROEs. About 50 of the 200 were in senior management positions. We analyzed 55 ROEs, and found no evidence that ROEs had been misused or misused in the past. We also found that the ROEs were more likely to be misused if they were written by someone other than an examiners-in-charge (EIC) for the ROE. We found that this was the case for more than half of the cases. not review loan classification details, they review loan classified writeups in ROEs for accuracy and support for CAMELS ratings in a broad range of ROEs. According to Federal Reserve officials, case managers and senior management hold discussions with the examination teams as examination findings are being finalized, to ensure that that the findings are accurate and accurate. The Federal Reserve is the largest bank in the U.S., with $1.2 trillion in outstanding loans, according to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. data and interviews with agency officials. We further refined the sample so that we would have a breadth of banks for interviews and ROE reviews, based on the state in which they were located, their CAMELS composite rating, and their regulator. We also wanted to increase the likelihood that banks would be willing to talk to us about their problems and problems with their customers. We wanted to make sure that banks were willing to discuss their problems with us, and that we could help them solve them. The analyst function at OCC serves a similar role: reviewing many ROEs, although not assigned to a specific portfolio of banks. Case managers review draft ROEs for consistency and adequate support of findings for a portfolio of Banks. While case managers and senior management generally do the reviewing, the analyst function in particular helps ensure consistency. The analyst function is part of OCC's internal audit process, but is not part of the bank's external audit process. The bank's internal Audit Process is a joint venture between OCC and the U.S. Federal Reserve. contacting banks to interview. We simultaneously began requesting ROEs and some related workpapers from the federal banking regulators. In that process, we learned that FDIC and Federal Reserve data included ROEs led by the state banking regulator (because they share examination responsibilities with state examiners) We excluded these from the list of banks we wanted to interview, and we also excluded ROEs from our list of possible candidates for the position of chief executive officer of the FDIC or the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. charged off the bank’s balance sheet. The end result of an on-site examination is an ROE that includes the CAMELS ratings and other findings on the bank's condition. CRE encompasses many different property types that present different risks. For all examinations, a team of examiners will conduct on- site work, led by an examiner-in-charge (EIC), who drafts the ROE. Other staff and management also discuss findings with the examination team and review the examination report. Federal banking laws and regulatory guidance require on-site examinations. Examinations evaluate a bank’s overall risk exposure and its ability to identify and manage those risks. At each full-scope examination, examiners review the bank”s risk exposure on a number of components. The examiners then evaluate the bank's risk exposure based on those components and other factors. The full- scope examination can take up to two weeks to complete, depending on the bank and its location. For confidential support, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org. a bank’s financial condition; (2) examiners review risks associated with concentrations and wholesale funding sources; (3) appropriate capital is maintained; and (4), examiners follow up on progress related to MRAs and enforcement actions. Based on our analysis of a nonprobability sample of 55 ROEs, examiners’ findings were generally consistent with those of other banks in the U.S. based on a survey of more than 1,000 people across the country. on capital-related issues. JoAnna Berry provided assistance in identifying relevant research literature. Bill Cordrey, Jay Thomas, and Gary Chupka provided accounting assistance. Paul Thompson provided legal assistance. Marc Molino developed the report’s graphics. Barbara Roesmann provided editorial assistance. Jan Bauer, Kimberly Cutright, Andrea Dawson, Nathan Gottfried, Elizabeth Jimenez, Angela Messenger, contributed to the report. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. Lauren Nunnally, Michael Pahr, Ellen Ramachandran, Maria Soriano, Winnie Tsen, Gavin Ugale, and Carrie Watkins held various roles in verifying our findings. For more, visit CNN.com/soulmatestories, or follow us on Twitter @CNNSoulmatters and @CNNOpinion. For the latest from CNN iReport, visit the site here. For all the latest news from CNN, check out the news hub here. Lee, Analyst-in-Charge, managed this review. Emily Biskup and Jason Wildhagen also led portions of the research and made significant contributions throughout the report. Anna Maria Ortiz and Rudy Chatlos provided methodological assistance related to our nonprobability sample. Michael Hoffman provided assistance reviewing the methodologies of our research studies and assistance reviewing our research methodologies and data collection. Emily and Jason led the research for this report. Lee, Analyst in Charge, managed the review. GAO staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix VI. Contact points for our Offices of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of this report. To assess the condition of the GAO, please contact A. Nicole Clowers at (202) 512-8678 or clowersa@gao.gov. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. Assurance memorandum for the Atlanta, Kansas City, Philadelphia, and Richmond districts. We also discussed with Federal Reserve staff whether other similar studies existed. To determine and assess the factors that can affect banks’ lending decisions and their impact, we reviewed and summarized academic studies that included analysis of various factors. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S., call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. on bank lending. With assistance from a research librarian, we conducted searches of research databases and report sources. We also sought and reviewed studies cited by the American Bankers Association (ABA) and the British Bankers' Association (BBA) The study was published in the online edition of the Journal of the American Economic Association (JAEA) with an embargo of two years. For more information, visit the JAEA website or go to www.jaea.org. Independent Community Bankers of America (ICBA). All studies included published papers released between 1991 and 2010. Based on our selection criteria, we determined that six studies were sufficient for our purposes. Specifically, with the assistance of a senior economist, we analyzed the methodologies underlying these studies and determined that they were adequate for the purposes of this study. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. In the U.S., call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. and development, nonfarm nonresidential, and multifamily residential real estate) divided by the reported amount of total risk-based capital. We conducted similar analyses for commercial banks with assets more than $1 billion. We assessed the reliability of the call report data by reviewing the controls in place to help ensure its reliability. We concluded that the call data was reliable and that the bank's risk-management procedures were sound. We did not find any evidence that the banks' call data had been misused. We conducted an analysis of call report data downloaded from SNL Financial and held discussions with the federal banking regulators. We analyzed the following data points for commercial banks with assets of less than $1 billion. We also wanted to include states from different regions of the country. For more information, go to: http://www.nltimes.com/2013/01/28/business/top-10-banks-with-less-than-$1-billion-asset-list.html. on our nonprobability sample. We initiated contact with 62 banks drawn from this sample and interviewed all of the 21 bank officials who responded to us. We gained additional bank views by supplementing this sample. Specifically, we interviewed officials from 22 additional banks that either testified before Congress on the issue or either testified to Congress about the issue in the past. We interviewed all the bank officials from the 62 banks that responded to our sample and all the banks from the 22 other banks we interviewed. statement; “some” to refer to 11–25 of 43 banks making the statement; and “many’s”to refer to 26–43 banks making a statement. We do not provide specific numbers in the body of the report to avoid overstating the precision of the results from the nonprobability sample we used to select. The results are based on a survey of more than 1,000 banks in the U.S. and Europe. The survey was conducted by the Bank for International Settlements (BIS) and the World Bank. issue of CRE, were identified to us through bank associations, or had learned of our work and wanted to talk to us. When we summarize statements from our interviews with bank officials throughout this report, we use the term ‘a few’ to refer to 3–10 of 43 banks making the changes. We use the word ‘few’ when referring to a few of the 43 banks that made the changes, such as U.S. Bank, Bank of America, Citi and U.K. Bank. for community banks to work through the downturn. Bank officials we interviewed also stated that their experience with increased supervisory scrutiny was being reflected in CAMELS ratings and additional capital requirements. For example, many bank officials thought the management component rating was more critically assessed now, and heavily driven by the CAMELS rating. For more information, visit www.bbc.com/news/features/bbc-news-features/banking-and-finance/stories/2013/09/29/b banking-and finance-features-2013/story. asset quality and other component ratings. A few bank officials added that they were being rated on deterioration in their portfolios that was due to the broader economic downturn and problems in their geographic market that were out of their control. Some bank officials with whom we spoke stated that they had been downgraded to "junk" status by the U.S. Department of Treasury. The rating agency has not commented on the report's accuracy or whether the rating was downgraded on the basis of the report or other factors. of community banks from a range of states in our sample, from all three of the banking regulators. Pool 1 consisted of banks with good CAMELS composite ratings and high CRE concentrations. In this group, we included banks that generally were in good condition but also had ADC concentrations. Pool 2 criteria were a CAMELS rating of 2 and both a 300 percent or greater concentration in overall CRE and a 100 percent or more concentration in ADC loans to total capital. Pool 3 included banks with a CAMEL composite rating of 1. banks were intended to represent banks that were struggling and that had a higher number of loans classified as loss at the most recent examination. These had a CAMELS composite rating of 3, an overall CRE concentration of 300 percent or greater, and a proportion of loansclassified loss to banks. The banks had to be struggling and had to have a Composite Credit Rating System (CAS) of 3 or higher. They had to also have a percentage of loans that were classified loss to at least a quarter of the total. our sample. The resulting sample from this process is outlined below, broken down by regulator (table 5), state (table 6), and CAMELS ratings (table 7) OCC- supervised banks represent the greatest number of banks in our sample, in part because a number of the examinations in our Sample for the OCC were conducted by OCC supervised banks. We have also included a sample of state-run banks in the analysis. The results of the analysis are shown in the table below, which is broken down into state, regulator, and CAMEL ratings. total assets in the 75th percentile and above, for banks within our sample. This “loss ratio” was calculated by taking the total assets classified loss for the most recent examination and dividing them by total assets. Pool 4 was the most distressed pool of banks and consisted of banks with the lowest loss ratio in the sample. It was made up of banks that had a loss ratio of at least 50 per cent and had assets of $1.5 billion or more in the past 12 months. Changes in CAMEL ratings were not found to have a “consistent’ impact on future lending behavior. When there was an impact, the data show that it was minimal. The researchers also noted that, based on their research, banks may respond “asymmetrically” to changes in CAMel ratings. These studies suggest examiners’ actions can affect lending, albeit minimally. However, research suggests that regulators were more regulators.this impact was projected to be significantly less than 1 percentage point. of the CAMELS components and given a composite rating. The composite is not an average of the component ratings. The component rating and the composite ratings are scored on a scale of 1 (best) to 5 (worst). Regulatory actions CAMELS composite ratings of 4 or 5, a 300 percent or greater concentration in overall CRE in the 75th percentile or greater for the banks in our sample, and a loss ratio in the75th percentile of our sample. Once we selected these pools, we began. using what is known as the CAMELS rating system (Capital adequacy, Asset quality, Management, Earnings, Liquidity, and Sensitivity to market risk) Evaluations of CAMELS components consider the institution’s size and sophistication, the nature and complexity of its activities, and its risk profile. In examinations, a bank is rated for each typically correspond to the composite CAMELS ratings, with the actions generally increasing in severity as the ratings become worse. Table 2 describes the definitions of the composite scores under the Uniform Financial Institutions Rating System. Bankers and examiners say global cash flow analysis always has been part of reviewing the loan. Such a loan may be classified if identified weaknesses suggest a reduction in the borrower’s capacity to repay that in turn could lead to future nonpayment. Many bank officials conclude that examiners were classifying loans based either on collateral value or because the bank lacked updated financial statements. Regulatory field staff acknowledged that global cashflow analysis can be used to help determine whether a loan should be approved or not. loans, but in the current economic downturn examiners have been focusing more closely on analysis and documentation of borrowers’ and guarantors’ global cash flows. The purpose of such analysis is to determine whether they have sufficient income and liquid assets to support loan payments. In some cases, such analysis shows that some borrowers have more liquid assets than they appear to have in their bank accounts, the bank says. The bank says it has no plans to change the way it analyzes loan applications. that a borrower is unable to pay the loan, even if the borrower is currently paying. For example, the borrower’s income and other debt obligations, when reviewed as a whole, could show that the borrower's debt obligations exceed income. This raises questions about whether the borrower will continue paying on the loan. If the debt obligations are greater than income, the loan may not be able to be refinanced. If income exceeds income, it may be impossible to repay the loan if the loan is not repaid. loan. If the borrower lacks the ability to repay, the loan then could be considered “collateral dependent” Such loans are classified based on the value of the property, and tend to rely on values established in appraisals. According to some bank officials we interviewed, examiners have been more critical of such loans. If you or a family member are considering taking out a loan, contact the National Bank of Canada at 1-800-273-8255. For confidential support on suicide matters call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here. The loans initially were considered collateral dependent, but after closer review the official determined that the borrowers had some capacity to repay. The loans should have been classified but not yet charged off. In these two cases, the loan downgrades were reviewed and downgraded, the official said. The official was not immediately available to comment on whether the loans will be charged off in the future or if they will be classified as collateral dependent or classified as non-collateralized by the time the loans are repaid. loan workouts (8 of 20) specifically note concerns about the nature of banks’ loan workouts. For example, in these cases, loans were restructured and extended on unsustainable terms that either resulted in further asset quality deterioration, did not adequately assess the borrower’s ability to repay, or were not adequately assessed. The report was published by the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) and the Bank for International Settlements (BIS) in New York, London, Paris and Madrid. a few bankers commented was a difficult adjustment. Some bank officials expressed concerns with examiner- required loan classifications. A loan is performing when the borrower continues to pay and should not be classified. However, according to regulatory guidance difficult to conduct because borrowers sometimes do not provide banks with updated financial statements. But regulatory officials told us that examiners do not classify loans solely because of a lack of financial statements, but a Lack of such statements combined with other weaknesses could provide sufficient support for classifying a loan. Bank examiners have been asking bankers to place more loans on nonaccrual, officials say. Classified loans mean the bank cannot accrue the interest income as earnings. Some bankers put loans onnonaccruals themselves, the officials say, but not as many as they'd like. The bank says it has no plans to change its loan classification policy in the near future. The U.S. Bankruptcy Court is set to rule on the matter in the next few months. determine the adequacy of credit risk administration and identify loans that show undue risk and may be uncollectible. As part of this review, examiners determine which loans are considered “pass,” with no concerns noted, as well as those that are special mentioned or “classified”—that is, subject to criticism because they are subject to special scrutiny. The U.S. Federal Reserve is the world’s largest lender of home loans, with $1.2 trillion in outstanding loans. were downgraded and 2 percent were upgraded. The western district’s quality assurance process concluded that 4 percent of risk ratings were incorrect. The district concluded that the vast majority of examiner loan classifications were accurate but recommended more training to address the discrepancies. Regulators also use other tools to monitor the accuracy of loan ratings and other loan-related data. For confidential support, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. recent appraisals. Classifications are a major concern for banks primarily because they can result in reduced earnings. For example, an examiner may determine that an institution's CRE collateral may be impaired. Bank officials have been criticizing the banks’ appraisal review process, and criticizing the appra isals themselves. The banks have been criticized for requiring appraisal on CRE collateral more often, and criticize the banks' appraisal reviewprocess, and criticism of the appraisALS themselves. For. example, these officials stated that examiners have been requiring appraisal on. CRE collateral. more often. are not performing or may not perform in the future. There are three classification categories used by the federal banking regulators: substandard, doubtful, and loss. These loan classifications, and the internal ratings that banks produce for all of their loans, are incorporated into how each bank calculates each loan's value. The U.S. Federal Reserve is the largest bank regulator in the world, with a market share of more than 80% of the global banking market. The Federal Reserve has the power to fine banks up to $1.5 billion for failing to meet certain standards. a bank’s ability to lend. Figure 6 illustrates relationships between loan losses, bank balance sheets, and capital requirements under certain assumptions. In this simplified example, the bank begins with $1,000 in assets ($1,010 in loans and $10 in ALLL), $900 in liabilities, and $100 in capital, which equates to a $100 capital, or $100,000. The bank has $1.1 billion in assets, $900 billion liabilities, $100 billion in capital. charged to the bank’s expenses, reduce income, and therefore reduce retained earnings that are included as part of total capital. As a result, the capital ratio falls to 8.2 percent. If the bank identifies as uncollectible and charges off a $20 loan that it holds as an asset, given the given circumstances, the bank's capital ratio could fall to just 8.1 percent. The bank could also be forced to sell off some of its assets to pay off the debt. total capital ratio of 10 percent (calculated by dividing total capital by total assets). In this example the bank has analyzed the collectibility of its loans and decided to add $20 to its ALLL in anticipation of loan losses. Provisions for these losses increase the ALLL, which in turn are decides to—or is required to—meet a 10 percent capital ratio. If the bank cannot raise additional capital because it is in poor financial condition, it would need to seek it from the bank’s owners or from investors. assumptions in the example, the bank’s total loans and ALLL would each decline by $20 with no change in capital. If the bank conducts another analysis of its loan collectibility and decides to add to its ALLL, then its capital would be further reduced. For this example, if the bank does not make any changes in its capital, its total loans will decline by just $20. For the bank to make any additional changes in capital, it would need to increase its capital by at least $10. Bank officials are concerned that examiners have been misapplying the from certified public accountants. Some bankers noted that some examiners want ALLL increased based on their peers’ ALLL rather than the bank’s individual situation. Increases in capital requirements or the allowance for loan and lease loss (ALLL) can affect lending. To obtain information on how examiner practices may affect lending, we interviewed bankers, examiners, and regulatory officials. We also interviewed officials from ABA, the Conference of State Bank Supervisors, and ICBA. its allowance for loan and lease loss (ALLL), which is an estimate made according to accounting guidance of incurred losses on loans and leases. If additional loans are classified substandard or doubtful, this information is included in a bank’s updated ALLL estimates. If loans areclassified loss, they are also can reduce earnings because they factor into ALLL, which a bank estimates based on accounting guidance from the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) As more loans are classify, more is generally reserved in ALLL to anticipate future losses. Discussions about the procyclicality of regulation have been a central feature of recent deliberations on revised capital requirements among U.S. banking regulators. The discussions have been seeking to address the pro cyclical effects developed standards that will be implemented gradually so that banks make the shift to higher capital and liquidity standards while “supporting lending to the economy” Federal bank regulators also have acknowledged the importance of addressing procyclicalsity in regulatory requirements and have made efforts in this regard. For example, the Chairman of the Federal Reserve has stated the importance. of regulators acknowledging the significance of pro Cyclicality. Regulatory efforts to better ensure that guidance is applied consistently during strong and weak economic periods helps to ensure that regulatory policies do not exacerbate. The procyclical effects of regulation may not adequately discourage overly risky behavior during economic upswings or may inhibit bank lending during downturns. Consistent and balanced application of policy guidance in strong andweak economic times is important to avoiding unnecessary pro cyclical effects. The U.S. and abroad have been attempting to address the procyclicals effects of their actions. stringent during the past credit crunch, even holding financial conditions constant. Therefore, regulators should be aware of how their actions can affect broader credit markets, and help ensure that their actions do not contribute to unnecessary procyclical effects. In the aftermath of the credit crisis, the U.S. Federal Reserve raised interest rates to a record-high of 7.5 per cent. The European Central Bank also raised its benchmark interest rate to 7.7 per cent, the highest level since the start of the crisis. The Basel Committee released the framework for Basel III in December 2010. It includes increased and higher-quality capital requirements, enhanced risk coverage, and steps to encourage the “build up” of capital. The Basel committee has established procedures to help ensure the consistent global application of this framework. It has also introduced two global liquidity standards to help with the development of the global capital market for the banking sector in the future. The framework is expected to be in place by the end of 2014. to mark-to-market accounting for assessing asset values in inactive markets. More recently, in May 2010, FASB released a proposed Accounting Standards Update, which encompassed proposals on the impairment of financial assets and suggested implementing a more forward-looking impairment model. Based on exposure draft comments, in January 2011 FasB proposed with mark-To-Market accounting for assessment of asset value in inactive market. The proposal was later approved by the FASB in May 2011 and is now in the process of being implemented. the International Accounting Standards Board a common solution on how to account for the impairment of financial assets and presented the document for public comment. Efforts such as these seek to address procyclicality concerns related to capital and accounting requirements, as well as the potential pro cyclical effects of examiners’ application of policy. The document was presented to the public for comment on May 2. It is available for download on the IASB’s website at: http://www.iasb.org.uk/news/press-releases/2013/05/02/13/14/13-14-13-13/financial-asset-impairment.html. Opinion Survey have suggested that new CRE borrowers have faced tighter credit conditions. Banks tightening their underwriting standards in response to the downturn. Trend of tighter credit standards suggests that borrowers who previously were considered creditworthy might not meet banks’ higher standards. The regulators have been aware for some time of the risk-management challenges related to growing CRE banks. The January 2011 survey found that 10.6 percent of respondents reported easing credit standards over the previous 3 months, compared to 10.5 percent who reported tightening them. Researchers found modest support for the hypothesis that increased regulatory ‘toughness’ occurred and that this affected bank lending. During the credit crunch they studied, the data show no more than 1 percent additional loans receiving classification or worsening of classification status. The authors say the effects of tougher regulations on bank lending are minimal. The data provided what the authors call modest support. for all three hypotheses that: (1) toughness increased during the creditCrunch from 1989 through 1992, (2) it declined during the boom from 1993 through 1998, and (3) differences in toughness affected bank lend. also reviewed the economic significance of changes in regulatory “toughness’ and found that growth in the number of classified assets by 1 percent would be predicted to decrease the ratio of real estate loans to gross total assets by less than 1 percentage point over the long term. The study was published in the Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics on November 14, 2013. It was published by the American Institute for Real Estate Research and Education, a division of the American Bankers Association (AIBER). satisfy capital requirements. Banks with capital bases that have been negatively affected by losses in their CRE portfolios may need to reduce lending to maintain an adequate capital-to-assets ratio. To further demonstrate how loan losses, allowance for loan and lease losses, and capital requirements can affect lending, we developed an illustrative example of how Loan losses affect capital ratios on a bank’s balance sheet, with assistance from the IMF. Although limited research exists of CRE and its effect on bank lending in the current financial crisis. a banking collapse. As our report notes, additional capital provides an important cushion against losses, though this comes at a cost. From our review of the literature, there is disagreement on the magnitude of such costs on lending. We added information to the report to clarify this issue, which includes the issue of how much capital is needed to prevent a banking collapse in the first place, and how much is required to prevent losses in the second and third quarters of the year. We are happy to provide more information on this issue. Banks in better financial condition may be able to respond differently in the face of loan losses. They may be. able to continue lending without raising additional capital or can rely on their stronger financial position to. secure new capital.“shrinking the balance sheet” is a common way to describe a bank’s strategy of reducing its balance sheet, but it is not always the best way to respond to a loan loss, according to the Bank for International Settlements (BIS) Regulators require banks to maintain certain minimum capital requirements to help ensure the safety and soundness of the banking system. These requirements may result from an enforcement action through an agreement between the regulator and the bank. However, requiring banks to hold more capital may reduce the availability of bank credit and reduce returns on equity to shareholders.these goals. Capital provides an important cushion against losses for banks, and represents the amount regulators require banks. to hold capital above regulatory minimums, these requirements may. result in enforcement action.  increases in capital requirements can raise the cost of providing loans. This would lead to higher interest rates for borrowers, tighter credit terms, or reduced lending. While capital provides an important cushion against losses for banks, there is a trade-off between building up this cushion to provide greater more stringent requirements during times when it is more difficult to do so. For instance, if regulators increase capital requirements at the same time that losses from an economic downturn decrease banks’ capital, banks may be less able to lend while they seek to rapidly raise additional capital. Many factors can affect a bank’s decision to lend, including regulatory requirements. But if such requirements are too stringent, they can unduly limit lending. Such limits on lending can have widespread effects on the economy, as acknowledged in Basel Committee for Banking Supervision discussions on capital requirements. Although isolating the problem is difficult, the Basel committee has taken steps to try and address the problem in the past. For more information, visit www.bankingsupervision.org. Holding more capital against each loan means less equity is available to return to shareholders or back new loans. Empirical literature generally supports this basic understanding of the impact of bank capital requirements on lending. For example, researchers found in one study that bank capital requirement substantially affected bank loan growth during the last economic downturn. They noted that those banks with “low or no profits and an low lending rate’ were more likely to be in trouble in the past and in the future. The study was published in the journal Banking and Finance. inability to obtain new capital at reasonable rates” decreased their assets and liabilities to meet the higher capital-to-asset ratios required by regulatory enforcement actions. Using the “capital crunch hypothesis,” the researchers found that institutions with lower capital ratios had slower loan growth (or loans shrank more rapidly) to try to meet regulatory requirements. The study was published in the Journal of the American Bankers and published by the American Institute of Actuaries, a trade group. of capital should be required at certain concentration levels. Some examiners did not think that limits were the answer, but others thought that there might be some level of concentration that was too high even when managed well. A market downturn would expose banks to significant losses. In addition, some examiners thought that some concentration levels could be too high in the event of a downturn, even if the banks were well managed. The report was published by the European Securities and Markets Authority (ESMA) on Tuesday. that the Chairman of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Chairman. of the Board of Governors, and the Comptroller of the Currency: Enhance and either re-issue or supplement interagency CRE concentration guidance. The Federal Reserve stated that it intends to work with its counterparts at the OCC and FDIC to develop and implement enhancements to CRE concentrations guidance. In its written comments, the O CC agreed with our written comments and said it would work with FDIC and Fed to improve the guidance. Concentrations, and the regional office could have better monitored CRE concentrations among the banks it supervised. A number of field examiners from all the agencies stated they did not have the tools to proactively address growing CRE concentrations when the economy was strong. FDIC stated that it has already supplemented the 2006 CRE concentrations and risk-management guidance. We continue to believe that our recommendations on enhanced or clarified CRE concentration guidance—on an interagency basis that involves the FDIC—would help bankers. review and comment. All of the agencies provided written comments that we have reprinted in appendixes III, IV, and V, respectively. The agencies also provided technical comments, which we considered and have incorporated as appropriate. In written comments, the Federal Reserve welcomed our recommendations to improve CRE concentrations guidance to the agency. We are happy to share these comments with the agencies. We hope to see them in the next few months as the agencies consider our recommendations and make a final decision on how to implement them. 2006 guidance states that the CRE and ADC concentration levels are not limits, but some bank officials told us that examiners have been interpreting them that way. A few bank officials also stated that some examiners were including owner-occupied CRE and some were using the wrong type of capital for the calculation, which inflated the concentration levels. Some bankers said examiners told them they exceeded the 300 percent concentration threshold for CRE, based on these faulty calculations, but according to the calculations in the guidance they actually were under the threshold. OCC has been reviewing whether particular capital requirements should be set for banks that have higher CRE concentrations and limits. OCC has also been reviewing how the CRE concentrations should be calculated, and whether specific amounts of additional capital should be required for banks with elevated CRE concentrations. FDIC provided clarification on CRE risk management in March 2008 that could contribute to interagency action on CRE guidance. But this guidance does not address all and examiners better understand how to comply with CRE risk Management requirements. FD IC also cited a study by the Bank for International Settlements that concluded the social benefits of higher bank capital requirements outweigh the large reductions in economic activity from CRE concentration risks. spoke agreed that determining certain limits on CRE concentrations, or requiring specific amounts of additional capital for certain levels of CRE concentrations would be difficult and require significant study. Federal Reserve officials also noted that limits or specific capital requirements would require studies on the potential effect on credit availability. Spokespeople agreed that. determining certain Limits on CRE. concentrations, would be. difficult and would require significant. study. Spoke agreed. that. requiring specific Amounts of Additional Capital for certain Levels of CRE. Concentrations, would require study. examiners have been more aggressive about requiring additional capital. Some bankers thought the additional scrutiny was appropriate, but should not necessarily be focused on all banks. One some thought that a focus on additional capital would be sensible given the severe capital shortfalls some banks with CRE concentrations faced during the financial crisis. Senior regulatory officials with whom we spoke had differing views on whether the 2006 guidance was sufficient for examiners to address the buildup in CRE concentrations. We are happy to share our views with you. agencies reviewed CRE concentrations and risk-management systems across banks. OCC noted that community banks’ increased CRE concentrations exposes them to CRE market declines. The regulators issued draft guidance in January 2006 on CRE concentrations, risk management, based in part on the conclusions and recommendations. The OCC also stated that it would discuss with community banks on how to manage CRE concentrations when the market is down, as well as when the CRE market is up, as a result of the decline in CRE market activity. of CRE to total capital above 300 percent, the concentration threshold established in the 2006 interagency guidance on CRE. This means that nearly a third of community banks are exposing three times their total capital to risks related to their CRE capital adequacy. Such thresholds are not intended to be a “safe harbor’ and banks with lower concentrations may still receive scrutiny of their CRE loans in examinations. In October 2009, after the start of the financial crisis, banks that exhibit other risk factors can receive criticisms on their CRE concentrations. The reports concluded that the guidance could have clarified expectations for how examiners should review banks’ compliance with CRE-related risk-management practices. The reviews found that assesses in detail the bank’s compliance with it. If banks are closely assessed on their compliance with the 2006 CRE guidance, although they have not reached the CRE and ADC thresholds, bank officials could be unclear on what the trigger is for compliance. One case in the reports found that a common, mandatory process would have resulted in better documentation and consistency. The regulators began to address CRE concerns before the financial crisis. Senior regulatory officials and examiners have differing views on the adequacy of the 2006 guidance. Revising or supplementing the guidance to provide more details about risk- management practices would help both examiners and bankers better understand how to assess and manage such concentrations. In addition, incorporating CRE-specific analyses into the scope of internal and quality assurance reviews will help ensure consistent application of the guidance and produce clearly articulated support in examination reports for requiring reduced concentrations.  CRE concentrations at community banks and have taken steps to address these challenges. The regulators, for example, issued guidance to banks on managing CRE concentration risks. A number of examiners also admitted that during strong economic times they could have been more assertive in asking banks to implement risk-management changes related to CRE concentrations. After issuing revised or supplemental CRE concentration guidance, incorporate steps in existing review and review procedures, according to the report’s authors. The findings include concerns on the banks’ need to update or enhance internal policies on CRE concentration limits. guidance is important to avoid unduly hampering credit provision throughout the economy. CRE still is working through a downturn sparked by the broader financial crisis, presenting an ongoing challenge to community banks and regulators. Community banks have been working through the challenges associated with many years of past growth while community banks work through these difficulties. Prior to the financial crisis,. regulators’ efforts included guidance on CRE concentrations and risk management, but these efforts were not as robust as they could have been in addressing CRE risks. Bankers remain concerned that regulators have become more stringent in reviewing CRE loans since the crisis. Consistent treatment also will make clear to banks what regulatory expectations are for managing CRE concentration risks. Given the key role community banks play in business lending, bank regulators are aware of the potential effects of their actions in exacerbating the credit cycle, the authors say. The authors say no regulator was immune from consistency issues in the treatment of CRE loans and application of the 2006 CRE guidance—demonstrating that no regulator is immune from inconsistency issues. trends they had observed in CRE concentrations and risks. The draft guidance elicited considerable feedback from bank representatives, many of whom stated it would curtail their CRE lending. The regulators revised the guidance based on the feedback received. Issued in final form in December 2006, the interagency guidance provides levels of CRE concentrations that will result in additional regulatory attention on risk-management systems. (1) 300 percent of CRE loans to total capital, (2) increases of 50 percent or more in CRE loans. it includes updates for changes in accounting (for example, related to ALLL), information on risk management for CRE loan workouts, and numerous examples to assist banks and examiners in interpreting the guidance. The examples provide scenarios for different CRE loan classification outcomes and whether loans should be considered troubled debt. It also includes information on how to manage the risk of a CRE loan workout, and how to deal with the potential loss of a borrower's equity. The guidance is available in English, Spanish, French and German. In 7 instances (of 44), the ROE includes statements that the bank must reduce its CRE concentrations. The basis for this requirement was unclear or appeared particular. The ROE requires a bank with a CRE concentration of about 600 percent of tier 1 capital to address a matter requiring immediate attention to improve stress testing for its CRE portfolio. The bank was in compliance with the 2006 CRE guidance, which requires robust stress testing when banks reach certain levels of CRE. It is unclear whether the bank had the appropriate risk-management systems in place. inconsistent with the 2006 CRE concentration guidance. In two other instances the ROEs state that the bank must reduce its CRE concentrations. However, the enforcement actions for these banks did not require reduced CRE concentrations and emphasized improvements to risk management. Differences in message between an ROE and an enforcement action could be confusing to bank boards and management as they seek to comply with regulatory requirements for risk management related to CRE concentrations, the authors say. They say confusion could lead bank officials to misunderstand whether they should focus on improving their risk-management systems or just reduce their total CRE concentration numbers. complying with the guidance. Some ROEs appear to include owner-occupied CRE as part of the CRE concentration calculation. 23 of these 47 ROEs include CRE concentrations calculated by using some combination of tier 1 capital. Another 24 ROEs specify using either total risk-based capital or equity capital, which is consistent with the 2006 guidance. The effect of calculating these concentrations differently can be to increase the total CRE concentration number, which can be a negative for a company's risk profile in the long run. increases the scrutiny placed on the banks’ risk- management systems. While FDIC clarified to its examiners in April 2010 how to calculate CRE concentrations, other regulators have not done so. Senior officials and field examiners have differing views on whether the 2006 CRE guidance is sufficient in addressing CRE concentration risks. We interviewed about 200 field staff associated with the FDIC, FDIC-insured banks and other financial institutions in the U.S. and Europe. The study was published in the Journal of Banking and Finance. Noncurrent CRE loans at community banks increased from 2.2 to 5.3 percent. CRE loan charge-offs increased from 0.19 to 1.34 percent from 2007 to 2010. The average charge off rate of CRE loans from 2000 through 2010 was 0.39 percent. We assessed changes in the rate of non Current CRE loans and CRE loan charges-offs over time. We also calculated average CRE concentration rates at community Banks from 1996 through 2010 by taking the aggregate reported total of loans secured by CRE. the CMBS market as well. By January 2011, the delinquency rate on loans included in CMBS was at a record high, above 9 percent. As we have reported, overall CMBS issuance slowed severely since the CRE downturn started. After peaking in 2007, theCMBS market came to a complete halt. The delinquency rates on CMBS loans are now at an all-time high of more than 9 percent, according to a report by the Bank of America/Merrill Lynch. FDIC for banks with assets of less than $1 billion to assess CRE loan concentrations. By including owner-occupied loans, we would ensure the largest possible pool of banks. We would also identify concerns that such banks might have about regulatory treatment of their CRE loans. For banks with a CRE concentration above 300 percent of CRE loans (including owner- occupied) to total capital, this would be Pool 2. For those with a concentration of 1 or 2, this pool would be called Pool 1. during the prior 36 months, and (3) 100 percent of CLD (or ADC) loans to total capital. In determining the concentration ratio, owner-occupied CRE is removed. The guidance also states that the concentration numbers are not limits, but rather indicate when banks will receive closer scrutiny of risk-management systems and risk-control systems. It is not clear when the new rules will be implemented in the U.S. and if they will take effect in the United Kingdom and other countries. The increased exposure of community banks to CRE loans has been pronounced over the last 10–15 years. While CRE collateral backed about 30 percent of total loans and leases at community banks in 2000, a decade later that rate increased to more than 43 percent. Community banks also have come to hold large concentrations of CRE loans in comparison to their total capital. Increased exposure to CRE has made community banks vulnerable to the decline of this market. The current economic environment and the expectation of higher loan delinquencies and charge-offs remain historically high. As of December 31, 2010, there were 6,364 community banks (commercial banks with total assets of $1 billion or less) This represents about 92 percent of all commercial banks, although only about 10 percent of commercial bank assets nationwide. Banks in the United States are supervised by one of the four major U.S. banking regulator groups: the Federal Reserve, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the National Association of Banks, and the Bankruptcy and Real Estate Deposit Insurance Association (B Deposit Institute). CRE debt maturing in 2011 is “underwater’—meaning the value of the loan exceeds the value. of the underlying collateral. Due to price declines and stricter bank underwriting standards compared to when these loans were originated, those mortgages will be difficult to refinance. Results from the Federal Reserve’s Senior Loan Officer be up for refinancing and what percentage of CRE loans were ‘underwater' We analyzed data on CRE loan volume by maturity schedule and underlying collateral value provided by Trepp. bank could work with the borrower to restructure the loan and avoid default. Trepp LLC, a commercial mortgage analysis firm, estimates that about $1.7 trillion in CRE mortgages will mature between 2011 and 2015. About half of that is held at banks, Trepp estimates, with 60 percent of that held by banks. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. problem of CRE loan refinancing may exacerbate the negative CRE trends and limit lending to small businesses. CRE loans usually are written for 3–10 years, with a 20–30 year amortization schedule and a balloon payment at the end. Instead of making the large balloon payment, the borrower typically will sell the property to pay off the debt. The CRE loan market is expected to continue to be negative for small businesses for the next few years, according to a report by the Bank of America Merrill Lynch. Georgia, Massachusetts, and Texas are among the states with the highest share of CRE-related nonperforming loans. The banks in the first two states have had a relatively greater share of such loans, and the latter two states a relatively smaller share. The percentage of CRE loans past due or in danger of default is measured by the percentage of the loans that are in nonperforming status or in default. The total number of nonperforming CRE loans in the U.S. is estimated to be more than $1.2 trillion. banks in each of the 50 states in relation to these measures and total assets in CRE loan categories, and arrived at our four states. We reviewed SNL data reliability and determined that it was sufficient for the purposes of selecting states for our sample. We further refined the sample to arrive at the four states in the table below. The four states are New Hampshire, New Jersey, Rhode Island and Vermont. The total number of states is 50, with New Hampshire being the most populous, followed by New Jersey and Rhode Island. on their data quality processes. We determined that the data was sufficiently reliable for purposes of determining when CRE loans were maturing and how many were underwater. To understand how the condition of the CRE market has affected community banks, we analyzed call report data from the Federal Deposit Insurance Agency. Reports by the inspectors general of the federal banking regulators provided additional information on the effect of CRE loans on community banks. We found that these reports were sufficient for the purpose of determining trends in CRE loan concentrations and performance at community Banks. assessed their reliability for the purposes of providing a picture of the trends in CRE prices. We determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purpose of determining price trends. To determine when CRE loans would assets of less than $1 billion with data elements that included the value of their CRE loans, recent CAMELS ratings, total risk-based capital, recent enforcement actions, and other information. Based on prior use of these data elements, we selected a sample of CRE loans based on their value. the economy during this crisis at a “significantly slower rate’ than banks that did not have high CRE exposure. The higher the bank’s CRE concentration prior to the crisis, the more its non-CRE lending slowed during the crisis. The authors hypothesize that the rise in CRE lending and the substantially increased delinquencies on these loans “could have inhibited banks’ willingness or ability to lend to other segments of the economy.” The reasons for the contraction of non- CRE lending during the Crisis are being examined. on the impact of CRE loan concentrations on a bank’s ability to lend, an existing study shows that high CRE concentrations can limit loan growth during economic downturns. The authors also cite the possibility that high-CRE banks may have failed at a greater rate than banks without that level of CRE exposure. Our assessment of existing studies and interviews with bank officials found that market factors tend to drive CRE downturns and suggests that the regulatory effect of CRE may not be as strong as previously thought. Large banks and other financial institutions increased their market share for consumer loans, credit cards, and residential mortgages. As a result, community banks shifted their focus to CRE lending. Because CRE can be used as collateral for small business loans, diminished CRE values also can negatively affect credit availability to small businesses. When the value of collateral declines, that refinancing of CRE loans will bring a new round of market stress suggest many community banks may face these challenges for some time. And, because community banks tend to provide a greater proportion of their loans to small business, the availability of credit to small firms could be constrained. South, Midwest, and West have experienced greater stress and deterioration than the East. These areas have also experienced more bank failures. Community banks increasingly have moved toward providing CRE loans more than other kinds of loan products, in part because of the CRE market. The FDIC data is based on data from the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, as well as state and local banks and insurance companies. For more information, visit the FDIC's website at www.FDIC.gov. many other MLRs we reviewed—states that the rapid growth of its CRE portfolio “increased the institution’s exposure to a sustained downturn in the real estate market” CRE market value declines could reduce overall small business lending by community banks. We reviewed all 106 of the material loss reviews (MLR) issued by the offices of the inspectors general of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (Federal Reserve), FDIC, and U.S. Department of the Treasury (for the Office of the Comptroller findings of their independent review of the MLRs) increase in noncurrent CRE loans have put stress on banks’ capital and ALLL. Many bank failures are associated with high CRE and ADC concentrations. In 2009 and 2010, 102 of 106 of the MLRs issued by the IGs of the banking regulators cited high CRE concentrations, and 92 of 106 specifically cited ADC loans in particular as a contributing factor in bank failures. In the 106 MLRs, 76 of the banks reviewed were community banks. For example, the MLR for one failed bank contains findings similar to of the Currency, or OCC. alterations on existing properties. Multifamily: loans for residential properties with five or more dwelling units, such as apartment buildings. Nonfarm nonresidential: loans secured by real estate for business and industrial properties, as well as properties such as hotels, churches, hospitals, schools, and charitable organizations. This category includes offices, retail, and other non-farm non-residentship-related properties. The U.S. Federal Reserve is the world's largest lender of short-term loans. than or equal to $1 billion: (1) loans and leases for construction and land development, multifamily, owner-occupied real estate, other property, and nonfarm nonresidential; (2) loans 90 days past due for each of these categories; and (3) loans in nonaccrual status. We reviewed these commercial loans to see if they were eligible for loan forgiveness. We found that they were not, and that they had to be refinanced or written off. Construction and land development (CLD) loans generally are considered to be the riskiest class of CRE. CLD loans can include properties (such as housing developments or retail space in a shopping mall) that are built before having firm volatility. These loans are more risky than loans secured by properties such as multifamily housing and other nonfarm, nonresidential commercial properties. This includes new construction, as well as additions and additions to existing properties. The loans are secured by real estate to finance land development and construction. Regulators define CRE loans to include construction loans, loans to finance CRE that are not secured by CRE, and loans secured by multifamily property. CRE loans in which the primary source of repayment is not the property itself are called owner-occupied loans and can include loans to businesses for working capital purposes that use real estate as collateral. The key CRE property types include nonfarm, nonresidential property in which rental income derives from the property or proceeds of the sale, refinancing, or permanent financing of the property. warehouse space. Loans to finance CRE, construction, and land development (not secured by CRE). Interagency guidance issued in 2006 on concentrations in CRE and sound risk-management practices define CRE loans within these categories to include those in which repayment is dependent on the cash flow generated from the real estate. CRE loans to finance real estate that is not secured by real estate are not included in the definition of CRE loans in the 2006 guidance. These loans are not considered to be CRE loans. For example, a line of credit for a business’s operating expenses might be secured in part by commercial property, such as an office. Owner-occupied properties generally are considered to carry less risk than non-owner- occupied properties. Regulators consider them to be less sensitive to the condition of the CRE market. For confidential support call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org. For support in the UK, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch or click here. When evaluating concentrations in CRE, examiners are instructed not to include owner-occupied properties in which the income or value of the property is not the primary source of repayment. CRE as an asset class, and especially properties in the ADC category, is prone to volatility and cyclical behavior, as illustrated in the chart below. It's important to be aware of the cyclical nature of the CRE market, as well as the risks associated with it, and be prepared to adapt to changes in the market. is by nature diverse and localized. For example, shopping centers are one type of CRE, but even within this category properties can have significant differences depending on design, types of tenants, and other factors that can affect their value. Because of these factors, the supply of CRE in the marketplace is very limited. The market for CRE is very competitive and there are many different types of CRE that can be found in the U.S. and around the world. For more information on CRE, go to www.realtor.com. weakness in the ADC sector during this crisis was primarily due to residential housing construction. That weakness affected the performance of other areas of CRE (for example, failed residential housing developments will affect the ability of nearby strip malls to attract and generate rental income from tenants) The recent downturn in the CRE sector has been the worst since the financial crisis of 2007-2008. The recent recovery has been more modest, with CRE's performance more stable than it was in the past few years. The CRE sector's performance has also been the best in years. Small businesses that are looking to refinance a loan against a property that has lost a significant amount of market value may have to put up more equity. Alternatively, such borrowers might default on the loan, or the property or refinance the loan at the end of the term. For more information on how to get a mortgage, visit www.cnn.com/mortgage or call the National Mortgage Advice Service (NMA) on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local NMA branch. or chooses not to because the cost of capital is prohibitive, then it could, among other options, reduce its assets (perhaps by selling assets such as other real estate owned) to decrease liabilities or by paying off borrowings to increase the capital ratio. Reducing assets is often referred to as "selling assets" or "selling real estate" to reduce liabilities and increase capital. The company could sell assets to reduce its liabilities or sell real estate to decrease its liabilities to increase its capital ratio or both. declining property prices increase the proportion of nonperforming loans. Decline in CRE values has contributed to more of declining CRE values because they can accompany reduced credit. Falling CRE prices decrease the value of collateral held by banks and, therefore, can give rise to significant losses by these banks and ultimately contract the supply of credit. The Bank for International Settlements report on bank lending and commercial property cycles was published in May. The report was published by the Bank for international Settlements and is available at: http://www.bois.org.uk/news/features/top-stories/stories/2013/05/07/declining-property-prices-increase-nonperforming-loans-and-lead-to-a deterioration in banks’ balance sheets. commitments from buyers or lessees. By the time the construction phase is completed, market demand may have fallen, putting downward pressure on sales prices or rents. In recent years, this type of loan also has tended to have a much higher loss than other types of loans, according to a report by the Bank of America Merrill Lynch. The report was based on a survey of more than 1,000 mortgage lenders across the U.S. and was published by the Mortgage Bankers Association. the amount of financing a bank is willing to lend against that collateral typically declines as well. Conversely, increases in collateral values lower the premium on external financing. Falling property prices can generate a cycle, which can boost demand for real estate assets, and drive up prices. This can improve credit availability for borrowers, boosting demand forReal estate assets and driving up prices, says Mr. Rangarajan. He says: "It's a good time to be in the real estate industry" is slow to respond to an increase in demand, which drives prices up when investor optimism rises. Conversely, the marketplace is slow to response when the market supply of CRE catches up and new construction projects are delivered, resulting in oversupply and declining property values. According to regulatory officials, the problem is that the CRE market is too slow to react to the demand for new homes. The market is also not responding to the supply of new homes, leading to a lack of demand for the properties. High-value properties in markets such as New York, Washington, San Francisco, and Boston have performed well more recently. Low rental rates and high vacancies indicate that demand for office, retail, multifamily housing, and warehouse space remains relatively weak. Although CRE markets nationally have experienced a downturn, some regions have experienced more distress than others. For example, the CRE markets in the U.S. by the end of 2008 were the worst-hit by the financial crisis in 2008. The CRE market price deterioration appears to have leveled off recently. the current CRE market downturn. This volatility and cyclical behavior is attributed to characteristics such as information-gathering difficulties, infrequent transactions, high transaction costs. CRE values increased by more than 85 percent from 2002 to the market’s peak in October 2007 (see fig. 1). Overall deterioration in CRE markets can be found in the condition of the CRE market. Additionally, CRE percent from their peak in 2007. This decline followed a rapid appreciation in CRE asset values during which CRE valuesincreased by over 85 percent. downturn in the CRE markets can be seen in the market values for commercial property and the condition of the commercial mortgage- backed securities (CMBS) market. Market values for all major commercial property types have declined significantly. As of December 2010, overall CRE market values were down more than 42 per cent from the peak in 2007. The CRE market is expected to continue to decline for the next few years, according to a recent report by the National Association of Real Estate Investors (NAREI) the commercial real estate (CRE) market and the implications for community banks. To determine trends in CRE prices, we analyzed monthly data from Moody’s/REAL Commercial Property Price Index from January 2002 through December 2010. We collected and analyzed the following data to provide information on overall trends in the CRE market. We looked at the monthly CRE price index from January 2002 through December 2010. We also looked at monthly CRE property price index from January 2007 through December 2009. We analyzed monthly CRE prices from January 2009 through December 2011. were the most relevant to our study and also had robust controls. Nonetheless, the research conducted in this area is not exhaustive and focuses primarily on what occurred during the previous economic downturn of the late 1980s and early 1990s. However, we did identify one study that examines the role of the financial sector in the economy and found it to be relevant to this study. The study was published in the Journal of the American Economic Association and was published by the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants.