The FIAR Guidance details the implementation of the methodology with an emphasis on internal controls and supporting documentation. The guidance directs the components to identify responsible organizations and personnel and establish effective and efficient financial management. It also provides the process for the components. to follow, through their individual Financial Improvement Plan (FIP), in assessing processes, controls, and systems; identifying and correcting weaknesses; assessing, validating, and sustaining corrective actions; and achieving full auditability. The FIAR guidance provides the. develop an effective financial management recruitment, retention, and investment strategy to successfully address its financial management challenges. The department established a governance structure for the FIAR Plan, which includes review bodies for governance and oversight. The governance structure is intended to provide the vision and oversight for the plan. It is intended that the plan will provide an effective way of managing the country's finances. It will also provide a framework for the development of a new financial management strategy for the country. The new strategy will focus on the recruitment and retention of new staff and managers. are changes at the senior leadership; therefore, it is paramount that the current initiative be institutionalized throughout the department. In May 2009, we reported that the FIAR Plan did not establish a baseline of internal control weaknesses. We reported in May 2009 that theFIAR Plan didn't establish an effective plan to correct internal control problems. We also reported that it didn't set a baseline for internal control improvements at all levels of the department, including at senior levels of staff. We said that the plan didn't provide a plan to address the weaknesses in the department's internal control. has efforts underway to address known internal control weaknesses through three integrated programs. However, the effectiveness of these three integrated efforts at establishing a baseline remains to be seen. As discussed in our recent report, the U.S. has a long way to go in improving its internal control system before it can be considered a national standard. The U.K. has one of the best internal control systems in the world, according to a recent report by the Institute for Fiscal Studies and Research (IFS). In May 2009, we reported that the FIAR Plan did not have clear results-oriented we found that weaknesses in the Navy and Air Force FIar Plan implementation efforts indicate that the monitoring and oversight of such efforts have not been effective. To monitor progress and hold individuals accountable for progress, DOD managers and oversight bodies need reliable, valid, meaningful metrics to measure performance and the results of corrective actions. Also generally have not generally been assigned appropriate roles and responsibilities, we found. We found that component officials as well as the oversight committees at both the component and DOD levels did not effectively do their jobs. about the FIPs, the DOD Comptroller stated that it is critical that the department continues to look at how effectively it applies lessons learned. DOD has introduced incentives such as including FIAR goals in Senior Executive Service Performance Plans, the Comptroller said. The Comptroller added that effective oversight holds individuals accountable for carrying out their responsibilities. The FIP program is funded by a combination of federal and military grants, as well as private-sector funding. The program is expected to be completed by the end of the year. metrics. DOD has taken action to begin defining results-oriented FIAR metrics it intends to use to provide visibility of component-level progress. We have not yet had an opportunity to assess implementation of the FIAR program. We will continue to monitor the progress of the program as it moves forward in the coming months and years. We are committed to making sure that the U.S. military is fully equipped to meet the challenges of the 21st-century defense posture. We remain committed to providing the best possible support to the Department of Defense and the American people. reported, those efforts did not achieve their intended purpose of improving the department’s financial management operations. DOD has made significant improvements to the FIAR Plan that, if implemented effectively, could result in focus efforts of the department and components. DOD revised its FIAR strategy and methodology to focus on the DOD. The DOD Comptroller established the DOD FIAR Directorate in 2005 to develop, manage, and implement a strategic approach for addressing the department's financial management weaknesses and for achieving auditability. financial statement auditability into five waves (or phases) of concerted improvement activities (see appendix I). According to DOD, the components’ implementation of the methodology described in the 2010 FIAR Plan is essential to the success of the department’s efforts to ultimately achieve full financial statements auditability. To assist the components, DOD has developed a ‘toolkit’ for the components to use in their implementation. The toolkit is designed to help the components implement the methodology in a manner that is efficient and effective. The FIAR Plan is in its sixth year and continues to evolve based on lessons learned, corrective actions, and policy changes that refine and build on the plan. The DOD Comptroller has expressed commitment to the FIAR goals, and established a focused approach that and monitoring, as well as sharing lessons learned. The revised FIAR strategy is still in the early stages of implementation, and DOD has a long way and many long-standing challenges to go. To learn more about DOD's financial management improvement efforts click here. equipment, real property, and general equipment, and validating improvement through existence and completeness testing. The DOD Comptroller directed the DOD components participating in the FIAR Plan to use a standard process and aggressively modify their activities. The departments of the Army, the Navy, and the Air Force and the Defense Logistics Agency are involved in the plan. The Army, Navy and Air Force are participating in FIAR, as are the Department of the Treasury, the Defense Department and the Army Corps of Engineers. budgetary and asset accountability priorities, while the remaining two waves are intended to complete actions needed to achieve full financial statement auditability. The department has not yet fully defined its strategy for completing waves 4 and 5. Each wave focuses on assessing and strengthening internal controls and business systems Statement of Budgetary Resources effort in Wave 2, including accounts receivable, revenue, accounts payable, expenses, environmental liabilities, and other liabilities. Wave 5—Full Financial Statement Audit focuses efforts on assessing, strengthening, as necessary, internal controls, processes, and business system involved in supporting the valuations reported for legacy assets. related to the stage of auditability addressed in the wave. Wave 1—Appropriations Received Audit focuses on the appropriations receipt and distribution process. Wave 2—Apportionment/reapportionment activity by the OMB focuses on allotment and sub-allotment activity within the department. Wave 3—Approval of the budget for the current fiscal year focuses on funding appropriated by Congress for that fiscal year and related apportionment and reapportionment activities by OMB. Mission Critical Assets Existence and Completeness Audit focuses on ensuring that all assets (including military equipment, general equipment, real property, inventory, and operating materials and supplies) that are recorded in the department’s accountable property systems of record exist; all of the reporting is accurate.include procure-to-pay, hire- to-retire, order-To-cash, and budget-to to report. Wave 3 focuses on mission critical assets, such as military equipment and general equipment. entities’ assets are recorded in those systems of record; reporting entities have the right (ownership) to report these assets; and the assets are consistently categorized, summarized, and reported. Wave 4—Full Audit Except for Legacy Asset Valuation includes the valuation assertion over new asset acquisitions and validation of management’s assertion regarding these acquisitions. Wave 5-Full Audit except for Legacy asset valuations includes the assertion over these acquisitions and the valuation of the acquired assets. Wave 6-Full audit except for legacy asset valuation includes the assessment of the value of these assets. new asset acquisitions, and it depends on remediation of the existence and completeness assertions in Wave 3. Also, proper contract structure for cost accumulation and cost accounting data must be in place prior to completion of the valuation assertion for new acquisitions. It involves the budgetary transactions covered by the Wave 3 transactions. It must be completed by the end of the third quarter of this year, according to the report. The report was published by the World Resources Institute, an affiliate of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce. to ensure control over the valuation of new assets acquired. The existence and completeness of all mission assets are deemed effective on a go-forward basis. Given the lack of documentation to support the values of the department’s legacy assets, federal accounting standards allow for the use of alternative methods. The department has no plans to sell any of its legacy assets. It has no immediate plans to make any major changes to the way the department is run. The agency has a long-term vision for the future of the agency. resource requirements for improvement work. In developing their plans, components use a standard template that comprises data fields aligned to the methodology. The consistent application of a standard methodology for assessing the components’ current financial management capabilities can help establish valid baselines against which to measure, sustain, and report progress. For more information, visit: http://www.businessinsider.com/business-insider/how-to-improve-your-business-with-a-standard-methodology-for-financial-management. of these metrics—including the components’ control over the accuracy of supporting data. Ensuring effective monitoring and oversight of progress, especially by the leadership in the components, will be key to bringing about effective implementation. However, as noted in our recent report, some of these metrics may not be useful in monitoring and redirecting actions. For more information, visit the U.S. Department of Defense’s website, which is open to the public and free to download, or go to: http://www.defense.gov/sites/default/files/2013/01/07/U.S.-Department-of-Defense-FIPs. the Marine Corps’ Statement of Budgetary Resources audit effort can provide a roadmap to help other components better stage their audit readiness efforts. GAO supports DOD’s current approach of focusing and prioritizing efforts in order to achieve incremental progress in addressing weaknesses and making progress toward audit readiness. Budgetary and asset information is widely used by DOD managers at all levels, so its reliability is important. In August 2009, DOD's Comptroller sought to further to support and emphasize achievement of the priorities. 2—Statement of Budgetary Resources Audit focuses on supporting the budget-related data used for management decision making and reporting. In addition to fund balance with Treasury reporting and reconciliation, other significant end-to-end business processes in this wave are reviewed. In this wave, the audit focuses on the status of funds received, obligated, and expended, including the Statement of budgetary Resources. The audit also looks at fund balance, reconciliation, and other significant business processes, such as procurement, procurement, and procurement. vital to daily operations and management. DOD needs to provide accountability over the existence and completeness of its assets. Problems with asset accountability can further complicate critical functions, such as planning for the current troop withdrawals. In May 2010, DOD introduced a new phased approach that divides progress toward achieving progress toward achieved goals. It is unclear whether this approach will be adopted by the rest of the U.S. armed forces in the near future. The U.N. Security Council is considering a resolution that would require DOD to share its assets with the public. to provide reasonable estimates for the cost of these assets. In the context of this phased approach, DOD’s dual focus on budgetary and asset information offers the potential to obtain preliminary assessments regarding the effectiveness of current processes and controls. The goal is to identify potential issues that may adversely impact subsequent waves of the program. The program is expected to be completed by the end of the year or early next year. The cost of the project is estimated to be in the region of $1.5 billion to $2 billion. The Marine Corps did not have effective controls in place to support estimated obligations, referred to as “bulk obligations,” to record a payment liability. The Marine Corps estimates obligations in a bulk amount to record payment liabilities where it does not have a mechanism to identify authorizing documentation as a basis for recording the obligations. The auditors found ineffective controls over three major information technology systems used by the Marine Corps. The audit also found problems with the reliability of reported financial information. The investigation is ongoing. the Marine Corps and reported numerous problems that required resolution. For example, the auditors identified a lack of controls over interfaces between systems to ensure completeness of the data being transferred. System interface controls are critical for ensuring the completeness and accuracy of data transferred between systems. The report also found that the Marine Corps had failed to adequately train its personnel to deal with the threat of terrorism. The Marine Corps has been accused of failing to properly train its staff to cope with the risk of terrorist attacks. The current approach is understandably focused on short-term actions. However, achieving financial accountability that is to accounting and financial reporting and information technology systems were fully implemented. DOD Inspector General auditors told us that tests performed during the Marine Corps’ fiscal year 2011 SBR audit effort will determine whether and when the Corps will be audited for its fiscal year 2012 SBR. The Marine Corps has not yet tested the completeness and effectiveness of most of its actions. It has not identified resources, roles and responsibilities, or include performance indicators to measure performance against action plan objectives. to what extent the problems identified during the fiscal year 2010 SBR audit effort have been resolved. As of August 25, 2011, the Marine Corps had remediated the problems on 11 of the information technology audit recommendations. Because of the department’s complexity and magnitude, developing and developing the SBR is a complex and difficult process. The Marine Corps is currently undergoing a major overhaul of its information technology system. The SBR was created in the early 1990s to address problems in information technology. the lack of effective internal controls, in part, contributed to the DOD Inspector General issuing a disclaimer of opinion on the Marine Corps’ fiscal year 2010 Statement of Budgetary Resources (SBR) The auditors reported that ineffective internal control and ineffective controls in key financial systems should be addressed to ensure the Corps' financial system is working properly. The Marine Corps is the second largest military service in the U.S. behind the Army. The Navy is the largest service, followed by the Air Force. The Marine Corps’ SBR Remediation Plan focused on individual initiatives to address 70 auditor Notices of Findings and Recommendations that included 139 recommendations. The plan did sustainable in the long term will require reliable financial systems and sound internal controls. An effective remediation plan would help ensure that audit recommendations are fully addressed to deal with the short-term and long-term goals. The Marine Corps reported that actions on 88 of the 139 recommendations, including weaknesses related to internal controls, were taken. noted that the Marine Corps did not develop an overall corrective action or remediation plan that includes key elements of a risk-based plan. Instead, its approach focuses on short-term corrective actions based on manually intensive efforts to produce reliable financial reporting at year-end. Such efforts may not result in a change in behavior, according to the report. The Marine Corps has a history of failing to meet its financial reporting obligations, the report says. The report says the Corps has made progress in recent months, but needs to do more. sustained improvements over the long term that would help ensure that the Marine Corps could routinely produce sound data on a timely basis for decision making. We previously reported that using principles of risk management helps policymakers make informed decisions about best ways to prioritize investments, so that the investments are made more effectively. The Marine Corps is a joint service of the U.S. Army, Navy and Air Force. It is based in San Diego, California, and has a fleet of more than 2,000 ships and submarines. significant improvement in DOD’s financial management and progress toward auditability, but progress in taking corrective actions and resolving deficiencies remains slow. While none of the military services has obtained an unqualified (clean) audit opinion, some DOD organizations, such as the Army Corps of Engineers, DFAS, the Defense Contract Audit Agency, and the DOD Office of Inspector General, have achieved this goal. Some DOD components that have not yet received clean audit opinions are beginning to reap the benefits of strengthened controls and processes. reports are produced, the accuracy of those reports is questionable. The Army and Air Force have stated that they have plans to address these issues, and the Army has plans to validate the audit readiness of GFEBS in a series of independent auditor examinations over the next several fiscal years. The Air Force has also stated that it will address the issues in a number of different ways, including through an internal audit of the Air Force's budget. The U.S. Army has also said it will conduct an internal Audit of the Army's Budget and Expenditure. increased reprogramming thresholds granted to components that receive a positive audit opinion on their Statement of Budgetary Resources. Audit costs funded by the Office of the Secretary of Defense after a successful audit. Publicizing and rewarding components for successful audits. The challenge now is to evaluate and validate these new initiatives. The Pentagon's budget for fiscal year 2015 is $1.2 billion. The budget for Fiscal Year 2016 is $2.1 billion. It will be followed by Fiscal Year 2017, when the budget will be $3 billion. carry out their monitoring responsibilities for the Navy Civilian Pay and Air Force Military Equipment FIPs. Neither individual officials nor the executive committees took sufficient action to ensure that the FIP's were accurate or complied with the FIAR Guidance. As a result, the Navy concluded that its Civilian pay was ready for audit. The Air Force with respect to its Military Equipment, even though they did not have sufficient support to assert audit readiness. On the other hand, once the Navy and Air Air Force submitted the Fips to DOD in support, they were deemed ready. The DOD Comptroller concluded that neither of these FIPs supported audit readiness. Effective oversight and monitoring would also help ensure that lessons learned from recent efforts would be sufficiently disseminated throughout the department and applied to other financial improvement efforts, the report says. The DOD Inspector General and the DOD Comptrollers carried out their responsibilities for reviewing the FIP's. In their reviews, both organizations identified issues with the Fips that were similar to those we had identified. The Comptroller, who makes the final determination as to whether an assessable unit is ready for audit, concluded that none of the units were ready to be audited. 1990, DOD created the Defense Finance and Accounting Service (DFAS) As DOD’s accounting agency, DFAS records these transactions in DFAS to make payroll and contractor payments. The military services continue to perform certain finance and accounting activities at each military installation. These activities vary by military service depending on what the services wanted to maintain in-house and the number of personnel they were willing to transfer to DFAS. DOD accounting personnel are responsible for accounting for funds received through congressional appropriations. 2010 DFAS processed approximately 198 million payment-related transactions and disbursed over $578 billion. DFAS accounted for 1,129 active DOD appropriation accounts. DOD financial management was designated as a high-risk area by GAO in 1995. Pervasive deficiencies in financial management processes, according to the GAO, are to blame for the agency's poor financial performance in recent years. The agency's financial management process was deemed inadequate in 1995, and it was deemed a high risk area in 1998. the sale of goods and services by working capital fund businesses, revenue generated through nonappropriated fund activities, and the sales of military systems and equipment to foreign governments or international organizations. DOD defines its accounting activities to include accumulating and recording operating and capital expenses as well as appropriations, revenues, and other receipts. According to DOD’s fiscal year 2012 budget request, in fiscal year 2011, DOD spent $1.2 billion on accounting activities. In fiscal year 2010, the Pentagon spent $2.1 billion on Accounting activities. positions, required DOD to develop a strategic management plan, and required the Secretaries of the military departments to designate their Undersecretaries as CMOs. DOD financial managers are responsible for the functions of budgeting, financing, accounting for transactions and events, and reporting of financial and functions. Also, its financial managers must work closely with other departmental personnel to ensure that transactions with financial consequences are properly monitored, controlled, and reported, in part to ensure DOD does not lose money. To maintain accountability over the use of public funds, DOD must carry out financial management functions. DOD relies on a complex network of organizations and personnel to execute these the accounting records. The military services play a vital role in that they authorize the expenditure of funds. They are the source of most of the financial information that allows DOD to provide budgetary information. The U.S. military is the world's largest employer of women, with more than 1.2 million women working for the federal government. Comptroller’s two priorities—budgetary information and asset accountability. The first priority is to strengthen processes, controls, and systems that produce DOD’S budgetary information. The second priority isto improve the accuracy and reliability of management information pertaining to the department's mission-critical assets, including military. The Department of Defense is responsible for funding the U.S. armed forces, including the National Guard, the Air Force, and the Marine Corps. For more information, go to: http://www.dol.gov/budgetary-information-and-assessment. In June 2010, we reported that the Army Budget Office lacked an adequate funds control process to provide it with ongoing Army Budget and program managers. Army Budget’s accounting records reflected estimates instead of actual amounts until it was too late to control the incurrence of excessive obligations in violation of the act. Without timely, reliable, and useful financial information on cost, DOD management lacks information needed to accurately report on acquisition costs, allocate resources to programs, or evaluate program performance. The lack of adequate process and system controls to maintain effective funds control impacted the Army's ability to prevent, identify, correct, and correct.costs. assurance that obligations and expenditures do not exceed funds available in the Military Personnel–Army (MPA) appropriation. We found that an obligation of $200 million in excess of available funds in the Army’s military personnel account violated the Antideficiency Act. The overobligation likely stemmed, in part, from lack of communication between the Army and Congress, the report says. The report concludes that the Army is in a position of strength to meet its obligations and obligations. Operating and support costs can account for a significant portion of a weapon system’s total life-cycle costs. In July 2010, we reported that the department lacked key information needed to manage and reduce these costs. For acquiring and maintaining weapon systems, the lack of complete and reliable financial information hampers DOD officials in analyzing the rate of cost growth, identifying cost drivers, and developing plans for managing and controlling these costs, we found. We also found that DOD lacked cost estimates and historical data on actual operating and support cost. The department is facing near and long-term internal fiscal pressures. The department is trying to balance competing demands to support ongoing operations, rebuild readiness following extended military operations, and manage increasing personnel and health care costs. For more than a decade, the department has been trying to find a way to pay for its programs without raising the cost of the military. In the past year, it has raised the price of its programs by more than $1.5 billion. In 2013, it raised it to $2.6 billion. The Department of Defense is now seeking to raise the price to $3 billion. necessary to align financial improvement and audit readiness efforts across the department. Both DOD and the components have established senior executive committees as well as designated officials at the appropriate levels to monitor and oversee their financial improvement efforts. Progress we have seen includes recently issued guidance to aid DOD components in their efforts to address their financial management weaknesses and achieve audit readiness. We currently have work in progress to assess implementation of the department’s FIAR strategy and efforts toward auditability. As a final point, I want to emphasize the value of sustained congressional interest in the department's financial management improvement efforts, as demonstrated by this Subcommittee's leadership. continued and provided with sufficient resources and ongoing monitoring in the future. Absent continued momentum and necessary future investments, the current initiatives may falter, similar to previous efforts. Some of the most difficult challenges ahead are with regard to sustained commitment, leadership, and oversight, before the department and its military components are fully auditable, and DOD financial management is no longer considered high risk. However, the department is heading in the right direction and making progress. The department is making progress, but there are still challenges ahead. Improving the department’s financial management operations will not be an easy task. It is critical that the current initiatives being led by the DOD DCMO and the DOD Comptroller be successful, he says. "We need to provide DOD management and the Congress more accurate and reliable information on the results of its business operations," he adds. "This is a critical time for DOD and the U.S. military," he says, "and we need to make sure that DOD is on the right track" The financial transformation needed at DOD, and its removal from GAO’s high-risk list, is a long-term effort. Improving financial management will need to be a cross-functional endeavor. Successful implementation will support DOD by standardizing and streamlining its financial management and accounting systems, according to the GAO report. It will also help resolve weaknesses in other high- risk areas such as business transformation, business system modernization, and supply chain management, the report says. decade, DOD has dominated GAO’s list of federal programs and operations at high risk of being vulnerable to fraud, waste, abuse. In fact, all of the DOD programs on GAO's High-Risk List relate to business operations, including systems and processes related to management of contracts, finances, the supply chain, and other areas of business. DOD programs include systems related to managing contracts and finances, supply chain and other aspects of business operations. GAO: DOD programs at risk of fraud or waste include programs that manage contracts, finance, and supply chain. DOD decision makers; (2) adversely impacted its operational efficiency and mission performance in areas of major weapons system support and logistics; and (3) left the department vulnerable to fraud, waste, and abuse. Because of the complexity and long-term nature of DOD’s transformation efforts, GAO has reported the need for a change in DOD decision-making process. DOD decision makers need to make changes to the way they think about and act on major weapons systems, the GAO says. lie in the effective implementation of the department’s strategy by the Army, Navy, Air Force, and DLA. Successful implementation of ERP systems and integration of financial management improvement efforts with other DOD initiatives. GAO will continue to monitor the progress of and provide feedback on the status of DOD’S strategy and efforts to improve its financial management efforts. The GAO is monitoring the progress and providing feedback to DOD officials in Washington, D.C. for the next six months. Before 1991, the military services and defense agencies independently managed their finance and accounting operations. According to DOD, these decentralized operations were highly inefficient and failed to produce reliable information. We reported on this issue over 20 years ago, but the problems continue to persist. In July 2010, we reported that although DOD and the military departments have efforts underway to begin addressing these financial management weaknesses, problems still exist and remediation and improvement efforts would require the DOD and military departments to work together on the problem. support infrastructure, as well as weapon systems acquisition. Long-standing and pervasive weaknesses in DOD’s financial management and related business processes and systems have resulted in a lack of reliable information needed to make sound decisions and report on the financial status and cost of DOD activities to Congress. DOD also requests billions of dollars each year to maintain its weapon systems, but it has limited ability to identify, aggregate, and use financial management information for managing and controlling operating and support costs. Examples of the pervasive weaknesses are highlighted below. Business operations, including the high-risk areas of contract management, supply chain management, support infrastructure management, and weapon systems acquisition are directly impacted by the problems in financial management. We have reported that continuing weaknesses in these business operations result in billions of dollars of wasted resources, reduced efficiency, ineffective performance, and ineffective use of military assets. The U.S. military has a long history of failing to meet its financial obligations to the U.N. Security Council and the world at large. systems, and controls, and the resulting lack of data reliability, continue to impair management’s ability to assess the resources needed for DOD operations. DOD components are at risk of reporting inaccurate, inconsistent, and unreliable data for financial reporting and management decision making and potentially exceeding authorized spending limits. Other costs are basic financial management functions that are also key in analyzing areas for potential future savings. Without adequate financial management processes, systems, andcontrols, DOD components may not be able to track and control costs. The lack of effective internal controls hinders management’s ability to have reasonable assurance that their allocated resources are used effectively, properly, and in compliance with budget and appropriations law. Over the years, DOD has initiated several broad-based reform efforts to address its long-standing financial management weaknesses. DOD currently implementing a comprehensive plan that identifies DOD's internal control weaknesses will not be an easy task. But it is a task that is critical to resolving the long- standing weaknesses and will require consistent management oversight and monitoring. of the data not being properly converted from the legacy systems to DEAMS. DFAS officials indicated that they were experiencing difficulty with some of the DEAMS system interfaces. For example, the interface problem with the Standard Procurement System has become so severe that the interface has been turned off, and the data must be manually entered into DeAMS. DEAMS does not provide the capability to produce ad hoc reports that can be used to perform the data analysis need to perform daily operations. They also noted that when some currently operational at 154 locations, including DFAS, and is being used by approximately 35,000 users. DEAMS is expected to be fully deployed during fiscal year 2016, is currently operational at Scott Air Force Base and DFAS. Our preliminary results identified issues related to the use of DEAMS in the U.S. Air Force, including the deployment of the C-17 Globemaster III and C-5 aircraft. The C-47 is currently being used in the United States by about 1,100 individuals. For DEAMS, the DOD Milestone Decision Authority has directed that the system is not to be deployed beyond Scott Air Force Base until the known system weaknesses have been corrected. The system has been independently tested to ensure that it is operating as intended. In closing, I am encouraged that the U.S. Air Force is taking steps to ensure the safety and security of its personnel and equipment. For more information, go to: http://www.airforce.milestone.gov/deams. The Army and DFAS are taking steps to address issues raised by DFAS. Approximately two-thirds of invoice and receipt data must be manually entered. The Army says the increase in tickets was not unexpected since the number of users and transactions being processed by the system has increased, and the Army is working with DFAS to address the issues. The number of tickets issued was not expected to increase as a result of the increased number of people using the system, the Army says. The increase was due to the increased use of the system.  Manual workarounds are needed to process certain accounts receivable transactions such as travel debts. The Army has recognized this limitation and is currently developing a system enhancement that they expect will better support the users’ needs. DFAS personnel stated that the problem is the result of the Army’s decision to change the way the system is used in the first place. For more information on DFAS, visit www.dfas.org or call 1-800-273-8255. The backlog of unresolved GFEBS trouble tickets has continued to increase from about 250 in September 2010 to approximately 400 in May 2011. Trouble tickets represent user questions and issues with transactions or system performance that have not been resolved. According to Army officials, Army officials.have identified include the following:  The backlog of GFEbs trouble tickets have continued to rise since September 2010. It is estimated that about 400 trouble tickets remain unresolved as of May 2011, the Army says. The Army says the backlog of trouble tickets is expected to continue to rise. System (GFEBS) and the Air Force’s Defense Enterprise Accounting and Management System (DEAMS) GFEBS is intended to support the Army’S standardized financial management and accounting practices for the general fund, except for funds related to the Army Corps of Engineers. The Army estimates that G FEBS will be used to control and account for approximately $140 billion in annual spending. DEAMS is expected to provide the Air force with the entire spectrum of financial management capabilities.  DFAS users have devised manual workarounds and several applications to obtain the information they need to perform their day-to-day tasks. GFEBS and DEAMS provide the expected capabilities in accounting, management information, and decision support. To compensate for the lack of these capabilities, users have developed their own solutions. For more information on DFAS, visit DFAS.org. For information about DFAS applications, visit the DFAS Application Center. for more information, visit DFAS.com.  DFAS personnel stated that manual data entry will eventually become infeasible due to increased quantities of data that will have to be manually entered as GFEBS is deployed to additional locations. Army officials acknowledged that there is still a lot of work that needs to be done to make the system more efficient and effective. The Army is working to improve the system's efficiency and reduce the amount of data needed to enter data into the system from the invoicing and receiving system (i.e., Wide Area Work Flow) GFEBS lacks the ability to run ad hoc queries or search for data in the system to resolve a problem. GFEBS is working with DOD to resolve the problem. The problem reduced the effectiveness of GFEbs, and that they are working to resolve it. G FEBS is a joint effort between the U.S. Air Force and the Department of Defense. For more information, visit the GfeBS website. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. DOD has identified 10 ERPs as essential to its efforts to transform its business operations. The department has not effectively employed acquisition management controls to help ensure the ERPs deliver the promised capabilities on time and within budget. We are currently reviewing the status of two of these ERPs—the Army’s General Fund Enterprise Business and the National Guard Enterprise Business. The Department of Defense has invested billions of dollars and will invest billions more to implement the ERP. The successful implementation of ERPs is crucial to achieving departmentwide audit readiness. multiple logistics systems and finance processes, providing asset visibility for accountable items, and integrating personnel and pay systems. Delays in the successful implementation of ERPs have extended the use of existing duplicative, stovepiped systems, and have continued the funding of these systems longer than anticipated. To learn more about how to implement an ERP in your business, visit the ERP for Business website. For more information on how to use ERPs in your company, visit The ERP For Business. $1 million. However, long-standing challenges that we previously identified remain to be addressed. While DOD continues to release updates to its corporate enterprise architecture, the architecture has yet to be federated through development of aligned subordinate architectures for each of the military departments. In this regard, each of these departments will be given their own separate subordinate architecture to work with. Each of the departments will also be given its own separate sub-architectures to cooperate with each other. This will allow for the creation of a single, unified, federated architecture for the military. military departments has made progress in managing its respective architecture program. There are still limitations in the scope and completeness, as well as the maturity of the military departments’ architecture programs. For example, while each department has established or is in the process of establishing an executive committee with each department, the program is still not mature enough to have a full-blown executive committee. The U.S. military has been involved in the development of the U.N.’s architecture program since the 1950s. DOD continues to take steps to comply with the act’s provisions and to satisfy relevant system modernization management guidance. None has fully developed an enterprise architecture methodology or a well-defined business enterprise architecture and transition plan to guide and constrain business transformation initiatives. While DOD continues to establish investment management processes, the DOD enterprise and the military departments’ approaches to investment management are consistent with our recommendations. In addition, while DOD continues with its efforts to implement best practices in implementing the statutory provisions, DOD has not fully developed a methodology for business transformation. Since 1995, we have designated DOD’s business systems modernization program as high risk. Between 2001 and 2005, we business systems investment management still lack the defined policies and procedures to be considered effective. Successful implementation of the ERPs.and other incentives to determine their effectiveness and whether the right mix of incentives has been established. Well-defined enterprise architecture. Until DOD fully implements these longstanding institutional modernization management controls, DOD's business system modernization will likely remain a high-risk program. The department has invested reported that the modernization program had spent hundreds of millions of dollars on an enterprise architecture and investment management structures that had limited value. Congress included provisions in the Ronald W. Reagan National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2005 that included explicit architecture and management-related recommendations, the report said. The report said the recommendations were intended to improve the value of the U.S. military's modernization program. It also said that the recommendations would be applied to a broader range of issues, including cybersecurity, cyber-security, and national security. Chairman and Members of the Subcommittee, this concludes my prepared statement. I would be pleased to respond to any questions that you or other members of the subcommittee may have at this time. For further information regarding this testimony, please contact Asif A. Khan, (202) 512-9869 or khana@gao.gov. For more information on this hearing, please visit the GSA's website at: http://www.gsa.gov/news/press-releases/2013/01/09/gsa-press-release-2013-01-09.html. This is a work of the U.S. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States. The published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from GAO. However, because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material, permission from the copyright owner is required. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org. For support in the UK, contact the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline on 1-800-273-8255. holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. For confidential help in the UK, call 0800-847-7255 or click here. The National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2006 directed DOD to develop a strategic plan to shape and improve the department’s civilian workforce. In developi the plan, the department identified financial management as one of its enterprisewide mission-critical occupations. In July 2011, we reported that DOD’S 2009 overall civilian workforce plan had addressed some of the issues raised in the 2006 plan. The plan was to, among other things; include assessments of (1) existing critical skills and competencies in DOD's civilian workforce as well as specific recruiting and retention goals. , (2) future critical skills and competencies needed over the next decade, and (3) any gaps in the existing or future critical Skills and Competencies identified. DOD was to submit a plan of action for dev eloping and reshaping the civilian employee workforce to address any identified gaps, legislative requirements, and assess the critical skills of its existing civilian workforce. Although some aspects of the legislative requirements were addressed, DOD still has significant work to do. For example, while the plan included gap analyses related to the number of personnel needed for some of the mission-critical occupations, the department had only discussed competency gap analyses for 3 mission-critical occupations. Financial management was not included in the department’s analysis. Until DOD analyzes personnel needs and gaps in the financial management area, it will not be in a position to assess gaps in financial management. DOD will be able to make a decision on whether or not to make changes to financial management training in the near future. It will also be possible to identify gaps in other areas such as language, logistics management and information technology. DOD will require a knowledgeable and skilled workforce that includes individuals who are trained and certified in accounting. Hiring and retaining such a skilled workforce is a challenge DOD must meet to succeed in its transformation to the digital age. DOD will need to hire and retain a workforce that is well versed in government accounting practices and standards, and experienced in information technology. DOD must hire and retaining a workforce who is trained and certify in accounting, well verses in government Accounting practices and Standards, and is experienced in Information Technology. chief management officer (CMO) position and a comprehensive, enterprisewide business transformation plan. In May 2007, DOD designated the Deputy Secretary of Defense as the CMO. In addition, the National Defense Authorization Acts for fiscal years 2008 and 2009 contained provisions that codified the C MO and Deputy Chief Management Officer (DCMO) positions. The CMO position was created in May 2007 by the Department of Defense's Chief of Staff for Policy and Planning, which is responsible for the overall direction of the Defense Department. those in the high-risk areas of contract management, supply chain management, support infrastructure management, and weapon systems acquisition. As acknowledged by DOD officials, sustained and active involvement of the department’s CMO, the DCMO, and other senior leaders is critical. Within every administration, there are high- risk areas that need to be dealt with, the officials said. They added that the military departments’ CMOs, the DOD Comptroller, and others should be involved as well. and report potential violations of the Antideficiency Act. DOD’s TRICARE Management Activity (TMA) had misclassified $102.7 million of the nearly $112 million in DCOE advisory and assistance contract obligations. The proper classification and recording of such contracts is critical to ensuring their proper payment and documentation. In our February 2011 report on the Defense Centers of Excellence (DCOE), we found that the TMA had misclassified $103.5 million. to this testimony include J. Christopher Martin, Senior-Level Technologist. The first three waves focus on achieving the DOD Comptroller’s interim budget. The next three waves will focus on the budget for the long-term. The hearing is expected to last until the end of the month. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255.