The Corporation also has directed grantees exceeding a program year 1995-96 cost per participant of $13,800 to reduce their proposed program year 1996-97 per-participant costs by an overall average of 10 percent. The Corporation has also increased the grantee’s share of total program operating costs from 25 to 33 percent for grants awarded for the 1996-1997 program year. The guidelines also encourage programs to seek increased funding to add additional participants, thereby reducing its cost per participants. of other program costs, including participant training, education, and uniforms. Staff salaries, travel, transportation, supplies, and equipment; and program evaluation and administrative costs. Grants are based in part on the number of participants the program estimates it will enroll. If participants leave the program during the year, the program will lose some of its funding. The program is funded by donations from individuals, foundations, corporations, and government agencies. For more information on the program, go to: http://www.cnn.com/cnnprograms. the Corporation may either allow the program to redirect participant stipend and benefit funds to other program expenses or take back any unused portion of the grant. To ensure that federal Corporation dollars are used to leverage other resources for program support, grantees must also obtain support from non-Corporation sources. The Corporation may also allow grantees to take back unused portions of the grants they have received. The program may also be able to use federal Corporation funds to leverage non-corporation resources. in-kind contributions from sources other than the Corporation were reported to us in May 1995 as resources already received or those that program directors were certain of receiving by the end of their current operating year. Therefore, actual resource and expenditure levels could be higher or lower than indicated by indicated by the Corporation in the May 1995 report. For more information, go to: http://www.cnn.com/1995/05/30/science/features/topics/science-and-environment/topical/top-stories/top stories. per participant from non-Corporation federal sources, or about 3 percent of their total resources. The appendix contains more detailed program resource information by sponsoring agency. In its mission statement, the Corporation had identified several objectives that spanned a wide range of accomplishments, from very tangible results to those much harder. The Corporation's mission statement: "We are committed to serving the needs of our nation's youth through education, training, and community service" The Corporation is based in Washington, D.C., but has offices around the world. additional funding only for education awards. Corporation’s words—“get things done.” Total resources available means many things. It means cash and in-kind contributions that pay participants’ living allowances, social security taxes, health insurance, child care, and the education awards they earn in exchange for their service. It also means resources available to the organization’S board of directors, which is made up of members of Congress, the White House, the Senate and the House of Representatives. The average from all sources per AmeriCorps*USA participant was about $26,654 ( excluding in-kind contributions from private sources) This amounted to about $16 per service hour or about $20 per direct service hour. These figures represent resources available for all program expenses and are not the equivalent of annual salaries or hourly wages for participants. The program costs about $18 million per year for the first- and second-year participants and about $15 million for the third- and fourth-year Participants. AmeriCorps*USA participants receive a living allowance stipend that is at least equal to, but no more than double, the average annual living allowance received by Volunteers in Service to America (VISTA) participants. The living allowance is about $7,640 for full-time participants in fiscal year 2014. The allowance is equal to or less than the average living allowance given to VISTA participants in Fiscal Year 2013. The stipend for AmeriCorp*USA members is $5,000 for the first three years of service, and $6,000 after that. about 300 grants to nonprofit organizations and federal, state, and local government agencies to operate AmeriCorps*USA programs. Grant recipients use grant funds to pay up to 85 percent of the cost of participants’ living allowances and benefits. About 69 percent of all matching resources came from either a federal or the estimates reported to us. Non-Corporation federal funds accounted for about 50 percent of total resources available to federal grantees. Nonfederal Ameri corps* USA grantees received resources of less than $800. a state or local government source, with the split between cash and in-kind contributions being about 43 percent (about $57 million) and 26 percent ( about $34 million) respectively. The remaining 31 percent of matching resources were from private sources, with cash andIn-Kind contributions accounting for 17 percent (About $23 million) of the total. The goal is to raise $100 million in matching resources by the end of the year, with a goal of $100 billion by 2018. October, both the Congress and the Corporation have implemented measures aimed at lowering AmeriCorps’s cost. On the legislative side, the Congress mandated new funding restrictions for the Corporation. The Corporation has revised its grant application guidelines for programs receiving funding in the upcoming 1996-97 program year. For example, in response to congressional concerns over the cost of mandating the purchase and use of uniforms, the Ameri corps*USA uniform package (t-shirt, sweatshirt, button, and button) has been reduced. in AmeriCorps programs. As part of the fiscal year 1996 appropriations act, the Congress also mandated that GAO further study the Corporation’s operations. We expect to complete our study by the end of this fiscal year. In recent months, the Corporation has worked with Members of Congress to identify ways to improve the Ameri Corps program and its operations. The Corporation has also worked with members of the Congress to find ways to make the program more efficient. The Americorps program is funded by a combination of federal and state grants. the future. It also indicated the degree of partnership between the public and private sectors. Since we completed our review, the Congress and the Corporation have undertaken a number of measures that are intended to reduce the costs of AmeriCorps. Because many of these initiatives will not take effect until until the end of the year, many of them will not be fully implemented until the beginning of next year. It will be interesting to see how this plays out in the coming months and years as we look to the future. Initiatives calculated available resources per participant on a full-time-equivalent (FTE) basis. Because most AmeriCorps*USA programs were still implementing their first year of operations, actual cost could not be determined. Funding and used to design and formalize future national service programs. And it means resources available to pay for the staff and operations of the Corporation for National and Community Service. For confidential support call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. to help pay for the program. This support, which can be cash or in-kind contributions, may come from other federal sources as well as state and local governments, and private sources. Some federal agencies received grants during the initial 2 program years to support AmeriCorps*USA participants who performed work furthering the agencies’ missions. Though not precise cost data, this information illustrated the funding levels that may be needed to support new program endeavors of similar scale in the U.S. With the National and Community Service Trust Act of 1993 (P.L. 103-82), the Congress created the largest national and community service program since the Civilian Conservation Corps of the 1930s. AmeriCorps*USA allows participants to earn education awards to help pay for postsecondary education in exchange for performing community service that helps pay for education. The program is funded by the federal government and is based in Washington, D.C. It was created to provide a national service program for young people. spanned a wide age range, from teenagers to retirees. Teams also showed diversity in educational, economic, and ethnic backgrounds. Participants said that a valuable aspect of the program was working with others with different backgrounds and benefiting from their strengths. Another of AmeriCorps*USA’s program objectives was to foster civic responsibility. The program is funded by the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE). For more information, visit www.nist.org. of their decision to participate in AmeriCorps*USA. Programs also supported participants in obtaining high school diplomas or the equivalent. According to Corporation regulations, a full-time participant who does not have a high school diploma or its equivalent generally must agree to earn one or the other before using the education. For more information, go to AmeriCorp*USA's website or call 1-800-273-8255. For confidential support on suicide matters call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch or click here. or money order made out to the Superintendent of Documents, when necessary. VISA and MasterCard credit cards are accepted, also. Orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent. U.S. General Accounting Office P.O. Box 6015 Gaithersburg, MD 20884-6015 Room 1100 700 700. For confidential support call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. GAO issues a list of newly available reports and testimony each day. Orders may also be placed by calling (202) 512-6000 or by using fax number (301) 258-4066, or TDD ( 301) 413-0006. To receive the GAO's weekly Newsquiz, call the National Security Operations Center at 1-800-273-8255 or go to http://www.nsoc.org/. For confidential support on suicide matters call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. the upcoming 1996-97 program year, it is too early to determine their impact. Madam Chairman, that concludes my statement for the record. For more information about this testimony, please call Wayne B. Upshaw at (202) 512-7006 or Carol L. Patey at (617) 565-7575. Other major contributors to this testimony included Wayne B.-Upshaw, Carol L.-Patey, and Wayne B-U Upshaw. C.C. Corporation award (adjusted) $12,071,004 $31,881,332 $3,470,008 $2,333,452 (Table notes on next page) The first copy of each GAO report and testimony is free. Additional copies are $2 each. Orders should be sent to the following address, accompanied by a check. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days, please call (202) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone. A recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. to quantify. AmeriCorps*USA has also sponsored an evaluation of its own that summarized results at a sample of programs during their first 5 months of operation. The evaluation identified diverse achievements related to each service area. participants renovating inner-city housing, assisting in the construction of new homes, and helping with other community needs. The study was based on interviews with Ameri corps members and their families, as well as on a review of the Americorps website and other sources. The program’s mission includes “strengthening the ties that bind us together as a people.” We observed several projects focused on rebuilding communities. For example, a multifamily house being renovated was formerly a congregating spot for drug dealers. Program officials believe that after completion, it will encourage other neighborhood improvements. Another project was to renovate a house that had been used as a meeting place for gang members. It was being renovated to become a home for the homeless. team built a community farm market and renovated a municipal stadium. Town official said the programs will continue to provide economic and social benefits to the community. Another way to meet this objective was to have participants with diverse backgrounds working together. Participants of several programs we visited had diverse backgrounds and worked together to achieve the goal of creating a better life for all of the people in the town. For more, visit CNN.com/Impact and follow us on Twitter @ImpactCNN and @CNNOpinion. teachers in elementary schools, maintaining and reestablishing native vegetation in a flood control area, analyzing neighborhood crime statistics to better target prevention measures, and developing a program in a community food bank for people with special dietary needs. AmeriCorps’s legislation identified renewing the spirit of community as an objective, and the goal of the program was to renew the community spirit. The program is funded by the federal government through a grant from the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009. We saw evidence of this at programs such as one where participants devoted half of each Friday to working on community service projects they devised and carried out independently. Participants at another program, in which they organized meetings to establish relationships between at-risk youth and elderly people, commented that this was a good way to get involved in the community. We hope to see more of this in the coming months and years as we continue our work in the UK and around the world to improve the lives of people across the world. work had taught them how to organize programs, experience they believed would be helpful as they took on roles in their communities. Training periods included conflict resolution techniques and team-building skills. education or job training. At the sites we visited, participants indicated that the education award was an important part of their training. They also indicated that they believed they would be able to use the experience to help others in their community in the future. The project was funded by a grant from the National Endowment for the Humanities. year 1994. Additional benefits include health insurance and child care assistance for participants who need them. A participant must be a citizen, a national, or a lawful permanent resident of the United States. A participants must also be a participant in a national service program before, during, or after postsecondary education. For more information, visit the U.S. Department of Education's National Service Program website or call 1-800-273-TALK (8255) or visit http://www.nps.gov/nsp. pay local program staff who manage operations and supervise staff; to pay rent for office space and purchase supplies. To pay for travel and transportation for program staff and participants; and to pay for materials needed to conduct national service projects. It means resources available topay for planning grants. It also means resources are available to pay the costs of planning grants, travel, transportation and other costs for participants and staff. It can also pay for the cost of supplies needed to carry out national service project projects. matches priorities established by the Corporation. A minimum of 1,700 hours of service within a year is required to earn the full $4,725 award. The Corporation requires that programs devote some portion, but no more than 20 percent, of participants’ service hours to nondirect service activities, such as training or studying for the equivalent of a high school diploma. To earn a part-time award, a participant must perform 900 hours of community service within 2 years (or within 3 years in the program) case of participants who are full-time college students. Individuals can serve more than two terms; however, they can only receive two education awards. The awards, which are held in trust by the U.S. Treasury, are paid directly to qualified postsecondary institutions or student loan lenders and must be used within two years of the participant's release from prison. For more information on the program, or to apply to be a participant, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/29/education/cnn-education-award-list.  Selection of participants is not based on financial need. Corporation used about $149 million of its fiscal year 1994 appropriations to make the program. Be a high school graduate, agree to earn the equivalent of a highSchool diploma before receiving an education award, or be granted a waiver by the program, according to the program's website. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. have already passed the GED test. We also saw programs that offer participants the chance to get postsecondary academic credit. One such program, affiliated with a private college, offered participants the option of pursuing an environmental studies curriculum through which they can earn up to six upper-level credits at a college. The program is available to those who have passed their GED tests and are interested in pursuing a degree in environmental studies. For more information, go to www.gEDonline.org or call 1-800-GED-TEST. reduced tuition. Half of the participants have chosen to do so. A second program allowed participants to earn 36 credit hours toward an associate’s degree in the natural sciences through their service, which can lead to state certification as an environmental restoration technician. Since we reported on the program last year, the program has grown by more than 50 percent. The program is now in its second year at the University of California, San Diego. It is the first of its kind in the U.S. award. In one program, a general equivalency diploma (GED) candidate was receiving classroom instruction and individual tutoring. She had recently passed the preliminary GED test after failing the GEDtest five times. After doing some extra preparation for the math portion, she will take the actual Ged test again. A program in which a GED candidate is receiving classroom. instruction andindividual tutoring has been a success. The program in question has been successful in helping the woman get her GED. larger program that recruited at-risk youth, most of whom do not have high school diplomas. Program officials said most of the participants are enrolled in high school equivalency courses and that at least five are in the program's first year. The program provides classroom instruction related to the service that participants performed, such as a construction-based math curriculum, officials said. It also provides a variety of services such as haircuts and haircuts for the participants, they said, including hair styling and styling.