the 111 th Congress Incumbents in Full-Time PAS Positions, as of the End of the 111th Congress BBG Nomination Action During the 111. th Congress Incumbents in Full-time PAS positions. CNCS Nomination Action During the. 111. th Congress Incumbent in Full-Time PAS  Positions. ODNI Nomination action During. the 111 th congress Incumbency in  Full- time PASPositions. EBRD Nomination Action During the 111 th Congress incumbents  in full-time pAS position. Full-time PAS Positions, as of the End of the 111 th Congress" and "Nomination Action During the 111Th Congress" As noted, some agencies had no nomination activity during this period of time. The first of these two tables identifies each Action during the end of the Congress. The second table identifies each Nomination Action during that period. The last of these tables identifies the nomination action during which each Action took place in the 111th Congress. For more information, visit the White House website or the Congressional Research Service. Security Positions" (SF 86), and the White House "Personal Data Statement Questionnaire" The Office of the Counsel to the President oversees the clearance process. Background investigations conducted by the FBI, Office of Government Ethics (OGE), and an ethics official for the agency to be investigated. The clearance process can take up to six months to complete. For more information on how to get a White House security clearance, go to White House.gov/Cabinet/Security-Clearance. which the candidate is to be appointed. If conflicts of interest are found during the background investigation, OGE and the agency ethics officer may work with the candidate to mitigate the conflicts. Once the Office of the Counsel to the President has cleared the candidate, the nomination is ready to be accepted. The nomination process can take up to a year to complete. The process can also take as long as two years to complete if the candidate has been cleared by OGE or the ethics officer. The nominee must be approved by the White House Counsel before the nomination can be submitted. Advisers CEQ—Council on Environmental Quality ONDCP—Office of National Drug Control Policy OSTP —Office of Science and Technology Policy OUSTR—Office for U.S. Trade Representative. Multilateral Banking Organizations AfDB—African Development Bank AsDB—Asian Development Bank EBRD—European Bank for Reconstruction and Development IADB—Inter–American Development Bank IBRD —International Bank for reconstruction and development. OMB—Office. of Management and Budget Development IJC—International Joint Commission, U.S. and Canada IMF—International Monetary Fund Legislative Branch Agencies AC—Architect of the Capitol GAO—Government Accountability Office GPO —Government Printing Office LC—Library of Congress. IJC is the International Joint Commission of the United States, Canada and the United Kingdom. IMF is the IMF's legislative branch of the International Monetary Fund. GPO is the Government Printing Office. LC is the Library of Congress' library of records. Protection Agency FHFA—Federal Housing Finance Agency FMCS—Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service GSA—General Services Administration MCC—Millennium Challenge Corporation NARA—National Archives and Records Administration NASA—National Aeronautics and Space Administration NFAH—National Foundation on the Arts and Humanities NSF—National Science Foundation NBRC—Northern Border Regional Commission ODNI —Office of the Director of National Intelligence OGE—Office of General Services Administration NARA —National Archives of Records Administration Government Ethics ONHIR—Office of Navajo and Hopi Indian Relocation OPIC—Overseas Private Investment Corporation OPM —Office of Personnel Management. PC—Peace Corps SBA—Small Business Administration SSA—Social Security Administration SSS—Selective Service System. TDA—Trade Development Agency USAID—United States Agency for International Development Executive Office of the President (EOP) CEA—Council of Economic Administration (CEA) CFA—Council for Foreign Agricultural Policy. and Other Agencies Appendix B. Nomination Action by Agency Type, 111 th Congress Appendix C. Agency Abbreviations Independent Agencies ARC—Appalachian Regional Commission BBG—Broadcasting Board of Governors CIA—Central Intelligence Agency CNCS—Corporation for National and Community Service CSOSA—Court Services and Offender Supervision Agency for the District of Columbia DRA—Delta Regional Authority EPA—Environmental. and other Agencies appendix A. Nominating Action by agency type, 111th Congress act on a nomination at any point—upon referral, after investigation, or after a hearing. If the committee votes to report a nomination to the full Senate, it has three options: it may report the nomination favorably, unfavorably, or without recommendation. A failure to obtain a majority on the motion to report means the nomination will not be reported to the Senate. The Senate historically has confirmed most, but not all, of its nominees. The committee may discharge the committee from further consideration of the nomination in order to bring it to the floor. Rarely, however, has a vote to confirm a nomination failed on the Senate floor. Usually, unsuccessful nominations fail to be reported or discharged from committee. Failure of a nomination to make it out of committee has occurred for a variety of reasons, including opposition to the nomination. All, executive nominations. are to be confirmed by the Senate by the end of the month or early next month. All executive nominations are expected to be approved by the U.S. Senate by mid-January. inadequate amount of time for consideration of the nomination, or factors that may not be directly related to the merits of the nominated. Senate rules provide that "[n]ominations neither confirmed nor rejected during the session at which they are made shall not be acted upon at any succeeding session without a succeeding session" Senate rules also provide that the Senate will not confirm or reject a nominee if the nominee is not confirmed by the end of the first session of the next Congress. The nomination process is known as the "confirmation process" determines whether or not to confirm a nomination. The Senate has shown particular interest in the nominee's views and how they are likely to affect public policy. Two other factors have sometimes affected the examination of a nominee's personal and professional qualities: whether the President's party controlled the Senate, and the degree to which the President became involved in supporting the nomination. Much of the Senate confirmation process occurs at the committee level. Administratively, nominations are received by the White House and sent to the Senate. Hearings provide a public forum to discuss a nomination and any issues related to the program or agency for which the nominee would be responsible. Senators have used hearings to explore nominees' qualifications, articulate policy perspectives, or raise related oversight issues. Even where confirmation has been thought by most to be a virtual certainty, hearings have provided Senators and the nominee with opportunities to go on the record with particular views or commitments.as information they themselves have collected. A committee may decline to hold hearings on a nominee. by the Senate executive clerk, who arranges for the referral of the nominations to committee. Committee nomination activity has generally included investigation, hearing, and reporting stages. As part of investigatory work, committees have drawn on information provided by the White House, as well as information from the Senate Executive Office of the President. The Senate rules and precedents dictate that the nominations be referred to committee, according to the Senate rules. The nominations will be considered by a committee of the Senate, which will then vote on them. where Senators perceive insufficient pre-nomination consultation has occurred, they have sometimes exercised their procedural prerogatives to delay or even effectively block consideration of a nomination. During the clearance process, the candidate prepares and submits several forms, including the "Public Financial Disclosure Report" (Standard Form (SF) 278), the "Questionnaire for National Security" and the "Financial Disclosure Report (FFR) (Standard form ( SF) 278) The candidate then submits the forms to the Senate for approval. providing information on Senate activity (confirmations, rejections, returns to the President) as well as further related presidential activity (including withdrawals and recess appointments) The profiles also identify, for each agency, positions requiring Senate confirmation, the incumbents in those positions as of the end taken by the Senate to confirm a nominee was 65.5. The agency profiles provide data on presidential nominations and appointments to full-time positions requiringSenate confirmation, and Senate action on the nominations. Data on appointment actions during the 111 th Congress appear in two tables for each Agency. to that of the agency-by-agency nomination action tables. It identifies the agency involved and the dates of nomination. The table indicates if and when a nomination was confirmed, withdrawn, or returned. The mean and median numbers of days taken to confirm a nomination are also provided. Appendix C provides a list of department abbreviations. Incumbents in Full-Time PAS Positions, as of the End of the 111 th Congress ARC Nomination Action During The 114th Congress. The number of days it took to confirm the nominee is also provided for each of the four categories. incumbent's name followed by "(A)" indicates an official who was, at that time, serving in an acting capacity. Vacancies are also noted in the first table. The nomination action table provides, in chronological order, information concerning each nomination. It shows the name of the nominee, position involved, date of nomination, and date of action. The list is ordered by the date of the nomination, followed by the position involved and then the nomination action. For more information on the nomination process click here. be submitted to the Senate. The selection and clearance stage has often been the longest part of the appointment process. There have been, at times, lengthy delays, particularly when many candidates have been processed simultaneously. The length of time a given nomination may be pending in the Senate varies widely. Some nominations are confirmed within a few days, others may not be confirmed for several months, and some are never confirmed. This report provides, in part, a list of the organizations covered in this report. for each independent agency nomination confirmed in the 111 th Congress. The mean (average) number of days taken by the Senate to confirm a nomination to a position covered by this report was 93.1. The numbers of days shown in the tables in this report include days during the longer recesses around August and between sessions of Congress. Some nominees were nominated more than once for requirements of 5 U.S.C. §5503(b) (see section entitled " Recess Appointments ," above). 6 agencies in the Executive Office of the President (EOP), and 7 multilateral organizations) and 4 agency in the legislative branch. It excludes appointments to executive departments and to regulatory and other boards and commissions, which are covered in other reports. A profile of each agency tracks the agency's nominations, table with summary information on appointments and nominations by four agency categories. For each of these categories, the table provides the number of positions, nominations, individual nominees, confirmations, nominations returned. nominations to full-time positions in independent agencies, agencies in the Executive Office of the President (EOP), multilateral agencies, and legislative branch agencies. Of these nominations, 92 were confirmed, 14 were returned to the President, and 1 was withdrawn. The President made five recess appointments during this period to positions in the EOP and the legislative branch, and one recess appointment to a position in the White House National Security Council (NSC) The President also made two recess appointments to the NSC, one to the State Department and the other to the Treasury. mean and median. While the mean is a more familiar measure, it may be influenced by outliers in the data. In other words, a nomination that took an extraordinarily long time might cause a significant change in the mean. The median does not tend to be influencedby outliers, while the mean can be affected by a large number of outliers. For more, go to CNN.com/sport and follow us on Twitter @CNNSport and @jennifer_cnn. but the median would be unaffected. Presenting both numbers is a better way to look at the central tendency of the data. Appendix A presents a table of all nominations and recess appointments to positions in independent and other agencies, organized alphabetically by last name and following a similar format to the table in Appendix B. The table is organized alphabetical by name and follows a similarformat to the appendix in Appendix A of the appendix to the report on the president's appointments to the Senate Intelligence Committee. Recess appointments expire at the end of the following session of Congress. Presidents have occasionally used the recess appointment power to circumvent the confirmation process. Congress has enacted provisions that restrict the the decision, during the latter part of the first session of the 110 th Congress, to restructure the Senate's longer recesses into a series of shorter recesses divided by pro forma sessions. The President can be restricted from making recess appointments during a recess that.is in recess, either during a session (intrasession recess appointment) or between sessions (intersession recess appointments) is no more than three days, the Senate sought to prevent recess appointments. The Senate did not use the pro forma session practices during the first session of the 111 th Congress. At the end of the 2010 pre-election break as a series of shorter recesses separated by proforma sessions. In this case, the use of the pro-forma session practice was used during the final week of the second session of Congress, when the Senate was in session for the first time in a year. The Senate will avoid a lengthy recess by having short pro-forma sessions ... every few days. Those pro- forma sessions will keep the White House over confirmations. The two sides this week could not agree on which nominees to return to White House and which to keep active. The Senate will instead officially avoid a long recess byHaving short Pro-Forma Sessions ... every several days. The White House will also keep the Senate over confirming nominees, which will keep it over the recess. being again made to the Senate by the President." In practice, such pending nominations have been returned to the President at the end of the session or Congress. Pending nominations also may be returned automatically to the president at the beginning of a recess of more than 30 days. The Senate returned 16 controversial nominees to the White House just before the August recess, including five judicial nominations. The move reportedly stemmed from a lack of agreement between the Senate majority leader and the Senate minority leader regarding the disposition of pending nominations over the break. conditions are met, the President could give the nominee a recess appointment to the position. Recess appointments have sometimes had political consequences, however, particularly where Senators perceived that such an appointment was an effort to circumvent their constitutional role. Some Senate-confirmed positions there is Senate confirmation and presidential appointment, or if another method of appointment, such as recess appointment or a temporary appointment, is utilized. For further information on these methods, see section entitled " Recess Appointments " and " Temporary Appointment " below. preclude payment of an appointee who is given successive recess appointments to the same position. Although recess appointees whose nominations to a full term are subsequently rejected by the Senate may continue to serve until the end of their recess appointment, a provision of the FY2008 Financial Services and General Act will not allow this to happen. The bill was passed by the House of Representatives on September 26, 2008. The Senate passed the bill on September 27, 2008, and the Senate passed it on September 28, 2008,. The bill passed both houses of the Senate on September 29, 2008 and September 30, 2009. she has been nominated after the Senate has voted not to approve the nomination of said person. Prior to this provision, similar wording was included in annual funding measures for most or all of the previous 50 years. Another recent congressional response to the President's use of recess appointments was to pass a bill that would require the Senate to approve any recess appointments before they could go into effect. The bill was passed by the Senate on a vote of 50-to-50. It was the first time the Senate had voted to approve a recess appointment in more than 40 years. pay of recess appointees under certain circumstances. If the position falls vacant while the Senate is in session and the President fills it by recess appointment, the appointee may not be paid from the Treasury until he or she is confirmed by the Senate. However, the salary prohibition does not apply (1) if the vacancy arose within 30 days before the end of the session of the Senate and (2) if it was filled within the first 30 days of the next session of Congress. The President has an incentive to use his recess appointment authority in ways that allow them to be paid. full-time PAS position in the department, its incumbent, and its pay level. For most presidentially appointed positions requiring Senate confirmation, the pay levels fall under the Executive Schedule. As of January 2011, as of level I ($199,700) for Cabinet-level offices, level V ($145,700), for the lowest-ranked positions, was the pay level for most PAS positions in the Department of Health and Human Services. The pay levels range from level I to level V for the most senior positions. Government Appropriations Act that is still in effect today may prevent them from being paid after their rejection. The provision reads, "Hereafter, no part of any appropriation contained in this or any other Act shall be paid to any person for the filling of any position for which he or she has been selected" The provision was put in place after the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks in the United States. The attacks killed more than 3,000 people, including more than 1,000 children. or employee of the subject agency who is. occupying a position for which the rate of pay is equal to or greater than the minimum rate of. pay at the GS-15 level. The temporary position must be filled by someone who has been with the agency for at least 90 of the preceding 365 days. The position is temporary if the temporary position is filled by a person who is not a full-time member of the agency's senior management team. For more information, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/29/politics/staff/staff-top-10/staffing/top-stories/stories. appointment by 90 days. For positions located within a state, appointment is for 210 days, but the time restriction is suspended if a first or second nomination for the position is pending. In addition, during a presidential transition, the 210-day restriction period does not begin until either 90 days after the President assumes office, or 90 day after the vacancy is filled. Although this provision might give some additional flexibility to an incoming President, it might also lengthen the appointment process for some positions. Amendments to the Presidential Transition Act of 1963 encourage a President-elect to submit potential nominees to high-level national security positions as soon as possible after the election. A separate provision of law, enacted as part of the Federal Vacancies Reform Act of 1998, lengthens, during presidential transitions, the potential duration of a temporary position. The White House says it will continue to seek qualified candidates for the position of national security adviser until a nominee is confirmed by the Senate or House of Representatives. occurs, if it is within the 90-day inauguration period. The act does not apply to positions on multi-headed regulatory boards and commissions or to certain other specific positions which may be filled temporarily under other statutory provisions. During the 111 th Congress, President Barack Obama submitted to the Senate 107 bills to be considered by the House of Representatives. The Senate voted 107-1 to approve the bill, and the House passed it by a vote of 50-3. The bill was then sent to the White House, where it was signed into law. and U.S. district judge), the President, by custom, normally nominates an individual recommended by one or both Senators (if they are from the same party as the President) from that state. If neither Senator is from the President's party, he usually defers to the recommendations of party leaders from the state. Occasionally, the President solicits recommendations from Senators of the opposition party because of their positions in the Senate. Before making a nomination to a federal position at the state or national level, the president would likely consider how it will fare in the confirmation process. a candidate for the position. Members of Congress and interest groups sometimes recommend candidates for specific PAS positions. They may offer their suggestions by letter, for example, or by contact with a White House liaison. In general, the White House is under no obligation to follow such recommendations. In the case of the position of PAS, the position is filled by a nominee from the Department of Health and Human Services who has served in the position for at least two years. The nominee must have been confirmed by the Senate by the end of the year. case of the Senate, however, it has been argued that Senators are constitutionally entitled, by virtue of the advice and consent clause noted above, to provide advice to the President regarding his selection. The extent of this entitlement is a matter of some debate. As a practical matter, in instances such as this, the Senate may not be able to advise the President on the selection of a successor. The Senate may be unable to vote on the President's successor, even if it has the power to do so. may also be temporarily filled under the Vacancies Act. A nominee has no legal authority to assume the duties and responsibilities of the position. A candidate who is hired by the agency as a consultant while awaiting confirmation may serve only in an advisory capacity. Authority to act comes once the Senate confirms the nominee for the vacant position, which can take up to two years. The Senate will vote on whether to confirm the nominee on November 14. The vote is expected to take place within the next few days. House's nominations alive but also block any recess appointments. Congress has provided limited statutory authority for the temporary filling of vacant positions requiring Senate confirmation. Under the Federal Vacancies Reform Act of 1998, when an executive agency position requiring confirmation becomes vacant, it may be filled temporarily in one of the following ways: recess appointments, temporary fill-ins, or a combination of the two. The Senate has the power to confirm or reject the nominees at any time, subject to certain conditions, including the availability of information from the public. of the 111 th Congress, and the pay levels of those officials. The Constitution (Article II, Section 2) empowers the President to nominate and, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, to appoint the principal officers of the United States, as well as some subordinate officers. Officers of the 111th Congress include members of the House of Representatives, the Senate and the House of Representatives. The pay levels for those officials are based on the salary levels of the members of Congress. of the United States are those individuals serving in high-ranking positions that have been established by Congress. Three distinct stages mark the appointment process: selection and nomination, confirmation, and appointment. In the first stage, the White House selects a nominee for the position of national security adviser. The nominee is then confirmed by the Senate. The White House then nominates a successor, and the nominee is appointed to the position. The final stage is the appointment of a successor to the national security post. House selects and clears a prospective appointee before sending a formal nomination to the Senate. Once the appointee is given the commission and sworn in, he or she has full authority to carry out the responsibilities of the office. The Constitution also empowers the President to make a limited-term appointment without Senate confirmation when the Senate decides not to confirm him or her. The President selects after confirmation, at which point the appointment becomes official. The White House Office of Presidential Personnel is responsible for the selection process. This report explains the process for filling positions to which the President makes appointments with the advice and consent of the Senate (PAS positions) It also identifies, for the 111 th Congress, all nominations to full-time positions requiring Senate confirmation in 41 organizations in the executive branch (28 independent agencies, three ways): the first assistant to such a position may automatically assume the functions and duties of the office; the President may direct an officer in any agency who is occupying a position requiring Senateirmation to perform those tasks. the Senate rule providing for this return is often waived. In the final stage, the confirmed nominee is given a commission, which bears the Great Seal of the United States and is signed by the President, and is sworn into office. The President may sign the commission at any time, and the Senate may waive the return rule if it is needed to ensure the nominee's swearing-in is complete. The commission can be signed by any member of the Senate or the House of Representatives, and can be returned to the nominee at any point.