airfields include the Air Force, who provides day-to-day operations for all but two of the airfields. The U.S. Transportation, Air Mobility, European, Central, and Pacific Commands have various functional or geographical responsibilities. The airfields are normally staffed for the peacetime flow of aircraft. Additional personnel and equipment would be brought in to handle the refueling and cargo operations. Many air fields are primarily for U.N. cargo and refueling operations, while fighter aircraft are generally located at separate bases. of the C-17 cargo aircraft without refueling. Operation of the ERS airfields is shared between the host nation, which owns the airfield, and a number of DOD organizations. Host nation responsibilities vary and are documented in the Status of Forces Agreement for each country. U.S. organizations with responsibility for the airfields include the Air Force, Air Force Reserve, Air National Guard, and Air Force Logistics Command, among others. The ERS program is funded by the United States Department of Defense. The military services and the Defense Logistics Agency generally provide U.S. funding for these purposes. For example, the Air Force provides funds for the operation of its ERS airfield in Fairford, England. If the base command has no.responsibilities for the airfields, they have no funding programs for base operations and construction. For more information, visit www.airbaseproject.org or go to airbaseprojectproject.com. In the UK, Airbase Project is based at RAF Fairford. We discussed issues related to the basing of combat aircraft in our recent report on Kosovo operations, but not ERS operations. As shown in figure 1, the 13 ERS airfields are located mostly in Europe and throughout the Pacific. DOD selected the13 ERS bases according to their proximity to each other and the U.S. military's operations in the region. The bases are located in Europe, the Pacific, and North and South America, as well as Africa and the Middle East. The Air Force operates 11 ERS airfields; the Navy operates the airfield in Rota, Spain; and the Marines operate the air field in Iwakuni, Japan. The airfields are located on bases owned by the host country, under agreements for support negotiated by the State Department. Each military service must operate the ERS airstrips, which are located in the United States, Spain, Japan and Italy. The U.S. Air Force has the largest number of ERS airports, followed by the Navy and Marines. ERS airfields provide the primary “throughput” services for aircraft as they move from U.S. bases through ERS airfields. ERS also provides the capabilities needed to handle ongoing peacetime operations and requirements associated with smaller-scale contingency operations. For example, ERS bases were used extensively during recent operations in Kosovo. The En Route System is a global system of integrated land, sea, and air resources, and supplies already stored overseas. It provides the critical air component. Cold War, many U.S. military locations overseas have been closed and their personnel relocated to bases in the continental United States. Transportation Command officials state that with this drawdown (see fig. 2) in the 1990s, the ERS lost many of its facilities and much of its flexibility. Today, the eRS is based in Fort Leavenworth, Kansas, and has a staff of about 1,000 people. The ERS has a budget of more than $1 billion, and it has a workforce of around 1,500 people. limited impact if those aircraft do not have adequate airfields to land on. To improve the visibility of the ERS and reduce the risk of management problems and inefficiencies, we recommend that the Secretary of Defense: make one organization responsible for strategic management and coordination of overall ERS operations. It believes that base-level management of ERS airfields is best performed by the responsible services but agreed to consider whether one organization should be designated as responsible for some matters. We remain convinced that the responsibility for or management duties at ERS airfields and reviewed the scope of their individual responsibilities with DOD officials. We conducted our review from July 2000 through April 2001 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. In addition to those named above, Katherine Chenault, Lawrence E. Dixon, Richard G. Dixon and others were named in the report. The report was published in the July 2000 issue of the magazine, “The Air Force Journal,” which is published by the Air Force Association. strategic operations. In the late 1980s, the European Command had planned to return U.S. facilities at two ERS airfields to the host nations. Transportation Command officials believed the airfields were needed for mobilizations to the Middle East. The airfield facilities were ultimately retained. Overall management of a particular E RS airfield is shared between the command with responsibility for that geographical area and the military service that operates the airfield on a daily basis. The Central Command may act as advocates for the ERSAirfields. airfield in accordance with its primary service mission but may act as advocate for the airfield’s ERS-related needs. These commands are responsible for supporting and achieving U.S. interests in their particular area. However, each service must also manage theAirfield in. accordance with the policies set forth by the geographical command. These policies are based on the geographical commands’ primary mission, which is to support and achieve American interests in that area. For more information, visit the Air Force ERS website. The European and Pacific Commands established separate steering committees to provide a forum for coordination and resolution of ERS issues in each region. The Transportation Command co-chairs both steering committees. No organization is responsible for formally coordinating and overseeing overall ERS operations. The growth in importance of the En Route System has not been matched by a commensurate improvement in its performance. For more details on the various responsibilities of these organizations, go to: http://www.enroute.org/en-route-system. two committees are not required by any DOD-level guidance but are a collaborative effort sanctioned by the geographical commands to solve ERS operating issues. The committees are composed of all the organizations in each region with responsibility for ERS airfields in the area. The European steering committee also includes the European ERS Airfield Steering Committee, which is made up of the European Air Force Association, European Air National Guard Association, and European Air Forces Association. The U.S. Air Force ERS Committee is composed of the heads of each of the ERS organizations in the United States. Transportation and Air Mobility Command officials play some combination of three basic roles: owner/manager, funder, and/or advocate in support of various ERS needs. The Transportation Command has functional responsibility for managing the entire Defense Transportation System, airplanes. However, the Transportation Command is not in charge of the ERS airfields and can provide only limited funding for repair and improvement projects. Both commands may act as advocates for the resource needs of the En Route System (see fig. 8) The Transportation Command plans and coordinates movements through the overall transportation system. The Air Mobility Command uses the ERS airfields to help provide aerial refueling and airlift through its fleet of air tankers and cargo. The U.S. Air Force has a fleet of more than 1,000 air tanker and cargo aircraft. The Transportation Command is responsible for planning, coordinating, and executing the transportation system for the Air Force. It is also responsible for coordinating the airlift portion of the transport system. while an optimization model would be aware of all cargo available for pickup throughout the mission being modeled. As a result, in a situation where 10 tons of cargo are ready to be loaded right now and 40 more tons several hours in the future, the Airlift Flow Model would loaded with all 50 tons before sending it off. For example, the optimization model predicted that by redistributing the existing ramp space and fuel, DOD could boost cargo deliveries. In 1997 DOD sponsored an ERS capacity analysis.  Requirements Study 2005 analyzed the capacity of the mobility system to handle additional missions occurring concurrently with two wars. In general, the additional requirements could raise airlift capacity requirements by about 7 percent, the study found. The ability of the ERS to handle this extra requirement, however, is unclear. According to the study, the capacity to handle the extra requirement could be 7 percent higher than the current capacity. The study concluded that the additional airlift requirements could be as high as 10 percent higher as a result of two wars occurring concurrently. to mission requirements by identifying the best allocations of cargo to aircraft, aircraft to routes, and ground resources to airfields. For example, in analyzing the movement of cargo aircraft through the ERS the Airlift Flow Model would only be aware of what cargo is available for pickup at the moment, rather than the full range of cargo available to be transported at any one time. The ERS can be used to identify the best routes for cargo aircraft to be flown, as well as the best cargo to be picked up. labor intensive, making the models relatively inflexible and slow, and that it is difficult to introduce variables into analyses because optimization models attempt to analyze all possible permutations. For their part, Air Mobility Command officials responsible for operating the Airlift Flow Model believe that by repeated analyses over time the models will become more accurate and accurate. The models are based on the U.S. Air Force’s Airlift flow model, which was developed in the 1970s. The model is based on a set of equations known as the “Airlift Flow Theory” shortfall, the model DOD uses to simulate ERS operations could overestimate the size of the shortfall. Air Mobility Command officials acknowledge that the Airlift Flow Model, although designed to simulate or describe complex systems such as the ERS, does not necessarily identify the best or optimal solution. The model is based on the Air Force’s ‘Airlift Flow’ model, which was developed in the 1970s. The Air Force uses a different model, the ‘Air Force Flow Model’, to simulate and describe ERS. by simulating the movement of troops and equipment needed for each war with a series of models. We calculated capacity in terms of the amount of cargo weight that could move through ERS bases in the first 40 days of a conflict (the period of highest demand) We found that the bases had a capacity of more than 1.5 million tons of cargo per day. This is equivalent to around 1.6 million tonnes of cargo a day. We also found that each base had a cargo capacity of around 1 million tonnes per day, or about 1 million tons per month. schedule an aircraft to pick up the 10-ton cargo immediately since it is focused on current conditions. It would then schedule another aircraft toPick up the remaining 40 tons later when another plane became available. An optimization model would likely wait a few hours until an aircraft was available. However, an optimized model would most likely wait until the next available aircraft was in place to make the pick-up. It is not known how long it would take to complete the pick up and drop-off. to mobilization requirements. The model repeatedly simulates cargo movements until it reaches a solution to the identified mission. The solution may or may not be the optimal one. There are other types of models, called optimization models, that officials say are designed to seek the best or optimal solutions. The models are not meant to be the only solution, but the best one may be the most appropriate one for a given mission, officials say. For more information, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/29/military/military-cargo-model/index.html. their model, they were able to identify the best solutions for mobilization missions. Officials from the Office of the Secretary of Defense stated, however, that because optimization models show promise, DOD is continuing to sponsor projects to further develop their use. We were unable to quantify the overall impact of the model, but it could be used in the future to help with mobilization missions, an official said. The U.S. military is currently using the model to assess the best ways to mobilize troops for missions.  optimization models can come to unrealistic conclusions because they cannot simulate random events and may use information that may not be available to commanders early in the mobilization. Officials further state that loading data into optimized models can be very difficult. The U.S. military has been using optimization models to help plan its military operations in Iraq and Afghanistan. The models can help plan the military's operations in the event of an emergency or a major mobilization. The military has also been using the models to plan its operations in Afghanistan and Iraq. Sound strategic planning that clearly lays out missions and goals is crucial to achieving program success. Some strategic guidance for the ERS is expressed through elements needed for sound strategic plans. In addition, the analysis does not identify the expected cost to remedy the capacity to do so. An extended research effort is needed to determine the extent of the problem and how it can be solved, officials say. The ERS program is expected to last for at least 10 years, according to the U.S. Department of Defense. gaps in DOD’s overall strategic planning processes that have led to difficulties in assessing performance in a variety of areas. As a result, we have classified DOD strategic planning as a major management challenge. We also classified DOD management of support infrastructure as amajor management challenge because of DOD�s lack of focus on this aspect of its mission. We have classified the management of Support Infrastructure as aMajor Management Challenge. We’ve classified DOD Management of Support Equipment as a Major Management Challenge because of its lack of attention to this area. its decisions or to show that the planned $2 billion in projects represent the best solutions for correcting the shortfall. According to Transportation Command officials, the process DOD used to determine the en-route infrastructure was primarily focused on satisfying mission war-fighting requirements while attempting to minimize costs where possible. An earlier version of this article stated that the Transportation Command was responsible for the planning and approval of the projects. We are happy to clarify that this was not the case and that the decision was made by the Department of Defense. example, choosing to repair or improve existing bases rather than building new ones. Because of the age of the facilities, many of the planned projects had already been identified and justified in the military construction budgeting process. Despite concerns about aging and deteriorating facilities, Transportation Command officials also told CNN that many of these projects were already approved by the military's construction budget process in advance of the 2014 fiscal year. The military says it will continue to build new bases in the event of a shortage of funds. higher resource priority. To publicize the problem and obtain higher priority, the Air Mobility Command proclaimed 1997 the “Year of the En Route System” and funding began to increase. However, even with the increased priority, officials told us that it still takes many years to move projects through the budget. It is estimated that the U.S. Air Force will spend more than $100 billion on air travel in 2015. The U.N. estimates that the number of air travelers will rise to more than 100 million by the end of 2015. usually the number of available aircraft but the capability of the en-route or destination infrastructure to accommodate the ground operations of the aircraft. According to Transportation Command officials, the absence of elements such as an overall strategic plan is the result of no single organization having overall responsibility for the mission. The U.S. Air Force has a fleet of more than 2,000 aircraft. It is the largest air force in the world, with more than 1,000 of its aircraft based in the United States. The Air Force's fleet of aircraft is based in San Diego, California. monitoring mechanisms to help decisionmakers gauge progress and problems in carrying out strategic goals. For example, it simply assumes that projects will be completed on schedule without any measures of actual progress. In fact, during our review Transportation and Air Mobility Command officials could not tell us how many projects they were working on at the time of the review. It is not clear how many of these projects are actually being completed on time and on budget. It's also not known how many are being funded by the United States. committees and the Honorable Donald H. Rumsfeld, Secretary of Defense. Copies will also be made available to others upon request. Please contact me at (757) 552-8100 if you or your staff have any questions concerning this report. The major contributors to this report are listed in appendix IV. According to the appendix IV, according to the report's author, the U.S. government has spent more than $1.2 billion on the Iraq war. officials at the Office of the Secretary of Defense, the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the RAND Corporation and the Naval Postgraduate School. Much of our analysis was focused on the U.S. Transportation Command, the European Command and the Central Command. We also looked at the Air Force Mobility Command, Air Force Central Command and Air Force Pacific Command. For more, go to CNN.com/soulmatestories and follow us on Twitter @cnnstories. Back to the page you came from. CNN's Stefano Petrucci and Gregory J. Symons contributed to this report. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255 or visit www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org. For the latest on CNN's "Reliable Sources," visit CNN.com/ReliableSources. region and for planning and maintaining war-fighting capabilities in the event of an outbreak of hostilities. They include component commands drawn from each of the military services to manage the support associated with each. These commands may act as an advocate for ERS needs consistent with their contribution to the commands’ mission of maintaining war fighting capabilities. In Europe, both the European Navy and U.S. Air Forces Europe provide support for their naval and air bases in the region. In the Pacific, the Navy’s Pacific Fleet, Marine Forces Pacific, and Pacific Air Forces provide similar support. information and management structures. Establishing the European and Pacific steering committees was an important first step in organizing regional operations, but does not go far enough. While the war-fighting responsibilities and authorities of the geographical commands must be respected, one overarching organization with responsibility for strategic operations and coordination of the operations should be established, says the U.N. secretary-general. The U.S. military has been involved in Afghanistan since the war began in December 2001, and is now involved in a number of regional operations. The needs of the geographical commands (such as the European, Central, and Pacific commands) take precedence over those of the functional commands. The North Atlantic Treaty Organization may also use the bases to assist in carrying out its duties. The U.S. Air Force bases are located in Florida, Georgia, North Carolina, South Carolina, and Virginia. The bases were built in the 1950s and 1960s by the United States Air Force. They are currently home to the Air Force Base System, based in Tampa, Florida. The ability to fight and win two nearly simultaneous major theater wars is the cornerstone of U.S. defense strategy. For planning purposes, the military assumes that the two most likely places where these wars would take place are Korea and Southwest Asia. Mobilization of U.-S. forces for such conflicts requires a significant increase in the number of troops in the armed forces, the authors say. The authors say the most effective way to prepare for such a conflict is to have a large number of soldiers on the ground in the region. the anticipated war zones, the host nation’s willingness to allow the use of its bases, and other factors such as climate. Each is planned to be within an area 3,500 nautical miles from the United States and from the war zones. This distance is based on the maximum efficient range, and based on other factors, such as the host country's willingness to let the U.S. use its bases. Each base is expected to be operational by the end of the 2030s. as Germany ($430.8 million) and Japan ($523.9 million) According to officials from the U.S. Transportation, European, and Pacific Commands, funding commitments from the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and Germany are contained in formal agreements. Japanese funding is provided under the Japanese Facilities Improvement Program. Japan has provided more than $1 billion in funding for U.N. peacekeeping operations since the start of the war in Afghanistan in March 2009. The U.K. has provided about $500 million in funding. some $21 billion for projects under this program, which started in 1979 to ease the financial burden of stationing U.S. forces in Japan. However, funding for projects is voluntary, and there are no written agreements associated with the ERS projects. Moreover, the level of funding has been the same since the program began in 1979, with no changes in funding levels since then. The ERS program is funded by the United States through a combination of military and civilian sources. declining somewhat since the early 1990s, and is also constrained by prohibitions such as using the funds for projects viewed by the government of Japan as increasing war-fighting capacity. The remaining 45 percent ($878 million) is expected to come from a variety of U.S. programs (see table 1). The largest program is the National Security Act of 1991, which provides $1.2 billion in aid to the war-torn regions of Afghanistan, Iraq, and Syria. The second largest is the Stimulus Act of 1990, which gives $1 billion to the United States. The third is the Bipartisanartisanartisan Budget Act of 1993, which offers $1 million in aid. Review in July 2000. Most (58 percent) of the costs are associated with bases in the Pacific region. Host nations and U.S. allies are expected to fund about 55 percent of the total. But it is unclear whether all the costs will be covered. The United States is expected to be responsible for the rest of the cost of the bases. The cost of a base in the Philippines is estimated to be about $1.2 billion a year, with the majority of that going to the military. The proposed projects are intended largely to replace capability lost due to deterioration or base closures. In fact, only 25 of the 516 projects provide additional capacity. The proposed projects cost about $1.billion (58 percent) compared to about $825 million (42 percent) for the European bases. The projects are not expected to increase overall capacity. They are intended to replace capability lost due to deterioration or base closures, not increase capacity. by more modern pipeline and hydrant systems. At other bases, hydrants are antiquated or have deteriorating lines that slow and sometimes interrupt fueling operations altogether. Bases in the Pacific are the worst off. As shown in figure 6, repairs and improvements at bases in the Asia-Pacific region total about $1.14. The U.S. military has more than 1,000 bases across the world, many of which are in Asia and the Pacific. The number of bases is expected to grow over the next decade. Contributors are the Defense Logistics Agency and the Air Force Operation and Maintenance and Military Construction programs. It is unclear whether all the construction projects will be completed as planned. According to Transportation Command officials, funding for the projects covered by U.S. programs has been formally requested through the DOD. For more, go to CNN.com/Impact and follow us on Twitter @CNNImpact. for updates on the latest in the Obama administration's infrastructure projects. for more, visit the CNN iReport website. needs funds for a construction project, it requests them from its parent command in the region. U.S. Air Forces Europe would validate the project and request funding through the various programs available. These would be primarily Air Force programs funding military military. The project would be completed by the end of the year or early next year, the Air Force says. The cost of the project would not be determined until after the project is complete, it adds. The program would be funded by the U.K. Air Force and the European Command. construction, operations, and maintenance, or, in the case of fuels projects, the Defense Logistics Agency. In deciding whether to include a project in funding requests, the services and the Defenselogistics Agency assign their own priorities to the project. The Defense Log logistics agency has responsibility for funding fuels projects across all services. The agency has the authority to approve or reject funding requests for fuels projects for the U.S. Air Force, Navy, Marine Corps, Army and Air Force Reserve. of a 2- to 3-year delay in host government approval of funding requirements. According to officials, the host government was concerned about sovereignty issues involved in its membership in the North Atlantic Treaty Organization. Formal approval has now been received for these projects, and funding has been shifted by about about $1.5 billion. It is hoped the project will be completed by the end of the year or early next year. It will be the first of a series of large-scale projects in the region. budget process, and they believe the projects will be funded within planned time frames. U.S.-funded ERS projects in Europe must compete for funding against Pacific projects and others within DOD in an environment of concern about a growing backlog of facilities maintenance and repair projects. Officials also note that host nation involvement in funding can create some uncertainty in construction timetables. For example, DOD had to reassign fiscal year 2002 funding for construction projects at one ERS airfield in Europe to other DOD projects. About 19 percent of funding under U.S. programs was associated with projects that had either begun or completed work, compared to about 10 percent of host nation and allied funding. Only recently has the ERS begun to receive high priority for funding. In the past, the U.N. Security Council has voted to cut funding to ERS projects if they had not been completed or completed by the end of the year. The ERS is a joint effort between the United States, France, Germany, Italy and Spain. reliance on the 13 remaining old and deteriorating ERS bases. DOD’s latest estimate of ERS construction to eliminate the shortfall consists of 516 projects and costs about $2 billion. This revised figure is substantially higher than the estimated $1.2 billion that DOD reported to us at the beginning of our remaining projects. The remaining projects either upgrade existing capacity to current environmental, safety, or operational standards or replace/repair equipment due to obsolescence or failure. DOD plans call for about 55 percent of the $2billion in ERSConstruction funding to come from the North Atlantic Treaty Organization ($132.6 million) We understand that developing a formal cost-benefit analysis of the overall ERS infrastructure is difficult because of the size of the ERS. We obtained lists of construction projects at each ERS airfield and analyzed them from a number of different perspectives, including the total costs by base, by region, and systemwide. We also discussed the purpose; and the expected source of funding and discussed them. We believe that the European and Pacific Steering committees and the Inspector General.to optimize the list of projects to be funded. DOD infrastructure is grossly under funded, with facilities currently funded for replacement every 250 years. DOD has reduced force structure since the end of the Cold War, but it has not achieved similar reductions in infrastructure costs. Projects planned in later years are more vulnerable to funding changes since they have not yet been spent and they must continue to problems in this area. (See p. 18 for a discussion of DOD problems in infrastructure management.) The Pentagon has not been spending enough money to offset the growing backlog of facilities maintenance and repair. As of October 2000, about 4 percent ($75.0 million) of total funding had been spent on completed projects with another 10 percent ($194.6 million) spent on projects in progress. The remaining 86 percent ($1.7 million) is associated with projects that had not yet started construction. Since the end of the 1 year, most of the projects have not yet begun construction.projects will be completed as planned, as the projects must compete with each other and with other DOD projects for funding and face other uncertainties. U.S. programs have progressed somewhat faster than those funded by host nations. Funding for such projects is subject to future budgetary constraints and uncertainties. $1.2 billion of funding was associated with projects in various stages of planning, programming of funds, and engineering design running out through 2006. The U.S.-led initiative is expected to be the largest in the history of the U.N. peacekeeping force. The mission is scheduled to be completed by the end of the 2030s. It will be the first time the United States has been involved in a major international peacekeeping mission. The $2 billion will fund repairs and improvements to fuel systems, runways, ramp space, and other base elements needed to bring system capacity up to requirements. As shown in figure 3, the largest construction cost category is associated with fuel system.some components were built by host nations even earlier. The cost of repairs to the fuel system is estimated to be $1.5 billion to $3 billion. The costs of improvements to the runways and ramp space are expected to be around $1 million to $2 million. to document the rationale for its decisions and demonstrate that its proposed projects represent the best solutions. The ERS has no centralized oversight system to provide readily available, up-to-date data on the condition and readiness of the airfields. It has no formal strategic plan to identify us that they could not provide data on deterioration and failure rates. Officials said that they. could not identify any worthwhile measures that they can accurately produce without. a formal plan to do so. The agency has no central oversight system for monitoring the condition of its facilities and equipment. shortfalls, or the organizational or procedural responsibilities for achieving ERS goals. The analysis does not identify priorities between regions, bases, or projects to help identify strategies to be followed in case of funding or other problems. Finally, the analysis also does not identifies any system of performance measures and measures of success. The report was published by the World Resources Institute (WRI) on November 14, 2013. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. A formal, written strategic plan that lays out missions and goals, guiding principles and priorities, performance measures, and monitoring mechanisms is also needed. This plan would help ensure that ERS operations are governed by a coherent worldwide vision and not by limited regional or service notions and perspectives. Without the vision and order provided by a formal strategic plan, decisionmakers do not have the information they need to ensure ERS resources and operations are focused on the right goals and outcomes. Without a system for ongoing monitoring of key aspects of ERS Operations, decisionmaking does not take place. ERS. Management of the ERS is fragmented among at least four unified commands and six subcommands, three services, host nations, and other organizations such as the Defense Logistics Agency. “robust” management in one or even several areas does not constitute a coherent and coordinated overall management structure. Our recommendation is intended to assign responsibility for overarching issues, such as development of an overall strategic plan. We agree that some elements of ERS operations are individually managed by various organizations and processes. overall ERS operations during peacetime is needed. Without such structure ERS. operations are prone to a higher risk of inefficiency in the form of confusing. and overlapping lines of authority and accountability for key decisions. There is a lack of coordination and duplication of effort among responsible organizations, and wasteful competition for. resources. The U.S. military has a long history of using ERS to support its operations in Afghanistan and Iraq. It has also been used to support U.N. operations in the Middle East and Africa. the DOD budget process. However, these officials acknowledged that DOD has no formal strategic plan for the ERS. Without such a plan, DOD does not have the information or management structure needed to ensure the success of the E RS. In fact, during our formal closeout meeting in April 2001 officials told us that a formal Strategic plan was being developed as a result of our review. The document cited by DOD in the January 2001 document is the document cited in this report. The report was published by the Center for Strategic and International Studies, a nonpartisan think tank. Despite the strategic importance of the ERS, critical information on ERS plans and operations is not available. DOD has not carried out overall cost-benefit studies long-term plans and strategies, guiding policies, and operating priorities. No single organization is responsible for managing and funding the E RS. ERS problems and issues need to receive a cost- benefit study, and monitoring system, to help provide a clear, coordinated, and comprehensive management structure for all ERS operations, the authors say. real time, readily available information needed to quickly identify and correct problems, including the status of projects. DOD also needs to develop an overall cost-benefit study of its construction plans for the ERS. Without this information, DOD will not be able to ensure that strategic requirements are met and planned troop movements won't be delayed, the report says. The ERS is expected to be completed by the end of the year, it adds. The cost of the project is estimated to be $1.2 billion. this information, DOD cannot compare options and alternatives for improving the ERS, and document that the solutions it chooses are the best ones. DOD disagreed with our recommendation to include information on ERS limitations in its annual performance plan and report. DOD needs to be able to ensure that the guiding principles and rationales at play in allocating scarce funding dollars are not lost in the many for funds. There is no evidence that projects are prioritized by importance or that progress toward an established goal is being made in an efficient and timely fashion. relying exclusively on the budget process to document funding rationales often results only in inferences as to why decisions were made. This process lacks the benefit of clear information on the pros and cons of available choices or on the guiding principles used to make those decisions. DOD’s annual requests are released to the public in advance of each fiscal year. The budget process is expected to be completed by the end of the year, according to a report by the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) The Congress may wish to consider directing the Secretary of Defense to implement the recommendations. DOD believes the guidance it provides through the planning and budgeting process is sufficient. The Department also disagreed with our recommendation for an overall cost-benefit study to document the rationales for plans to repair and improve the ERS. There is no centralized monitoring system to ensure that these prudent improvements to ERS management are were behind their original schedule because there is no central monitoring system. The Congress may want to ask DOD to periodically report on DOD’s progress. We reviewed deficiencies and corrective actions identified in DOD Joint Monthly Readiness Review Reports, Air Mobility Command reports, and reports and other documents produced by the military. We discussed them with officials at the offices identified above, as well as at DOD’s Office of the Inspector General. We also reviewed the reports and documents that led to the corrective actions. We are happy to provide more information about the actions taken to address the deficiencies. We hope to share more information with you in the coming days and weeks. stated that any modeling provides only an approximation of real-world systems and that no analysis can provide solutions that are 100-percent accurate. DOD believes that it has applied the best tools available and that it will continue to refine its capabilities, as new modeling tools become available. DOD appears to these factors on DOD’s estimate. Our report does not attempt to endorse one modeling approach over the other. We point out the uncertainties of both approaches—including DOD officials’ comments on the pros and cons of each. is important to fully consider all options in such analyses to ensure that, should an optimal solution be available, it is identified. DOD also provided technical comments, which we incorporated as appropriate. We are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional members for consideration. DOD’s comments are reprinted in appendix III, and we are sending a copy to the White House as well as the Senate and the House of Representatives for further review and consideration. The report is available online at: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/28/technology/features/top-10-military-issues-of-the-year.html#storylink=cpy by an estimated 12 to 13 percent. A second DOD- sponsored study used an optimization model to analyze the impact of proposed construction projects designed to increase the fuel handling capacity at ERS bases. The study concluded that the increase in throughput capacity provided by the projects would be small and that using existing resources more effectively may be the best way to increase fuel deliveries. Although DOD officials believe that optimization models have promise, they also believe that they have drawbacks and did not use them to analyzed the ERS in the Mobility Requirements Study 2005. We did not independently verify DOD’s estimate of system capacity. DOD believes that the existing organization, in particular its ERS steering committees, readiness reporting processes, planning and budgeting system, and reviews of strategic mobility already provide a “robust” management structure for the ERS. To identify the causes of any shortfalls and DOD's plans to correct them, we reviewed the processes DOD used to analyze ERS capacity.or our description of the modeling approach used to analyzed ERScapacity. carried out. In written comments on a draft of this report, DOD generally disagreed with our conclusions and recommendations. DOD did not agree with our view that the ERS lacks a coherent management structure. Our description of the growth in costs of eliminating the shortfall in system capacity, progress and overall costs is symptomatic of the weaknesses in DOD’s management of the E RS, DOD said. DOD said our report asserted that the approach it used is “flawed” and overestimates the shortfalls. to the study, DOD needs to reanalyze the ERS to determine whether there might be any extra capacity available to handle the additional missions or whether more capacity must be built. Officials were unsure when this issue would be tackled. In contrast to the assumptions that tend to underestimate the U.S. military, this study found that U.N. forces tend to overestimate their ability to cope with new missions. The study was conducted by the RAND Corporation, a nonprofit that provides research and development support to the military. Some study assumptions eliminate the shortfall by 2005. The effect of the shortfall would be that required military forces and equipment would arrive in the war zones later than planned, increasing the risk of operations not being executed as planned and of higher casualties. The study estimated the shortfall have misunderstood our point. Our report does not assert that the modeling approach was flawed or that it overstated the shortfall. We state that the assumptions and modeling approaches DOD used could underestimate or overestimate the size of the sh shortfall. Some of the study’s assumptions tend to underestimate the size of the shortfall. Despite concerns about their old age and deteriorating condition, DOD assumes that ERS airfields would operate without breaking down. The net effect of these factors on estimates of ERS capacity in 2005 is unclear. DOD officials believe their analyses of E RS requirements and capacity are accurate.. The capacity requirements of the ERS are defined in the some of the Study’S assumptions. The modeling approach used could overestimate it. strategy is being considered for the Pacific, but it has not yet been approved. Additional study assumptions that tend to underestimate the shortfall are classified. Capacity requirements for the ERS could be raised even higher if other ongoing missions (such as peacekeeping) were added, further increasing the shortfall. The Mobility strategy is being considering for thePacific. It has not been approved by the U.S. government. It is not known if the strategy will be used in the Pacific or the rest of the world. three measures (airlift capacity, sealift capacity, and overseas prepositioning of equipment) However, it does not include data on ERS shortfalls in the report, despite the major effect such shortfalls have on airlift capacity. Officials from the Office of the Secretary of Defense said that they do not include ERSShortfalls in their report. They said that the data does not reflect the full extent of ERS Shortfalls. The report was published by the U.S. Department of Defense on Wednesday. peacetime, develop a formal strategic plan and monitoring system for the ERS, develop an overall cost-benefit study. DOD said it would nevertheless try to improve the integration, presentation, and documentation of the plan to help outside organizations understand its provisions. We disagree that the January 2001 Mobility Requirements Study 2005 contains a strategic plan forThe ERS. There seems to be some confusion in DOD over this issue. During the course of our review we asked repeatedly for copies of any strategic plan. shortfalls in its reports on the performance of the overall strategic mobility system, resulting in an incomplete picture of mobility capabilities. DOD also disagreed with our description of the growth in estimated costs for improving the ERS. DOD stated that the different cost estimates we were provided are not directly comparable because they were produced several years apart and were produced in different locations. Despite the increased cost estimates and other uncertainties surrounding ERS construction projects, DOD has not developed overall cost-benefit studies or other prudent assurances to demonstrate either the rationale for performance report. Omitting data on ERS limitations from DOD’s plan and reports on strategic mobility presents an incomplete picture of DOD capability. Efforts to reduce shortages of DOD cargo aircraft will have along with the other elements of strategic mobility: airlift, sealift, and prepositioned equipment. We disagree that it is appropriate to exclude information about ERS performance from other documents such as the mobility requirements studies, annual budget justification documents, and quarterly readiness reports. DOD stated that information on E RS performance is already included in other documents. recent Mobility Requirements Study 2005, which estimated the mobility assets and supporting infrastructure needed to deploy for the two-war scenario. The study concluded that current capacity is significantly short of requirements but that improvements to the ERS would be needed. The analysis does not include many of the projects that are planned for 2005, the study says. It is simply an analysis of current shortfalls in capacity and whether planned construction projects will remedy those shortfalls by 2005—if they are completed on schedule. The ERS "Infrastructure Analysis" is not a strategic plan. The Air Mobility Command says ERS airfield capacity is not a primary criterion for measuring performance. The ERS is an integral aspect of strategic mobility. Omitting ERS information from the key annual report would be a mistake, the command says. The report covers only the highest-level measures of performance, it says, and not all elements of the military's strategic mobility are included in the annual report. In fact, Air Mobility command reports cite ERS infrastructure as the top limiting factor in deployment operations. We obtained briefings, reviewed documents, and interviewed. To determine whether the ERS airfields have the capacity needed to meet the requirements of the National Military Strategy, we obtained briefings and reviewed documents. We concluded that reducing unneeded infrastructure could free up the funding needed to ensure that critical assets such as the E RS airfields are adequately funded. In accordance with the Government Performance and Results Act of 1993, DOD reports annually on its performance in managing strategic mobility capabilities by using the project in terms of its contribution to their own missions. ERS capacity was about $1.2 billion for fiscal years 1997 through 2006. Shortly after that the estimate was changed to $2.0 billion. No one is responsible for monitoring the overall cost to eliminate the shortfall, Transportation Command officials say. The estimated cost has grown to about $2 billion, officials say, according to officials, the increase reflects the increase in the number of aircraft in the fleet, and the cost of maintaining them all at the same time.. The Air Mobility Command agreed to query all of the various commands involved in the ERS to determine the current cost to eliminated the shortfall. DOD did not know how much it would cost to bring ERS capacity up to requirements because it does not monitor overall costs. Air Mobility Command officials had to make a special query to all the commands to find out what was going on. The U.S. Air Force is using the ERS system to provide air refueling and other support to the Air Force. The ERS program is funded by the U.N. and the Air force. It is funded through a combination of federal and military sources. were premised on different sets of bases and analytical methodologies. Our report clearly lays out these differences. DOD further claimed that we were using the comparison to point to ‘unexplained’ cost growth. Whether DOD was aware of the reasons behind the increased estimate was not the primary point we made in our report. The report was published by the Government Accountability Office (GAO) on November 14. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. the current costs were and whether they had changed over previous estimates. Similarly, when we requested an updated estimate late in our review, officials responded that obtaining such an update would be very labor intensive and time consuming. We believe that the lack of a strategy or system for monitoring the project is the reason for its lack of progress. The project is expected to be completed by the end of the year or early next year. The cost of the project has been estimated to be in the region of $1 billion. increased flow of aircraft in the event of contingency operations or full-scale war. According to DOD’s January 2001 estimate, the 13 ERS airfields would not currently have enough capacity to move the required amounts of personnel and airfields will still be short of requirements at the end of 2005. The study at least partially offsets these assumptions by calculating the capacity of ERS bases in Europe on the assumption that DOD would lose access to one of six bases during mobilization (the so-called “six-lose-one” strategy). First few years after the end of the Cold War and during the military drawdown, little concern was voiced about shrinking ERS capacity. But as contingency operations began to place increasing demands on the remaining airfields, Air Mobility Command leaders realized how critical the airfields were and how they needed to be protected. The U.S. Air Force has more than 2,000 ERSs, the majority of which are located in the Pacific Northwest, the Middle East, and South America. The ERS system was built in the 1950s and 1960s. It was designed to handle the needs of the military during the Vietnam War. has access to only 13 locations, compared with 45 in the early 1990s. As a result, the remaining bases have become much more important as the only airfield options available for en- route mobilization support. In July 2000, DOD officials told us that the cost to eliminate the shortfall in bases was estimated to be $1.5 billion. The cost of eliminating the shortfall is now estimated at $2.2 billion, according to a report by the Congressional Research Service. The report was based on a request for information from the Department of Defense. changes in the bases making up the ERS since the mid-1990s, increases in the costs of repairing/improving system components due to aging, and a more in-depth and accurate analysis of costs. Transportation Command officials told us that most ERS airfields were built during or immediately after World War II. Overall cost-benefit analysis was not done, they said, because the E RS evolved over many years in response to changing military and political conditions and to hundreds of mobility and engineering analyses of capacity trade-offs under different combinations of bases. estimate developed in the mid-1990s in conjunction with a major review of overall mobility requirements. That estimate was based on a quick world tour by a team of engineers who covered what at the time were about 35 ERS bases, with sometimes only half a day spent at each base. The U.S. Air Force is one of the largest military contractors in the world, with a budget of more than $1 billion a year. It is the second largest military contractor after the U.K., with a $1.2 billion budget. The standard fuel systems at current ERS bases were designed and built during the early 1950s and had an estimated life span of 30 to 40 years. At some bases refueling must be carried out by trucks, rather than the usual aircraft. The U.S. Air Force plans to replace its fleet of F/A-18 Hornets with F-16s and F-22s by the end of the decade. The F-18s will be able to carry out missions in the event of an emergency.