designating the boards and commissions as the DFE heads enhances their independence, and 20 responded that their independence is enhanced by requiring a two-thirds majority for their removal. A smaller number of affected IGs stated that these provisions had no effect on their independence. One DFE IG affected by the provisions did not respond to these survey questions. Also, a former D FE IG stated that reporting to his commission would reduce his independence, according to the survey. The survey was carried out by the European Commission. The Dodd-Frank Act requires the written concurrence of a two-thirds majority of the board or commission to remove an IG. Prior to this protection, most DFE IGs reported to, and were subject to removal by, the individual serving as head of the DFE. Twenty-six of the 33 D FE IGs are in DFEs with boards and commissions. Of these 26 IGs, 14 reported that the act’s provision had enhanced their independence. The Reform Act also letters. The Dodd-Frank Act amended the IG Act with provisions to enhance the independence of IGs in DFEs with boards or commissions. IGs rarely use 7-day letters as a way to independently inform agency heads and the Congress of serious problems. Such issues were resolved without the need for such a letter, the authors say. They surveyed the 26 DFE IGs affected by the provisions intended by the House Committee on Government Operations in 1988 and found that the IGs viewed the use of the 7- day letter as a last resort to attempt to force appropriate action. professional certifications, 6 IGs appointed by the President reported having professional certifications. 28 DFE IGs reported they possessed at least one professional certification related to their IG responsibilities. For the presidential IGs, 2 were certified fraud examiners, 1 reported being a certified internal auditor. 6 reported they are certified public accountants and 6 reported that they were certified internal auditors. Additional certifications reported by the D FE IGs include 6 certified government financial managers, 4 fraud examiner, 3 certified information managers and 2 had certifications in additional separate areas. systems auditors, and 7 with other certifications such as a certified government auditing professional, certified information security manager, and certified inspector general. We received comments from the IG Council (reprinted in app. V), on September 13, 2011. The council commented that the draft provided provided that the auditors were not qualified to do their jobs. (See fig. 5.) We also received comments on the draft from the Inspector General's Office, on September 14, 2011, on the issue of the inspector general's office. ability in accounting, auditing, financial analysis, law, management analysis, public administration, or investigation. The fields in which an IG can have experience are intended to be sufficiently diverse so that many qualified people could be considered. The IG Act IGs’ survey information provided on the background of each IG, including professional experience, academic degrees, and professional certifications obtained prior to being appointed to an IG position. We compared this information to the areas of demonstrated ability specified by the IG Act. criminal justice, investigations, law enforcement, accounting and auditing, and financial analysis. Most of the IGs reported having degrees in areas that are relevant to performing in an IG position and in areas of demonstrated experience specified by the IG Act. Other academic degrees reported by presidential and DFE IGs included mathematics, science, sociology, education, psychology, and English. With respect to the academic degrees obtained by the 62 IGs, we also obtained information on the academic degree obtained by them. Figure 3 summarizes the background experiences of the 62 IGs who responded to our survey. Most of the IGs appointed by the President reported that they had a background in criminal justice, investigations, law enforcement, and public administration, while most of the DFE IGs had backgrounds in inspections and evaluations, according to the survey. The survey was carried out by the Center for International Governance and Security (CIGS) in Washington, D.C., on behalf of the U.S. Department of State. or to obtain counsel from another IG’s office or from the Council of the Inspectors General on Integrity and Efficiency (IG Council) The IG Act also provides protections to the independence of the IGs while keeping both their agency heads and the Congress fully and currently informed about particularly flagrant using the legal resources of the IG Council. The Act provides a reporting tool that can protect the independence. of IGs who report immediately to the agency head particularly serious or flagrant problems, abuses, or deficiencies relating to the administration of programs or operations. legal counsel from another IG office or from the IG Council. In a March 1995 report, the IG community expressed concerns that IGs with attorneys located organizationally in their agencies’ offices of general counsel would not always receive independent legal advice. The results from our survey show that all the IGs established by the IG Act reported having access to a legal counsel that is organizationally independent. For the 30 IGs appointed by the President, 29 employ their own legal counsel while 1 IG uses the legal services of another IG. their relative stature within their agencies by increasing their fixed compensation and eliminating discretionary compensation that could create a conflict of interest. Having access to independent legal counsel reporting to an IG instead of an agency management official, thus helping to ensure the independence of legal advice available to agency management officials. Being able to receive independent legal advice from an outside counsel instead of a management official. Having the ability to use their own legal counsel rather than rely on the advice of their agency's legal counsel to provide legal advice. The IG Act created independent IG offices at 30 major departments and agencies. IGs are appointed by the President, confirmed by the Senate, and may be removed only by the president with advance notice to the Congress stating the reasons. Although not in the scope of our review, there are 10 IGs established by the IG Act that are not subject to Senate confirmation. They are the same as those IGs originally established, but with the distinction that they are appointed and can be removed by their agency heads rather than the President. In 1988, the IG Act was amended to establish additional IG offices located in 33 DFEs defined by the act. The IGs appointed by the President are generally located in the largest departments and agencies of the government. In addition, the Department of State IG provides oversight of the Broadcasting Board of Governors, which is located at the State Department. The DFE IGs have the same authorities and responsibilities by other statutes with provisions similar to those in the Inspector General Act of 1978, as amended, with appointment by the agency head. the agency, such as the general counsel, chief acquisition officer, chief information officer, and chief financial officer. In addition, the DFE IG pay cannot be less than the average total compensation (including bonuses) of the senior-level executives at that agency. Of the remaining 3 DFE IGs, 1 was newly established in fiscal year 2011 and had not yet determined an amount of pay consistent with senior- level executives, 1 IG said. 29 reported that their pay and salaries were consistent with those of theSenior-level Executives of their agencies. Of the 30 IGs appointed by the President, 27 reported being at or even above the required pay level. The remaining 3 IGs reported that they were in acting positions and the requirement was not currently applicable to them. Of the 32 DFE IGs who responded, 27 responded to the request for information on their pay levels on an annual basis, with the remaining 3 reporting they were not currently in a position to do so. The report was compiled by the Office of the Director-General of the DFE. and they had about 14 percent (1,826) of the total staff on board at the end of fiscal year 2010. The IG Reform Act of 2008 (Reform Act) amended the IG Act by adding requirements related to IG independence and effectiveness. Among other provisions, the Reform Act requires the rate reported having the correct salary but not the corresponding grade level. 1 IG was in an acting capacity and reported the requirement was not currently applicable. The Reform Act also requires that each IG established by theIG Act have his or her own legal counsel or obtain necessary legal counsel. We asked all of the 62 IGs about the implementation of Reform Act provisions intended to keep IG pay and salaries at a specified level. Just over half of these IGs responded that the change of agency head to the full board or commission increased their independence. The IGs reported pay that was at the specified levels required by the Reform Act for IGs appointed by the President and consistent with those of other senior-level officials as required for DFE IGs. Most responded that requirements for a two- thirds concurrence among the board orCommission were needed to maintain IG independence. of basic pay of the IGs appointed by the President to be at a specified level, and for the DFE IGs, at or above a majority of other senior-level executives at their entities. The Reform Act also requires an IG to obtain legal advice from his or her own counsel. The IG's pay is adjusted from Executive Schedule IV to Executive Schedule III plus 3 percent. In addition, the Reform Act requires that the grade, level, or rank designation of the D FE IGs be set at orabove that of a majority. of the senior- level executives of their organizations. DFE for purposes of IG appointment, general supervision, and reporting under the IG Act. If the DFE has a board or commission the amendments would now require each of these IGs to report organizationally to the entire board orCommission as the head of the D FE rather than an individual. Amendments of 1988 created DFE IGs but did not specify that these IG appointments made by agency heads were to be without regard to political affiliation. The Reform Act addressed the differences in criteria for IG appointment by providing the Congress asked the IGs to identify the 10 most serious management problems in their respective agencies. This request began a yearly process that continues as a result of the Reports Consolidation Act of 2000. Most of the 203 management challenges they reported for fiscal year 2010 focused on issues specific to their agencies’ missions and performance management. For example, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration’s IG reported that major changes to the direction to provide oversight coverage of management challenges were needed to address about 93 percent of the challenges identified. was often identified as a management challenge. The performance management issues the DFE IGs identified as management challenges included timely implementation of IG recommendations by the Peace Corps. For example, the Federal Maritime Commission’s IG and the National Labor Relations Board’S IG identified challenges in upgrading their agencies’ management systems. The IG recommendations were based on the findings of a report by the D FE. The report was published by the U.S. Department of Labor and the Department of the Treasury. report fraud, and how to manage grant and contract programs to meet legal and administrative requirements. The management challenges included in the “other’ category included concerns over internal controls, improper payments, and the security of federal property. In addition, the DFE IGs issued reports that addressed almost 90 percent of the management challenges identified and addressed. The identification of and expanding public access at the National Archives and Records Administration is key to focusing on effective IG oversight, according to the report. The report was released on Thursday. challenges for fiscal year 2010, with a focus on their agencies’ missions, information technology, and performance management. The Farm Credit Administration’s IG reported management challenges related to the safety, soundness, and mission accomplishment of the Farm Credit System. Information technology, including information security, was also a focus for the IG. (See fig. 2 for more information on the IG's challenges for fiscal 2010. For more information about the IG’S challenges, visit: http://www. IG.gov/report/2010/challenges. The Department of Health and Human Services IG cited the management challenges associated with delivery of the nation’s health care. The other management challenges addressed by the IGs relate to information technology, procurement, financial management, and human resources. In addition to the space program, the IG's also addressed the challenges of delivering the nation's health care and other services to the public. The report was published by the Department of health and human services on June 14. For more, go to: http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/features/2013/06/14/government-issues-report-on-space-program-and-health-care.html. on the sufficiency of their budgets. The American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (Recovery Act) is one of the federal government’s key efforts to stimulate the economy. The Recovery Act provided for IG oversight of the funds mission and accomplishments in providing oversight of Recovery Act funds. In addition, our survey questionnaire obtained information for fiscal year 2010 on management challenges identified by the IGs reporting under requirements of the Reports Consolidation Act of 2000. To identify the extent of oversight provided by the. IGs, we summarized the information. Local employees, as well as contractors, private entities, and award recipients. The IGs’ training was intended to improve awareness of the legal and administrative requirements of the Recovery Act programs. As of June 2011, the Recovery Board reported that the IGs received over 7,000 complaints of wrongdoing associated with Recovery funds. In addition, IGs have provided over 2,000 training sessions to almost 139,000 individuals on the requirements of Recovery act programs, how to prevent and solve problems. effectiveness was demonstrated in their efforts to help prevent fraud, waste, and abuse. IGs in agencies receiving Recovery Act funds have reported providing oversight in the areas of establishing and maintaining controls to help ensure the funds are used properly. The Recovery Act requires IG reviews of concerns raised by the public about investments of stimulus funds. The IGs’ effectiveness was demonstrated by their the IGs assisted in the oversight of expenditures authorized by the Recovery Act by reporting on preventive measures taken to help reduce the vulnerability of Recovery Act disbursements to fraud and waste. by creating the Recovery Accountability and Transparency Board (Recovery Board), which has an IG Chairman and 12 additional IG board members. Altogether, there are 30 IGs involved with the oversight of Recovery Act funds. The Recovery Act established the Recovery Board whose members include 12 IGs and an additional IG as the chair, to coordinate and conduct oversight of funds distributed under the act in order to prevent fraud, waste, and abuse. The IG Act includes a provision addressing the qualifications and expertise of the IGs by specifying that each IG appointment is to be without regard to political affiliation. fraud, waste, and abuse. In addition, the board is charged under the act with establishing and maintaining a user friendly website to foster greater accountability and transparency in the use of Recovery Act funds. To help prevent fraud and other potential wrongdoing, the IGs offered training to federal, state, and local officials. The board is also charged with establishing a user-friendly website for the Recovery Act of 2009 to foster transparency in use of the Act's funds. For more information, visit the board's website at: http://www.recoveryact.org/. is a designed federal entity. The IG is a member of the Recovery Accountability and Transparency Board. In addition to the contact named above, Jackson W. Hufnagle, Assistant Director; Jacquelyn Hamilton; Werner F. Miranda Hernandez; Rebecca Shea; and Clarence A. Whitt made key contributions to this report. For confidential support on suicide matters call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. The Reform Act requires the President’s budget submission to the Congress to have the IGs’ requested budget amounts identified separately within their respective agency budgets. The added transparency of these amounts can help increase IG independence, says the IG Council. The IG Council agreed to review and assess the matter, and the report is published today at 10:30 a.m. ET. It will be available online at: http://www.irsociety.org/blog/2013/10/29/the-impeachment-of-the- inspector-general-is-a-problem.html. because the commission has both federal and state members. However, the current IG who took office during our review stated that the primary concern is how nonfederal members would exercise their authority over a federal IG. The Reform Act amended the IG Act to require that IG budget requests include a list of state and federal members. The IG Act also requires that the IG report to Congress each year on the effectiveness of the inspector general's office. The inspector general report will be released on October 1. The report will also be released to the public on October 2. fiscal year 2009, these IGs identified $43.3 billion in potential savings from audits and investigations. Over 5,900 criminal actions, 1,100 civil actions, 4,460 suspensions or debarments, and over 6,100 indictments resulted from their work. Based on this information, the potential dollar savings reported by these IGS represent a return on investment of approximately $18 for every IG dollar spent. In addition to measurable accomplishments, IGs also reported actions taken to prevent problems within their agencies. their IGs have correspondingly smaller budgets and fewer staff. The presidentially appointed IGs and the DFE IGs reported to us total budget authority for fiscal year 2010 of about $2.2 billion with approximately 13,652 authorized full-time equivalent staff. They had about 86 percent (11,564) of the total staff on board. The budgets of the D FE IGs made up about 16 percent (about $352 million) for IGs, the report said. formulate and transmit their own budget amounts for the IG. The fiscal year 2011 budget included amounts for 28 of the 30 presidentially appointed IGs. One IG office was newly established and not included in the full fiscalyear 2011 budget process. There were four newly established DFE IGs that were not part of the full Fiscal Year 2011 Budget process. The President’s budget did not contain specified budget amount for the four newly created DFE IG offices. Only 7 of the 33 D FE IGs had specific budget amounts disclosed in the President's budget. and 2010. Only one, a presidentially appointed IG, had used the 7-day letter during this time frame. On May 6, 2009, the IG delivered a report to the acting head under the IG Act provisions for a 7- day letter. In 1999 we reported that no IGs had used a 7 day letter during the period of January 1990 through April 1998. In addition, we reported a 10-year review of the IG act had found that no IG had used it in that period. The IG Act requires IGs to report flagrant problems to their agency heads and the Congress within 7 days. We asked whether any of the 62 IGs we surveyed had used the 7-day letter at any time during fiscal years 2008, 2009. We also asked about the sources of legal counsel for the IGs. The IGs’ answers will be published in a forthcoming book, The Inspector General’s Handbook, published by Simon & Schuster, on September 25, 2009, at 10 a.m. settlement reached by the agency with a grantee. The acting head provided the IG’s report to the chairmen of numerous congressional committees on May 12, 2009, which was within the 7-day time frame. The report gained the interest of congressional members and the issues were resolved by the President. The IG's report was published in the New York Times on May 13, 2009. The article was updated on May 14, 2009 to include the fact that the IG was the acting head at the time of the incident. sufficiency of their budgets. We obtained information on the accomplishments of the IGs as reported to the IG Council for fiscal year 2009. We also obtained information reported by the Recovery Board on its this matter and, if necessary, work with congressional and administration officials to resolve this issue. The IGs’ effectiveness was reflected in a range of reported accomplishments, such as potential dollars to be saved by the government through the results of federal IG audits, investigations, and other reports. In their annual report to the President, the IGS identified billions of dollars in savings and cost recoveries. useful information on the independence, activities, and accomplishments of the federal inspectors general. We also received, and incorporated as appropriate, technical comments from several IGs. The information will contribute to a greater understanding of the work of the IGs in providing oversight to a wide range of government programs. We hope the information will help you understand the role IGs play in overseeing government programs and activities. We look forward to hearing from you in the coming days and weeks. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from. fiscal year 2011, and the IGs’ semiannual reports to the Congress. We also received and incorporated as appropriate technical comments from several IG offices. Our survey obtained information from 62 federal IGs appointed under the IG Act on actions taken concerning legislative provisions in the Reform Act and the IG act. We summarized information from the responses to our survey questions about the implementation of selected provisions in these laws. We have included the comments we received in the “Agency Comments” section of this report. same provisions for both the DFE IGs and the IGs appointed by the President. The IG Council has responded that it will review and assess the report. We notified the IG Council that most of the D FE IGs did not have separate budget amounts included in the President’s budget submission to the Congress. We augmented the survey data with information obtained from prior GAO reports, the President's budget submission for 22 remaining D Fe IGs, and the IG Act's budget requirements. We will send copies of this report to members of the IG Council, including the Office of Management and Budget’s Deputy Director for Management, the Chairperson, the Vice Chairperson and the IGs who participated in our survey. We will also sent copies of the report to the Chairman and the Chairman of the Board of Governors. The report will also be sent to the heads of all the IG offices that participated in the survey. It will be published in full in the next issue of the magazine, which will be available to all IG offices. discuss any limitations in our work. We believe that the information and data obtained, and the analysis conducted, provide a reasonable basis for any findings and conclusions. We requested comments on a draft of this report from the IG Council. Written comments from the Inspector General's Council are reprinted in appendix. The IG Council's comments can be found in the report's appendix and in the comments section of the report. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. closing process for failed financial institutions which is a key aspect of FDIC’s mission regarding insured depository institutions. Social Security Administration IG identified transparency and accountability issues as an agency management challenge and provided report recommendations for improved performance in this area. The DFE IGs reported 124 management management problems, with the FDIC and SSA among the agencies with the highest number of management problems. The SSA IG identified 124 management problems and provided recommendations for improvement. The FDIC's management problems were reported to be the highest with the lowest number being the SSA. contained recommendations for corrective actions. For example, the Farm Credit Administration IG assessed the agency’s readiness to take enforcement actions related to its mission. The Postal Service IG provided recommendations to improve the efficiency of postal operations related to performance management in sorting the mail. The 62 recommendations were based on a review of the Postal Service's performance in sorting mail and other areas of the agency's operations. For more information on the 62 recommendations, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/28/us/62-recommendations-for-corrective-actions-in-the-postal-service-and-farm-credit-administration-gives. area. We conducted our work from November 2010 to September 2011 in accordance with all sections of GAO’s Quality Assurance Framework that are relevant to our objectives. The framework requires that we plan and perform the engagement to obtain sufficient and appropriate evidence to meet our stated objectives and to meet the requirements of the GAO Quality Assure Framework. We are proud of our work in this area and will continue to work to improve the quality of government in the U.S. and around the world. the Ranking Member of the Senate Committee on Finance. If you have any questions or would like to discuss this report, please contact me at (202) 512-8486 or raglands@gao.gov. Contact points for our Offices of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of this report. The full report can be found at: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/28/politics/senators-finance/index.html.