The General Accounting Office is the investigative arm of Congress. It exists to support Congress in meeting its constitutional responsibilities and to help improve the performance and accountability of the federal government for the American. Have a question about this story? Send it to us at jennifer.smith@dailymail.co.uk or call 1-800-273-8255. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. GAO’s commitment to good government is reflected in its core values of accountability, integrity, and reliability. GAO examines the use of public funds; evaluates federal programs and policies; and provides analyses, recommendations, and other assistance to help Congress make informed oversight, policy, and funding decisions. The fastest and easiest way to get your hands on a GAO report is to go to www.gao.people.com/getyourhands on-the-gauge. GAO’s Web site (www.gao.gov) contains abstracts and full-text files of current reports and testimony. The Web site features a search engine to help you locate documents. You can print these documents in their entirety, including charts and other graphics. Each day, GAO issues a list of newly released reports, testimony, and correspondence. The list contains links to the full- Text document files.. To have GAO documents emailed to you, call the National Security Agency at 1-800-273-8255 or go to: http://www.nsa.gov/. E-mail this list to you every afternoon, go to our home page and complete the easy-to-use electronic order form found under “To Order GAO Products” Web site: www.gao.gov/fraudnet/Fraudnet.htm, E-mail: fraudnet@GAo. government, or 1-800-424-5454 (automated answering system) or call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1- 800-273-8255. in Appendix 2 establishes a minimum fee of $3.50 for any chargeable case and additional fees for searching and providing copies of various records, photographs, forms, etc. The Institute’s proposal for five copies of an 8- x 10-inch photograph shows a total fee of. $105 (pull fee per item of $5 and $20 for each copy). The total fee under Appendix. 2 for the same order would be $2.90, itemized as follows. In this case, the fee under. Appendix 2 charge as opposed to the $13.25 hourly charge for clerical search and processing under Appendix 2. The price per print for an 8- by 10-inch print ranges from $4.50 for one to nine prints to $1.75 for each print in quantities of over 10. For photography, the Appendix’s schedule of prices per print is based on the size, type, and quantity ordered. Each additional page is priced at $2.50 per page, or $3.75 per page for a total of $8.50. For more information, visit the Appendix. and under what circumstances fees will be waived. Archives officials told us that, in many cases, fees are not charged when the request is from military personnel, veterans, or government employees. Under the User Charge regulation, only members of the U.S. Armed Forces, in their capacity as Service members, are that fees are often waived for military personnel. Such waivers are not addressed by DOD’s regulations implementing the User charge Statute. Archive officials state that search Fees are not usually charged, which can be a significant element of cost.  Appendix 2, “Schedule of Fees and Rates for Copying, Certifying, and Searching Records Rendered to the Public,” is mandated. Chapter 4.1 of Chapter 4 lists benefits for which no charge is to be made such as services requested by members of the U.S. Armed Forces in their capacity as service members. The list of benefits is based on a request from a member of the Armed Forces, and the cost of such services is determined by the service member. Existing fees vary significantly among the archives. For example, the charges for a paper copy made by archive staff ranged from no charge by the Air Force Historical Research Agency, to archives do not impose a minimum charge for providing information. The Marine Corps fees, which are based on FOIA, resulted in any requester receiving up to 2 hours of search time and 100 pages without a charge. With the exception of the Marine Corps, the archives did not have a clearly identified basis for their fee schedules. The archives also appear to have different practices regarding which requesters are charged. no charge by the Marine Corps Historical Center for the first 100 pages and a charge of $0.15 for each page thereafter. No charge by Army Military History Institute for the second 100 pages, to a charge by Naval Historical Center of $ 0.30 per page. In general, the. Marine Corps. Historical Center is the only center that charges a fee for the third 100 pages or more of a book. The. Army Military history institute charges a charge for the next 100 pages. The Naval Historical Institute charges a. charge for every page after that. In the mid-1990s, the Army Military History Institute began developing proposed legislation for charging and retaining fees to defray costs of providing historical information to the public. The Institute, whose mission is to preserve the Army’s history and ensure access to historical research material, was experiencing a significant increase in aware of any reviews having been done. However, the officials had no information as to whether the minimum clerical charge had been or would be included in a fee involving a request for paper copies of an item. appears to be about one-third of the Institute’s proposal. Comptroller officials noted that Appendix 2 provided for a minimum clerical search and processing charge of $8.30 and that including this minimum charge in the above comparison would result in a higher fee under Appendix 2 than under the Army. The Institute's proposal would require the Army to charge a $10 clerical processing fee, the Comptroller's office said. The Army's proposed fee would be $10, the comptroller said.  Archives are developing arrangements to minimize the cost impact of public requests on the archives’ budgets. For example, the Army Military History Institute arranged for a contract, through a nonappropriated fund account, to reproduce requested photographs with fees collected for the photographs reimbursing the fund. The Naval Historical Center refers those requesting its photographs to the Naval Historical Foundation, a nonprofit foundation, which reproduces the photographs and charges the customer. Without such arrangements, the costs of reproducing photographs and responding to requesters would come from the archive’s budget. one designated primary archive in each of the four military departments. The four designated archives are the Air Force Historical Research Agency at Maxwell AFB, Alabama; Army Military History Institute at Carlisle Barracks, Pennsylvania; Marine Corps Historical Center at Washington Navy Yard, D.C.; and Naval Historical Center in Washington, DC. The Air Force has the primary archive, the Army has the secondary archive, and the Marine Corps has the tertiary archive. The Navy has the third primary archive and the fourth primary archive. requests from the public while resources available to respond were decreasing. For example, the Institute reported that the annual number of requests increased from about 13,000 in 1987 to 20,600 in 1995 and to 35,800 in 2000. During the same period, the number of staff members decreased from over 40 to over 30. The Institute is now based in New York City and has offices in Washington, D.C., Los Angeles, and San Francisco. It was founded in 1987 and is based in the same building as the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline. The FOIA fee schedule for technical information was last issued in 1998, but is the same as the schedule first issued in 1986. The collections reported by the four primary military archives are not indicative of potential that the archives have used to lessen budgetary impacts. Because of DOD’s inconsistent use of authority to charge fees and use of outdated fees schedules, the archives and other providers of public information throughout DOD have not collected a million dollars or more annually in user fees and have treated it as a rounding error. future collections under updated fee schedules. Military archive officials reported collecting about $81,000 during fiscal year 2000. Air Force reported the most collections (about $46,000) and the Marine Corps reporting the least ( about $2,000). However, these amounts are probably much less than amounts that should be collected if they were to be used for future collections. The Air Force is the largest collection agency. The Marine Corps is the smallest. The Army is the second-largest collection agency, after the Navy. schedule for responding to FOIA requests. For general information, the fees for search, review, and duplication of documents are to be based on direct costs. FOIA requests are specifically excluded under Section 1085 2 would be $22.50 ($4.50 per copy) or less than one-fourth of the Institute’s proposal. DOD reported that about $670,000 was recovered through assessed fees in fiscal year 2000, less than 2 percent of the reported $36.5 million in costs. carry out a duty as a member of the armed forces or employee of the United States or (2) under FOIA, which has a separate fee structure. Prior to the authority granted under Section 1085, DOD, including the military archives, was authorized to charge fees for responding to requests for information under the User Charge Statute and FOIA. Because Section 10 85 does not apply to the DOD offices, organizations, museums, and archives other than the four designated archives, the User charge Statutes and FOIA will continue to be the basic authority for these activities. The first 100 reproduced images and 2 hours of research are free per request. DOD’s FOIA regulations provide that fees shall be waived for all requesters when assessable costs for a FOIA request. Archive officials also said that fee waivers were used extensively for FOIA requests. The fees should be determined under the User Charge Statute as specified in FMR, Volume 11A, Chapter 11A. However, neither of these statutes authorizes the military archives to retain fees collected in providing general exempt from charges. information to the public to defray costs. Fees collected under both the User Charge Statute and FOIA for general information must be deposited in the Treasury as Miscellaneous Receipts. Accordingly, the authority to retain collected fees todefray incurred costs is one significant distinction between Section 1085 and the other Sections 1085. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255.  FOIA is implemented in DOD by DOD Regulation 5400.7-R. The Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller) is responsible for additions or revisions to Chapter 4. For each archive implementing Section 1085, establish a fee for use throughout DOD. The Director, Freedom of Information and Security Review, in conjunction with the secretaries of the military departments and other DOD officials, as appropriate, review and update fee schedules under the User Charge Statute and FOIA. The fee is $1,000 per archive. We are sending copies of this report to the Office of the Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller); the Director, Freedom of Information and Security Review; and interested congressional committees. Copies of thisReport will also be made available to others upon request. Please contact me at (202) 512-9505 if you want to share your copy of this Report with the rest of the world. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from."This is the first of a two-part series. The second part will be released in the coming days. to 33. As a result, backlogs and waiting times increased. Congress enacted Section 1085 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2001, which authorizes the charging and retaining of fees. The Army Military History Institute identified the ability to use collected fees to improve service to the public as the primary reason it developed the legislative proposals that led to Section 10 85. Increasing numbers of public requests at a time when budgetary resources were decreasing resulted in the increasing numbers of requests for fee collection. All of the four primary archives charge fees for providing historical information to requesters. However, none of the fees were in.guidance from their headquarters. These arrangements, by reducing budgetary pressures, have lessened the benefits that an archive could achieve from implementing Section 1085. The four archives were already authorized under both the User Charge Statute and FOIA to charge for information provided to the public. Based on the statute and regulations, the archives should charge for Receipts and would not be available to offset the costs. An archive implementing Section 1085 could use DOD’s user fee schedule in lieu of establishing a new fee schedule unless specific justification recommendations. DOD said that the Army Military History Institute, the only archive developing a schedule of. DOD commented that fee schedules authorized bySection 1085 are optional. The fee schedule should be consistent with updated user charge fee schedule, DOD said. The schedule should not be in addition to the user fee fee schedule for each archive implementing the new law, it said. Officials at the Army Military History Institute were developing fee schedules and planning to implement the Section by October 2001. Officials at the Air Force Historical Research Agency had tasked key stakeholders with determining a fee structure. However, they have not established a target date for implementing the Section. None of the four designated archives has changed its fee structure pursuant to Section 1085. At the time of our work, two of theFour archives were taking actions to implement Section.1085.4. It permits each of thefour archives to develop its own fee schedule provided that the accordance with the mandated DOD user fee schedule specified in Appendix 2 of DOD FMR, Volume 11A, Chapter 4. In fact, archive officials told us that they were unaware of the mandated fee schedule. The “Schedule of Fees and Rates for Copying, Certifying, and Searching Records Rendered to the Public” its User Charge Statute fee schedule for copying, certifying and searching records in March 1986. At that time, DOD revised its user fees instruction and added a schedule of fees and rates. In written comments on a draft of this report, DOD concurred with the recommendations and commented on actions that have been or are to be taken. With regard to the recommendation to undertake a notification, training, and follow-up effort, DOD commented that the Office of the Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller) has an established process for making changes to the User Charge Statute. DOD said it would consider, where appropriate, the changes in a revised user charge schedule. The report was released to the public on Tuesday. Archives officials said there exists for the new schedule. Fees charged by the archives are generally less than those in DOD fee schedules. The fees in the DOD schedules are outdated and could be understated by a factor of three or four. Archives officials said that the new fee schedule will be implemented consistently throughout DOD by all offices and organizations responding to public requesters. The Secretary of Defense (Comptroller) will work with other organizations to update, as appropriate, and publish a revised fee schedule periodically. accruing to the public at large, a reasonable charge shall be made to each identifiable recipient. The policy provides that a charge should be imposed to recover the full cost to the federal government of rendering a service or the fair market value of such service, whichever is higher. The charge should not exceed the cost of providing the service, or the value of the service as determined by the government. The charges should be based on the cost to provide the service and the value that the government determines to be fair. rendering the service, or fair market value of the service. The regulation also provides that the first 2 hours of search time and the first 100 pages of duplication shall be provided without charge. Unless requesters are seeking documents for commercial use, fees will be waived or waived. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. Yard, D.C. Section 1085 does not specify a fee structure or the fees that are to be charged. It states that fees are not to exceed the costs of providing the information. The Section also states that Fees are notto be charged for information that is requested (1) to be provided to the public. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. fees charged do not exceed the costs of providing the information. Officials at the Naval Historical Center and the Marine Corps Historical Center have not decided whether to implement a fee system based on Section 1085 provisions. They have taken no specific actions toward implementation and have received no implementation from the Navy and Marine Corps. The cost of the fee system would be based on the cost of providing information to the public. The fee system could cost as much as $1,000 per year. The Marine Corps and Naval Historical Centers have not made a decision yet. The User Charge Statute is implemented by Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Circular No. A-25. DOD’s policy is that when a service is provided that conveys special benefits to recipients, above and beyond those used for such services throughout DOD. The same fees were included in the DOD FMR, Volume 11A, Chapter 4, Appendix 2, issued in March 1997. Although the Chief Financial Officers Act of 1990 and OMB Circular A- 25 require a biennial review of charges for services, DOD Comptroller officials were not required to do so. request total $15 or less. Documents shall be provided without charge or at reduced charge when a DOD component determines that a waiver or reduction of fees is in the public interest and likely to contribute significantly to public understanding of DOD. DOD last revised Comptroller officials had no information as to the amount of funds collected throughout DOD using the fee structure mandated in the DOD FMR, Volume 11A, Chapter 4, Appendix 2. They agreed that numerous offices and organizations throughout DOD— some of which have significant numbers of requesters— should use the fee. public requesters inconsistently. DOD, in conjunction with considering implementation of Section 1085, needs to ensure that fees charged to public requesters for information throughout DOD are current and consistent. This is not the situation now because (1) DOD has not revised its fee schedules under the User Charge Statute and (2) DOD is not considering a new fee schedule for public requester access to DOD information in the near future, as proposed by the Department of Defense in a forthcoming report. The report will be published in full in the next few weeks.