costs within a federal organization. OMB directs agencies to break down IT investment costs into two categories: (1) O&M and (2) development, modernization, and enhancement (DME) DME costs refers to those projects and activities that lead to new IT assets/systems, or change or modify existing IT assets to substantively improve capability or performance. Beginning in 2014, OMB directed agencies to report on their IT investments to OMB. This information is designed, in part, to help OMB better understand what agencies are spending on IT investments. A policy analyst within OMB’s Office of E-Government and Information Technology expressed concern when agencies, or their bureaus, spend a low percentage of their IT funds on DME. The analyst further stated that this could indicate that the agency's maintenance costs are reducing its flexibility and that is part of PortfolioStat process. An OMB official stated that the aim is for the amount of spending on D ME and provisioned IT services to rise, thus reducing the percent of Spending on Non- Provisioned IT. reporting as O&M. OMB encourages agencies to adopt provisioned IT services, such as cloud computing and shared services. However, it has not identified an associated goal with this measure. Until it does so, OMB and agencies will be constrained in their ability to evaluate their progress in adopting cloud andshared services.. Several of the 12 selected agencies’ major O &M investments were identified as ‘cloud’ and ‘shared services’ by the OMB. to increase the amount spent on development activities and provisioned IT services. According to OMB guidance, the O&M phase is often the longest phase of an investment and can consume more than 80 percent of the total lifecycle costs. As such, agencies must actively manage their investment during this phase. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. maintain legacy IT infrastructure, such as those that use older programming languages. They also noted that improved reporting has made it appear that O&M spending has increased. OMB staff in the Office of E-Government and Information Technology have identified several contributing factors, including maintaining legacy hardware, which costs more over time, and (2) costs are higher for IT services that use legacy programming languages such as C and C++, they say. For example, a DHS official in the. Office of of the Officeof IT Services’ budget. increased in maintaining applications and systems that use older programming languages. programmers knowledgeable in these older languages are becoming increasingly rare and thus more expensive. OMB officials stated that in several situations where agencies are not sure whether to report costs as O&M or DME, agencies default to DME. The cost of maintaining older languages can be as high as $10,000 to $15,000 per application. The program costs can also be as much as $20,000 for a single application. OMB identified a series of performance metrics for agencies’ PortfolioStat sessions. One measure is the percent of IT spending on non-provisioned O&M spending. We also compared OMB’s associated performance measure on driving value in federal IT investments to federal best practices. To assess the cause of the changes in spending, we also compared the spending to best practices for development, modernization, and enhancement (DME) activities or provisioned O &M services. The report was published by solutions.solutions. Federal agencies reported spending $55 billion—69 percent of total IT spending—on non-provisioned O&M in fiscal year 2015. OMB has not identified an associated goal with its non- provisioned IT measure. For example, State allocates about 87 percent of its IT spending on non- Proportions. Department of Transportation (DOT) allocates 50 percent. See figure 5 for details on agencies’ planned spending allocations for fiscal years 2010 through 2017. For more information, visit OMB’s website. determined that of the top 10 investments with the largest spending in O&M, only the DHS investment underwent an operational analysis. DHS’s analysis addressed most, but not all, of the factors that OMB called for (e.g., comparing current cost and schedule against original estimates). DHS officials attributed this to the department still being in the process of implementing its new operational analysis policy. The remaining agencies did not assess their investments, which accounted for $7.4 billion in reported O &M spending. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. Table 8 provides the reported spending by agency on operations and maintenance (O&M) and the percentage of IT spending on O&M for fiscal years 2010 and 2015. Table 9 lists the number of employees employed by the agency and how much of their salaries are spent on IT. The agency's IT spending is reported in Table 9 and Table 10 of the audit report. For more information on the audit, visit: http://www.auditonline.com/audit/2013/01/09/audits-reports-2013-01-09. DHS officials stated officials stated that updates to its technology are the primary reason for the increase in spending. Officials stated that the increased spending on O&M was largely due to grants to states and local entities for new programs, such as the Affordable Care Act. Officials said that initially DHS had high DME spending to setup the agency, but now that the major parts of the agency are established, the funding has shifted to O &M. The increase in funding is due to updates to the agency's technology. HHS’s Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services’ Medicaid Management Information System to spend $666.1 million on IT infrastructure. Over the past 7 fiscal years, O&M spending has increased, while the amount invested in developing new IT infrastructure has decreased. HHS has spent $1.2 billion on the IT infrastructure over the past seven fiscal years. The IT infrastructure investment has decreased over the last 7 years, but has increased in the past three years, according to HHS. systems has decreased by about $7.3 billion since fiscal year 2010. O&M spending relative to overall IT spending has increased by 9 percent since 2010. In fiscal year 2017, agencies plan to spend 77 percent of their IT funds on O &M. According to agency officials, reasons for the increase in O & M spending include the recent shift of major systems from DME to O and rising costs to system development, maintenance and upgrades. The percentage of total IT spending on O&m ranges from a 20 percent increase (Department of Education) to a 16 percent decrease (Office of Personnel Management) 26 federal agencies spent about $61 billion on O&M, more than three-quarters of the total amount spent. In 2015, 5,233 of the government’s nearly 7,000 investments were spending all of their funds on O &M activities. According to agency data reported to OMB's IT Dashboard, the 10 IT investments spending the most on O/M for fiscal year 2015 total $12.5 billion, 20 percent of thetotal O&m spending. as well as several bureaus having recently completed major DME work that is now in the O&M phase. Further, according to Commerce officials, one of their bureareaus had no actual IT systems in its budget, as its IT has been absorbed by headquarters, and thus any DME spending is part of the budget. The Commerce Department has no immediate comment on the report's findings, but says it is looking into the matter. The report is based on information from the Commerce Department and the Department of Justice. OMB has not identified a specific goal for the measure because it would be ever changing. While goals for performance measures may change over time, it is still important for OMB to set a target by which agencies can measure their progress. OMB’s own website, performance.gov states that when measuring performance, a goal is a simple but powerful way to motivate people and communicate priorities. The federal government operates more effectively when agency leaders, at all levels of the organization, set clear measurable goals aligned to achieving better outcomes. stress that organizations should measure performance in order to evaluate the success or failure of their activities and programs. Performance measurement involves identifying performance goals and measures, identifying targets for improving performance, and measuring progress against those targets. Without links to outcomes and goals, organizations are not able to effectively manage their programs and activities, according to the report. The report was published by the International Institute of Management, a non-profit organisation based in New York City. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here. OMB requires CIOs to submit ratings that reflect the level of risk facing an investment. Several O&M investments were rated as moderate to high risk in fiscal year 2015. In instances where investments experience problems, agencies can perform a TechStat, a face-to-face meeting to terminate or turn around IT investments that are failing or not producing results. In addition, OMB directs agencies to monitor O &M investments through operational analyses, which should be performed annually and evaluated OMB budget data. reviewed IT Dashboard data on O&M investments to identify those that were rated as moderate to high risk by the agency chief information officer (CIO) We reviewed agency documentation such as TechStat documentation and operational analyses that had been performed on the investments, as available. We then interviewed agency officials to confirm and obtain additional information on the systems or investments. To select systems and investments to profile, we identified agencies’ existing investments in O &M that were ratings as medium or high risk. oversight). Since not all of our selected agencies had identified an at-risk O&M investment, we also used the list of agency-identified oldest systems or investments. From the resulting list of systems and investments, we created a list of the agency's oldest systems. The list of oldest systems includes the Social Security Administration, the Department of Defense, Justice, State, Transportation, and Veterans Affairs and the Defense Department. The oldest system is the Defense Dept.'s D.C. National Security Agency. of these data is intended to allow OMB, other oversight bodies, and the general public to hold the government agencies accountable for results and progress. Among other things, agencies are to submit ratings from their Chief Information Officers (CIO), which, according to OMB’s instructions, should reflect the level of risk. The data is expected to be available by the end of the year. For confidential support call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. For support in the UK, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here. facing an investment relative to that investment’s ability to accomplish its goals. To do so, each agency CIO is to assess his or her IT investments against a set of six pre-established evaluation factors identified by OMB. Then assign a rating of 1 (high risk and red) to 5 (low risk and green) for each investment. For more information, visit the OMB website or the IT CIO Council's website, which can be found at: http://www.omb.org/ IT-CIO-Council. (low risk and green) based on the CIO’s best judgement of the level of risk facing the investment. Over the past several years, we have made over 20 recommendations to help improve the accuracy and reliability of the information on the IT Dashboard and to increase its availability. Most agencies use the Dashboard to monitor their investments in technology and IT systems, but some are looking for ways to improve its reliability. For more information on how to use the dashboard, visit the itdashboard.com. agreed with our recommendations or had no comment. TechStat reviews. In January 2010, the Federal CIO began leading TechStat sessions to terminate or turn around IT investments that are failing or are not producing results. These meetings involve OMB and agency leadership and are intended to increase accountability and improve performance. OMB also empowered agency CIOs to begin to hold their own Techstat sessions within their respective agencies by June 2012. In June 2013, we reported that O MB and selected agencies held multiple TechStats, but additional OMB oversight was needed. In the last 6 years, we made approximately 800 recommendations to OMB and multiple agencies to improve effective and efficient investment in IT. OMB partially agreed with our recommendations, and responses from 21 of the agencies varied, with some agreeing and others not. In May 2012, OMB released its Federal IT Shared Services Strategy. The strategy requires agencies to implement the recommendations. As of October 2015, about 32 percent of these had been implemented, and we made more than 60 recommendations to the agencies. impact on underperforming projects and that resulting cost savings were valid. Among other things, we recommended that OMB require agencies to address high- risk investments. OMB generally agreed with this recommendation, but as of October 28, 2015, OMB had only conducted one TechStat review in the prior 2 years and plan and has since been upgraded from high to moderate risk. It should be noted that recent legislation requires agencies to perform a review of each major IT investment that receives a high-risk rating for 4 consecutive quarters. included most of the key practices, and we recommended that OMB include all 10 key practices in future guidance. OMB launched the PortfolioStat initiative in March 2012, which requires agencies to conduct an annual, agency-wide IT portfolio review to, among other things, manage existing IT systems. We recommend that all of the 10 key Practices be included in future OMB guidance, and OMB should include all of them in its guidance on IT systems in the future. For more information, visit the OMB's Port portfolioStat website. are newer than their operational age. We compared OMB and agencies’ current practices with federal guidance. To assess the reliability of the OMB budget data and IT Dashboard data, we reviewed related documentation, such as OMB guidance on budget preparation, capital planning, and risk ratings. We also reviewed agency documentation and interviewed agency officials on those profiled systems or investments. The report is based on OMB’s Circular No. A-11: Preparation, Submission, and Execution of the Budget. their O&M investments to determine whether they should be kept as-is, modernized, replaced, or retired. According to OMB staff from the Office of E-Government and Information Technology, OMB has created draft guidance that will require agencies to identify and prioritize legacy information systems that are in need of replacement or specific plans for modernization or replacement. Until this policy is finalized and implemented, the federal government runs the risk of continuing to maintain investments that have outlived their effectiveness and are consuming resources that outweigh their benefits. OMB did not commit to a firm time frame for when the policy would be issued. Until OMB’s policy is finalized and carried out, the federal government runs the risk of continuing to maintain investments. State plans to work with OMB to develop detailed plans for modernization. The department also provided technical comments, which we have incorporated in the report as appropriate. In comments provided, State said it would work to identify and prioritize systems, and planning for modernization, among other things. and Operations. This area highlights several critical IT initiatives underway, including reviews of troubled projects, an emphasis on incremental development, and a key transparency website. Data center consolidation, and the O&M of legacy systems. To make progress in this area, we identified actions that OMB and the agencies need to take. We have released a list of what we believe are the most important steps the government needs to take in order to make progress on this area. For more information, visit the OMB website or go to www.obm.gov. OMB has developed guidance that calls for agencies to develop an operational analysis policy for examining the ongoing performance of existing legacy IT investments. However, OMB’s guidance on operational analyses does not exclude infrastructure investments. Until agencies ensure that their O&M investments are fully reviewed, the government's oversight of old and vulnerable investments will be impaired and the associated spending could be wasteful, the report says. The report is based on the Department of the Treasury's budget for fiscal year 2016, which runs through September 30, 2017. OMB guidance called for agencies to develop an operational analysis policy and perform such analyses annually. The extent to (VA) had not developed a policy or conducted operational analyses. We recommended that the agencies develop operational analysis policies, annually perform operational analyses on all investments, and ensure the assessments include all key factors. We also recommended that OMB revise its guidance to include directing agencies to post the results of such analyses on the IT Dashboard. OMB and the five selected agencies agreed with our recommendations and have efforts planned and underway. Acquisition Reform Act or FITARA) that, among other things, requires OMB to develop standardized performance metrics, including cost savings. OMB uses several data collection mechanisms to oversee federal IT spending during the annual budget formulation. In carrying out its responsibilities, OMB has to submit quarterly reports to Congress on cost savings, according to the report. The report is based on data collected by OMB from various sources, including the federal government, state and local governments, states and territories, and the private sector. OMB requires federal departments and agencies to provide information related to their Major IT Business Cases and IT Portfolio Summary. The purpose of this requirement is to provide a business case for each major major process.process. OMB also requires agencies to report on the progress of their major IT projects and their progress on the major IT programs they are working on. This information is provided in the form of exhibit 300 and exhibit 53. The information is intended to help the public understand the state of the federal government's major IT processes. Over the last three decades, Congress has enacted several laws to assist agencies and the federal government in managing IT investments. Congress enacted the Clinger-Cohen Act of 1996. This act requires OMB to establish processes to analyze, track, and evaluate the IT investments of federal agencies and government departments. For more information, visit the OMB's IT Investing and Management Center. For confidential support, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. IT investment and to allow OMB to monitor IT investments once they are funded. Agencies are required to provide information on each major investment’s cost, schedule, and performance. OMB has implemented a series of initiatives to improve the oversight of underperforming investments and more effectively manage IT. In June 2009, to further improve the transparency into and oversight of agencies’ IT investments, OMB publicly deployed the IT Dashboard. We recommended that Energy and Commerce appropriately categorize their IT investments. Dashboard. OMB issued guidance directing federal agencies to report, via the Dashboard, the performance of their IT investments. Currently, theDashboard publicly displays information on the cost, schedule, and performance of over 700 major federal IT investments at 26 federal agencies. We determined that the budget and IT Dashboard data were reliable for our purposes of reporting IT O&M spending and related information on O&m. We focused on the 12 agencies with the highest planned IT spending for fiscal year 2015, given that these agencies make up over 90 percent of and ITDashboard submissions. operating systems (as depicted in the figure); however, NWSTG still lacks full backup capability for 26 percent of its functions. In fiscal year 2013, a major rearchitecture and redesign effort began which, according to Department of Commerce officials, will result in an entirely new dissemination architecture. According to officials, a detailed project plan is now being carried out and is scheduled to replace theNWSTG in early fiscal year 2017. The Personnel and Accounting Integrated Data will be replaced with an integrated system that is more capable, more reliable and have 100 percent backup capability. year 2017 and replace it with a new system. The National Weather Service Telecommunication Gateway (NWSTG) system is operated by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, a component of the Department of Commerce. It is the nation’s hub for the collection and distribution of weather data and products and provides weather information to the public. The system is expected to be fully operational by the end of the year and will be available to the general public by the start of the 2015 hurricane season. National and global real-time exchange services using automated communications resources to collect and distribute a wide variety of environmental data. Thousands of customers worldwide use data distributed by the NWSTG and these data affect a wide range of economic and emergency management decisions. These data are collected, analysed and distributed using a variety of methods. The NWSTg is a non-profit organization based in Washington, D.C. with offices in New York, London, and Washington, DC. It was founded in 1993 by a group of scientists and engineers. that coordinates the operational functions of the United States’ nuclear forces. Further, in some cases, the vendors no longer provide support for hardware or software, creating security vulnerabilities and additional costs. For example, each of the 12 selected agencies reported using unsupported operating systems and components in each agency’s nuclear arsenal. The U.S. nuclear arsenal is the largest in the world, with more than 1,000 nuclear warheads and warheads, according to a report by the Joint Chiefs of Staff. For those in the nuclear command area, the system’s primary function is to send and receive emergency action messages to nuclear forces. The system is designed to handle the operational functions of the United States’ nuclear forces, such as intercontinental ballistic missiles, nuclear bombers, and tanker support aircrafts, among others. According to Defense officials,. the system is intended to handle. the operations of the U.S. nuclear forces,. such as Intercontinental Ballistic Missile (ICBM) and nuclear bombers. The U.S Forest Service says ROSS is on the verge of technical obsolescence. One of the applications ROSS uses is no longer supported by the vendor, creating vulnerability issues. In September 2015, the Forest Service issued a request for information for services to develop ROSS’s replacement—Interagency Resources Ordering Capability. In January 2016, Forest Service officials signed a charter to begin this project.replenishing supplies. Agency officials say ROSS will continue to operate until a replacement is developed. (ROSS) is used to mobilize and deploy a multitude of resources, including qualified individuals, teams, aircraft, equipment, and supplies. The system supports the basic needs of the first responders and support personnel at an incident location by processing orders and providing support to them. It is also used to respond to all hazard incidents, including wildland fires, wildfires, and other natural disasters. It can also be used to provide support to first responders in the event of an emergency, such as when a fire breaks out. Account Data Engine 2 at an unknown date. The Internal Revenue Service’s (IRS), Individual Master File (IMF) is the authoritative data source for individual taxpayer accounts. Within IMF, accounts are updated, taxes are assessed, and refunds are generated as required during each tax filing period. Virtually all IRS information system system is based on IMF. The IRS has no plans to replace IMF with a new version of Account Data Engine. The current version is available for download from the IRS website. IMF with the Customer Account Data Engine 2 (CADE 2) investment. The CADE 2 investment includes plans to re-engineer the IMF by: (1) applying modern programming languages, (2) establishing Cade 2 as the authoritative data source, and (3) implementing functionality to address the IRS financial material weakness. However, the replacement of the IMF with the CADE2 will not be complete until after the IMF's next board meeting in June 2015, when the IMF is expected to decide on a replacement for the IMF. IMF was written in an outdated assembly language code and operates on a 2010 IBM z196/2817-m32 mainframe. This has resulted in difficulty delivering technical capabilities addressing identify theft and refund fraud, among other things. In addition, there are many other issues with the IMF that need to be resolved before it can be used for its intended purpose. For more information on the IMF, visit the IMF's official website or its official blog. For additional information about the IMF’s mainframe, visit its official website. Sentry is a real-time information system comprised of various modules. It provides information regarding security and custody levels, inmate program and work assignments, and other pertinent information about the inmate population. Sentry is used to process inmates at all phases of incarceration, including release, transfer, and sentence computation. When Sentry was first deployed over 30 years ago, it was comprised of approximately 700 program routines written in COBOL and ran on a mainframe platform. It became increasingly more difficult and expensive to maintain complex, highly-customized systems written in older programming languages. programming languages. The bureau has plans for updating the user interface and integrating the data through September 2016. According to agency officials, there are no plans to replace Sentry, as the system is the main system used by the bureau. Department of Defense—Air Force Number of users: 175 users across the agency's three branches. The agency is based in Washington, D.C., and has offices in San Francisco, Washington, San Diego and San Antonio. The department has a budget of more than $1 billion. migrated the older database, merged the legacy data into the newer database platform, and modified the COBOL programs to ensure compatibility with the new software and database. In addition, the legacy Sentry programs are now accessible via a web browser and use a relational database and both COBol and Java. For more information, visit Sentry's website. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. In the U.S., call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. SSA does not have plans to retire the Title II system. Rather, the agency plans to continue to eliminate and replace Title II’s older and more costly subsystems. SSA currently is planning to retire four Title II subsystems, including a claims control system, and one that processes changes in earnings transactions. In addition, SSA has other efforts to modernize or consolidate Title II systems, such as its database management systems. Officials further stated that training new employees to maintain the older systems takes a lot of time. The Social Security Administration’s (SSA) Title II investment includes the Title II system which determines retirement benefits eligibility and amounts, 162 subsystems, as well as several smaller IT improvement initiatives and projects. The agency has ongoing modernization efforts. According to SSA, the agency has spent $284.1 million on its Title II program since it was established in 1983. SSA has spent more than $1.2 billion on Title II since the program was created in 1983, according to a report by the Center for Retirement Studies. agencies have to deal with the previously mentioned issues and may pay a premium to hire staff or contractors with the knowledge to maintain outdated systems. For example, one agency (SSA) reported re-hiring retired employees to maintain its COBOL systems. Selected agencies reported that they continue to maintain old investments. For more information, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/29/technology/technology-gadget/index.html#storylink=cpy. retire two high-risk, COBOL- based systems in 2017 and 2018. VA’s comments are reprinted in appendix XII. SSA stated that it agreed with our recommendation and that it has already initiated numerous activities to modernize or replace the two systems. The VA recommended that the systems be retired in 2017 or 2018. The SSA agreed with the recommendation and said it had already initiated activities to replace or modernize the systems in that time period. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. issues associated with losing knowledgeable employees. SSA officials stated that the agency has rehired retirees to work on the legacy systems. In addition to the contact name above, individuals making contributions to this report included Gary Mountjoy, Kevin Walsh, Scott Borre, Rebecca Eyler, Bradley Roach, Tina Roach and Rebecca Eler. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. In the U.S., call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. were also built in a compartmentalized structure by SSA, rather than contractors, because the agency determined that there were not commercial programs that could satisfy the agency’s business needs and the volume of data needed. SSA officials stated that most of the employees who developed these systems are ready to use them, and most of them are in good health, they said. They added that the agency has no plans to change the way the system is used in the future, and that it will continue to rely on contractors for data collection. that agencies provide a list of their three oldest systems. In some cases, agencies reported that they do not track the ages of individual systems. We selected one system or investment per agency using a combination of agencies' systems and investments. Table 10 provides a listing these systems or investments, as reported by agencies. In those cases, we requested that the agencies provide their 3 oldest IT investments and their approximate age. The list of systems is broken down into three categories: systems, investments, and systems with components that track ages. Table 6 shows the 10 oldest investments and/or systems, as reported by selected agencies. Agencies reported having plans to modernize or replace each of these investments and systems. Five of the plans for five of those were general or tentative in that the agencies did not provide specific time frames, activities to be performed, or functions to be replaced or enhanced. For a full list of the agencies’ reported oldest systems, see appendix IV. Separately, we profiled one system or investment from each of the 12selected agencies. The selected systems and investments range from 11 to approximately 56 years old. For example, Treasury’s Individual Master File was first initiated about 56 years ago and currently is the authoritative data source for individual taxpayer accounts where accounts are updated, taxes are assessed, and other functions are carried out. For more information, visit Treasury.gov/Treasury-Investment-Systems- and Treasury.com/Treasurer-Investor-Investments-System-and-systems- & Treasury. that have outlived their effectiveness and are consuming resources that outweigh their benefits. In April 2016, the IT Modernization Act was introduced into the U.S. House of Representatives. If enacted, it would establish a revolving fund of $3 billion that could be used to retire, replace, or upgrade obsolete investments. The bill is expected to be voted on by the House of Representative in the next few weeks and could be implemented by the end of the year or early next year if it is approved. or upgrade legacy IT systems to transition to new, more secure, efficient, modern IT systems. It also would establish processes to evaluate proposals for modernization submitted by agencies and monitor progress and performance in executing approved projects. Of the more than $80 billion that the 26 agencies reported spending for this year, $7.5 billion was spent on modernization projects, according to the report. The rest of the spending was on technology-related programs and services, the report said. The bill is expected to be voted on by the House and Senate next month. of modernization or replacement. It stated that the department has modernized, upgraded, or retired hundreds of systems in the last several years through an investment review process. The department stated it plans to continue to identify, prioritize, and manage legacy systems that should be modernized or replaced, based on existing to address obsolete IT investments. It further stated that all four of the systems listed in appendix IV have been identified for modernization or Replacement and three are under consideration for modernization. The Department continues to take steps to modernize its legacy investments and systems, as needed and as funding is available. The draft guidance includes time frames date by which its draft guidance on legacy systems will be issued. It will direct agencies to identify legacy systems and/or investments needing to be modernized or replaced. To monitor whether existing investments are meeting the needs of their agencies, we recommend that the Secretaries of Commerce and the Treasury recommend that they do so. The draft guidance is intended to develop criteria through which agencies can identify the highest priority legacy systems, evaluate and prioritize their portfolio of existing IT systems, and develop modernization plans. modernizing legacy systems after receipt of the finalized guidance. DHS’s comments are reprinted in appendix X. The department also provided technical comments, which we have incorporated in the report as appropriate. We are sending copies of this report to interested congressional committees; the Secretaries of Agriculture, Commerce, Defense, Energy, Health and Human Services, Homeland Security, State, the Treasury, Transportation, and Veterans Affairs; the U.S. Attorney General of the Department of Justice; the SSA. Treasury, Transportation, and Veterans Affairs direct their respective agency CIOs to identify and plan to modernize or replace legacy systems as needed. OMB’s draft guidance includes time frames, activities to be performed, and functions to be replaced or replaced. The Attorney General; and the Commissioner of Social Security also direct the CIO to look at modernizing or replacing legacy systems. The guidance is based on OMB's draft guidance, which is available on the OMB website.  Commerce, Defense, DOT, HHS, and VA reported using 1980s and 1990s Microsoft operating systems that stopped being supported by the vendor more than a decade ago. Lastly, legacy systems may become increasingly more expensive as a result. Their fiscal year 2014 reports pursuant to the Federal Information Security Management Act of 2002 were released on Friday. The report was released on behalf of the Department of Commerce and the departments of Defense, Interior, Justice, and Health and Human Services. For confidential support call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. is already appropriately replacing and modernizing systems as needed within budget constraints. Commerce’s comments are reprinted in appendix VI. The department also provided technical comments, which we have incorporated in the report as appropriate. In written comments, Defense partially concurred with our recommendation to address obsolete IT investments in need. The report was published by the Center for Strategic and International Studies, a nonpartisan think tank based in Washington, D.C. It was released on November 14. For confidential support, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org. HHS provided technical comments, which we have incorporated in the report as appropriate. DHS concurred with its recommendation and that the department plans to establish a framework for identifying and replacing or replacing IT systems. HHS’s comments are reprinted in appendix IX. In written comments, DHS stated that it concurred and that it plans to set up a framework to identify and replace or replace IT systems, according to the report. The report is available online at: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/29/technology/top-10-government-failures-in-government/story.html?storylink=cpy. The DVIS interface software, PowerBuilder, is no longer supported by the vendor. According to State officials, the main challenges in maintaining DVIS’s aging technology are related to information security and infrastructure concerns. State plans to replace DVIS with a project called ConsularOne. The replacement effort is to begin in October 2018, State officials say. The cost of replacing DVIS at system level is not tracked at the system level, according to the State Department. The project is expected to be completed at an unknown time. Diversity Visa Information System (DVIS) is an electronic case management system used by approximately 30 federal employees and contractor staff working at the Department of State’s (State) Kentucky Consular Center. DVIS is used to track and validate application information submitted by foreign nationals under the Diversity Visa.associated with its legacy software. The system is used by the State Department to track, validate and monitor visa applications for foreign nationals living in the U.S. and applying for a Diversity Visa in the United States. The Department of Transportation’s (DOT) Hazardous Materials Information System maintains and provides access to comprehensive information on hazardous materials incidents, exemptions and approvals. The software was no longer supported by the vendor, as of December 2014. DOT is in the process of updating the functions performed by the system. The new system's modules are intended to be integrated, automated, and improve efficiency, effectiveness, and data quality.to replace legacy modules, and plan to retire the legacy modules by the end of fiscal year 2018. DOT’s profiled system was initiated about 46 years ago and allows the agency to maintain comprehensive information on hazardous materials incidents. Of the 12 investments or systems, agencies had plans to replace or modernize 11 of these. However, the tax refunds are generated during the tax filing period. In addition, the IRS has a system that allows it to track tax returns for up to three years. The IRS has also a system for tracking tax refunds for three years after tax returns have been filed. and they plan to retire DVIS when appropriate. In the meantime, the department plans to upgrade the unsupported software to a new version, which is also not supported. Department of Transportation—Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration Number of users: 250 federal users, 547,000 active hazardous materials facilities, 10,000 pipeline users. The department also plans to retire the unsupported DVIS software when appropriate, but not before it is upgraded to the new version that is supported by the federal government. program. The system consists of five modules that register carriers and shippers, document incidents involving hazardous materials, issue special permits, facilitate approvals and exemptions pertaining to safety regulations. Officials from Pipeline and Hazardous Material Safety’s Office of the Chief Information Officer stated that software applications and processes will be used in the program. The program will be rolled out in phases over the next few years, officials said. For confidential support call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. Many federal agencies use outdated languages and old parts. Department of Justice (Justice), DHS, HHS, Treasury, USDA, and VA use COBOL. agencies need to move to more modern, maintainable languages, as appropriate and feasible. For example, the Gartner Group, a leading IT research and advisory company, has reported that organizations usingCOBOL should consider replacing the language with something more modern. It is widely known that agencies should consider moving to a new programming language for their legacy systems. language and in 2010 noted that there should be a shift in focus to using more modern languages for new products. In addition, some legacy systems may use parts that are obsolete and more difficult to find. For instance, Defense is still using 8-inch floppy disks in a legacy system. The U.S. Air Force uses a variety of languages, including English, Spanish, French and German. The Air Force also uses an array of other languages, such as Italian and Spanish. The Defense Department uses a number of different languages for its products. is made up of technologies and equipment that are at the end of their useful lives. For example, the system is still running on an IBM Series/1 Computer, which is a 1970s computing system. It also uses 8-inch floppy disks, which are a1970s-era technology. It is written in assembly language code and uses a number of different languages. It was created by the University of California, Los Angeles, in the 1970s. The project was funded by the National Institute of Standards and Technology. used by the system have become outdated and costly to maintain. For example, the system uses Microsoft.NET and Classic Active Server Pages. Officials stated that costs have increased due to maintaining the personnel with the knowledge to use these older applications. In particular, the costly applications include those for scanning, such as those used by the U.S. National Security Agency. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. imaging, and documentation management. These applications are compartmentalized, so data is duplicated and not integrated. The system uses an application that is no longer supported by the manufacturer, which can cause security risks, among other issues. Specifically, the system uses Kofax Indicius software to perform optical character recognition. It also uses a system that uses a software that is not supported by its manufacturer, causing security risks. It uses a program that is used to perform Optical Character Recognition (OCR) System is a case tracking system that is to facilitate maintenance and transfer of case specific data with regard to Medicare appeals through multiple levels of the appeal process. In addition, the system is to provide the capability to report on appeals data and enable more accurate and expedient responses. The system is expected to be in place by the end of the year. It will be available to all Medicare recipients in the United States. It is not available to those in Canada, Australia, New Zealand, Puerto Rico or the United Kingdom. vendors still support all of the hardware and software used by this investment. The agency is not currently planning future modernization activity. The investment has gone through several updates in the past, with the last allowing the retirement of 16 associated legacy applications in 2011 and retired two mainframe. It is not known if the agency will make any changes in the near future, though it is not clear if it will make changes at all in the next few years. It's not clear what the agency's plans are for the future, however. the unsupported application is planned to be eliminated. While DOT does not have dates for when individual legacy modules will be retired, officials stated that they plan to have all the legacy modules retired by the end of fiscal year 2018. Department of the Treasury—Internal Revenue Service Number of users: 1,000,000. The unsupported application was designed to allow the Internal Revenue Service to send tax returns to the Department of Treasury without having to send them to a tax preparer. It was created for the U.S. Treasury Department, which is part of the Federal Reserve. The system runs on a Solaris 10 operating system, last updated in February 2016. According to the agency, the software is still supported by the vendors. The system has faced challenges due to the rapid growth in the U.S. prison population, the agency said in a letter to Congress. The agency said it is working with the Department of Justice to improve the system. It said the system is still in the early stages of development and could take several years to fully implement. It is not clear when the system will be fully operational. Concerns with the system had been increasing because of an aging and unsupportable infrastructure, limited backup capability, and un-scalable architecture. In 2013, the agency upgraded its hardware and software to Power7 IBM servers and Unix and upgraded its software to Microsoft Windows 8.1. The agency is also upgrading its software and hardware to run on the latest version of Microsoft Windows 7 and 8.0. The upgrade is expected to be complete by the end of the year or early next year. is a risk of inaccuracies and system failures due to complexity of managing dozens of systems synchronizing individual taxpayer data across multiple data files and databases. There are limitations in meeting normal financial requirements and security controls, and keeping pace with modern financial institutions. IRS plans to address these issues by replacing the current system with a new system that will be based on a new software architecture. The new system is expected to be in place by the end of the year and will be fully operational by the beginning of 2015. There is a plan underway to replace the floppy disks with secure digital cards. This effort is underway and is expected to be completed in the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2017. Social Security Administration Number of users: 1.2 million. The number of Social Security recipients is up to 1.4 million, up from 1.3 million in 2012. The Social Security system has more than 1.6 million recipients. The social security system has a total of 1.5 million users. The total number of recipients is 1.1 million. CAS relies on outdated and heavily customized Oracle software. It uses a version of Oracle Federal Financials software that was first available in 2004. CAS uses software forceivable, accounts payable, purchasing, asset management, procurement, and document imaging and processing. The investment’s operational analysis document says the software has become expensive to support. It also says CAS has lost more than $1 billion in market value since it began using the software in 2004, including $1.2 billion in lost revenue. and the extended vendor support for the software ended in November 2013. Further, it relies on Windows 2003 servers and any changes would require recoding of many functions within the CAS suite. The agency plans to pursue using other shared services to provide its financial management services and, therefore, began working on a new version of the CAS software in the coming months. The software will be available on a trial basis for the time being, with plans to roll it out to the rest of the agency’s staff. CAS is the primary financial management system for the U.S. Coast Guard. It is also used by the Transportation Security Administration (TSA) and the Domestic Nuclear Detection Office (DNDO) CAS is a set of several applications that assist the agencies in several areas, including accounts. It was created to help the Coast Guard and TSA with their financial management. It has been in use for more than 30 years and is still in use by the TSA and the DNDO. Until the migration is complete and CAS can be decommissioned, USCG plans to resolve emergent issues and maintain applications. In the meantime, due to the costs associated with implementing a full fix and the impending transition to shared services,. USCG has accepted the security risks. USCG in fiscal year 2018. USGC in fiscalyear 2018. USC CG in fiscal Year 2018. U.S. Army Corps of Engineers in fiscal 2014. US Marines in fiscal 2013. US Marine Corps in fiscal 2015. the Financial Management Service Improvement Initiative to migrate the services from CAS to the Department of the Interior’s shared service offering for financial management. In August 2014, the agencies agreed to a staggered transition of these services, with DNDO transitioning in fiscal year 2016, TSA in fiscalyear 2017, and the rest of the agencies in 2018. The transition is expected to be completed by the end of fiscal year 2018 or early next year, depending on the agency's fiscal year for that year. There is no projected end of life date, and they plan to continue to maintain and use the system. There are 14,000 Coast Guard users and also services the Transportation Security Administration. Investment start date: 1998 Age: 18. The system is used by the U.S. Department of Homeland Security, the Coast Guard, and the TSA. It is also used by other federal agencies such as the State Department and the Department of Justice. For confidential support, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. into 2020. As a result, the agency will continue to maintain two separate systems until the replacement is complete. Department of Health and Human Services – Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services Number of users: 1,900 system users. Investment start date: 2005 Age: 11 years Investment anticipated end date: none. The agency will not be replacing its current system until at least the end of the next decade. The new system is expected to be fully operational by the start of the 2015/16 fiscal year. The Strategic Automated Command and Control System is the Department of Defense’s dedicated high-speed data transmission, processing, and display system. The system coordinates storage device; and assembly programming code typically used in mainframes. Replacement parts for the system are difficult to find because they are now obsolete. Defense is initiating a $60 million full system replacement which is scheduled to be completed in fiscal year 2020. In addition, Defense is planning a $75 million modernization project for the entire system. command functions for intercontinental ballistic missiles, bombers, tankers, munitions sites, intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance platforms. Investment start date: 1963 Age: 53 years Investment anticipated end date: 2030. Fiscal year 2016 funding: $5.6 million. Total estimated life-cycle costs: $135 million through 2032. Development costs: Approximately $60 million. Operations and maintenance costs: approximately $80 million. Fiscalyear 2016 funding for the program: $4.7 million for the 2016 fiscal year. operators, and several million potential facilities Investment start date: 1970s Age: about 41 years Investment anticipated end date: 2018 Fiscal year 2016 funding : $6.7 million Total estimated life-cycle costs: $38.0 million Development costs : $22.7million Operations and maintenance: $15.3 million Plans for retirement or modernization: Developing new system and academic communities. Agency plans to retire the system in fiscal year 2017. The system is expected to be fully operational by the end of 2018. years Investment anticipated end date: 2018 Fiscal year 2016 funding: $29.8 million Total estimated life-cycle costs: $543.2 million Plans for retirement or modernization: Agency plans to transition to federal shared services in fiscal year 2018. The Core Accounting System (CAS) Suite Approximately 230 million tax accounts Investment start date: 1960s Age: Approximately 56 years Investment anticipatedend date: 2019 fiscal year 2016 Funding: $13.6 million. The agency plans to update the user interface and integrate system data through September 2016. offices System start date: 1963 Age: 53 years System anticipated end date: 2017 Fiscal year 2016 funding: $6.7 million Total estimated life-cycle costs: n/a, not tracked by system. Development costs: $235.7million Operations and maintenance costs:  $6.6 million yearly Plans for retirement or modernization: The system will Services general public, 1,300+ field offices with 50,000 to 60,000 employees, as well as other federal agencies. The U.S. Department of State has been running a consular center since the early 1990s. The system has 55,000 applicants annually. It is estimated to cost $2.4 million over its life-cycle. The program is expected to end in 2020. It has about 30 to 40 consular staff and about 50,000 people applying for visas each year. The center is funded by about $164,000 in fiscal year 2016. The U.N. has a similar system in place. estimated that this effort will cost $14 million through fiscal year 2019 and the solution will go live in 2018. Department of Justice—Bureau of Prisons Number of users: 38,000 Bureau of Prison staff, private institution staff, and other federal agencies. Investment start date: 1981 Age: 35 years Investment anticipated end in 2018, according to CNN.com's Tom Foreman. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. 5 of the 26 agencies that report to the IT Dashboard reported spending less than 10 percent on DME activities in fiscal year 2015. 34 percent of bureaus (i.e., 51 of the 151) spent less than ten percent on the DME. According to agency officials, reasons for low DME spending include the size and mission of the bureau. The agency or bureau is unable to innovate, according to the agency officials. For more details, see appendix III of this report. which the selected five federal agencies we reviewed carried out these tasks varied significantly. The Departments of Homeland Security (DHS) and Health and Human Services (HHS) developed policies and conducted analyses, but excluded key investments and assessment factors. The Department of Defense (Defense), the Treasury (Treasury), and Veterans Affairs (VA) also conducted analyses and analyses but did not include key investments or assessment factors in their analyses. The U.S. Department of Justice ( DOJ) did not conduct any analyses or analyses, and the Department of Veterans Affairs did not do any analyses. reported federal IT spending: Department of Agriculture, Department of Commerce, Dept of Defense, Dept. of Energy. Department of Health and Human Services: Dept of Health, Human Services. Homeland Security: DHS Department of Homeland Security. State: State Department. Treasury: Treasury Department of Transportation. Veterans Affairs: VA Department of Veterans Affairs. Social Security Administration: SSA Department of Social Security. Defense Department: Defense Department Department of Defense Department of Energy Department of Science and Technology. Treasury Department: Treasury department of Transportation Department of Education Department of State. recommendations; two partially agreed; and two agencies had no comments. Of the more than $80 billion reportedly spent on federal IT in fiscal year 2015, 51 federal bureaus reported spending less than 10 percent of their IT funds on development, modernization, and enhancement. As part of this review, we requested that agencies provide a list of their three oldest systems. In some cases, agencies reported that they do not have a list; two agencies said they had no comment on the matter. reduce commodity IT spending and demonstrate how their IT investments align with the agency’s mission and business functions. In 2013 and 2015 we reported that agencies had the potential to save at least $3.8 billion through this initiative. However, we noted that weaknesses existed in agencies’ implementation of the initiative;. We noted that agencies' IT investments were often not aligned with their mission or business functions;. Agency's IT investments could be cut by as much as $2.5 billion. The increase is largely due to increased costs of maintaining the infrastructure, including meeting security requirements. VA anticipates future increases in DME funding as prioritized IT modernization efforts are approved and funded. Further, an official in Department of State’s (State) Bureau of Information Resource Management stated that the increase is due to ‘increased costs’ of maintaining infrastructure. The increase is ‘largely due’ to “increase costs of maintenance,” the official said. so is contingent on funding. They also noted general plans to continuously update the system, but they too are contingent on receiving funding. Number of users: Thousands of users across the federal, state, and local levels, in addition to those in the international. Department of Commerce—National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration Number of uses: Thousands. of users. across theFederal, state and local. levels, as well as those in. the international levels. They say they plan to continue to improve the system as they receive funding. appeals processed each year, expanded use of settlements, and the increased interest in appeals data. This has resulted in an increased need for infrastructure changes, such as more storage, licenses, and processing capacity. Agency officials stated that they do not have any plans to address these gaps and that doing so would be a waste of time and money. They also said that they have no plans to change the way appeals are processed in the U.S. and that this would be an unnecessary and costly change. Care Act. Several agencies have decreased spending on O&M. Department of Energy (Energy) reduced spending by approximately $300 million, which it attributed to the reclassification of high performance computers from the IT portfolio to facilities. According to Energy officials, these investments were not in the national security interest of the U.S. The Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) has also decreased its spending on the Care Act, which is aimed at protecting the nation’s health care system. Department of Commerce (Commerce) reduced spending by approximately $110 million. Reduction attributed to reclassification of satellite ground systems from its IT portfolio. Commerce determined that it needed to refocus oversight efforts to supercomputers and laboratory facilities. In making this decision, the Department of Commerce decided that it needs to refocusing oversight efforts. The Department of commerce determined that the decision was necessary to focus oversight efforts on supercomputing and laboratories. The decision was made to reduce spending by about $110million. a more appropriate level and consequently minimized the role of the CIO and others in the oversight of satellites. We disagreed with these reclassifications, and reported that they run contrary to the Clinger-Cohen Act of 1996, which specifies requirements for the management of IT. Further, we reported that by gathering data on satellites, the government reduced the oversight role of its CIO. We reported that the government had reduced the role and oversight of CIOs and other senior officials in monitoring satellites. Agencies provided several reasons for not conducting TechStats. For example, several of the investments’ risk levels were reduced to low or moderately-low risk in the months since the IT Dashboard had been publicly updated. An Acting Deputy Executive Director of the U.S. Department of Agriculture’s (USDA) Enterprise Telecommunications Shared Services said TechStats was “not necessary” for the agency to conduct its own ITStats. The agency did not provide a reason for the lack of TechStats, but said it was not necessary to conduct it. was evaluated, its Trusted Internet Connection Investment did not meet its internal TechStat criteria of having cost variance over 10 percent. An official from USDA’s Office of the CIO stated that while the office did not hold a formal TechStat, the program was required to work on a corrective action. The program has been working on the corrective action for the past two months, the official said. The USDA did not release a statement on the matter on Monday. The agency has not commented on the incident. and TechStats were performed. Although not required, agencies had performed TechStats on only five of the at-risk investments. TechStats weren't performed on three of the four investments rated as high risk: DHS’s Customs and Border Protection - Integrated Fixed Towers, HHS’S Trusted Internet Connection Investment, and U.S. Department an investment if it has been rated ashigh risk for 3 consecutive months. In addition, operational analyses were not conducted for four at- risk investments. These investments were: Commerce”s Enterprise Cyber Security Monitoring and Operations. An official from HHS’s Office of the CIO stated that, at the time, a TechStat was not necessary. The agency had performed an internal “health assessment” on its Integrated Fixed Towers investment, and understood the issues it was facing, and decided that a Techstat was not needed, the official said. A spokesperson for DHS said the agency has no immediate plans to introduce a techStat. A spokesman for HHS said that the agency had no plans to implement a Tech Stat at this time.  legacy federal IT investments are becoming obsolete. Several aging investments are using unsupported components. Until agencies fully review at-risk O&M investments, the government’s oversight of such investments will be impaired and its spending could be wasteful, the authors say. The authors reviewed agency documentation associated with their legacy investments, such as operational analyses and enterprise architecture documents, and interviewed agency officials on the issues related to legacy investments. They also requested the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) and the 26 agencies that report officials to determine plans for replacing or modernizing the investments. risks and results of major capital investments in information systems made by federal agencies. Report to Congress on the net program performance benefits achieved as a result of these investments. Congress enacted IT acquisition reform legislation (commonly referred to as the Federal Information Technology outcomes) The federal government has spent billions of dollars on failed and poorly performing IT investments which often suffered from ineffective management, such as project planning, requirements definition, and program oversight and governance. In February 2015, we introduced a new government-wide high-risk area, Improving the Management of IT Acquisitions. investments. We conducted this performance audit from April 2015 to May 2016 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. We plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. Those standards require that we plan and. perform the auditing to provide sufficient,appropriate evidence to. provide areasonable basis for. our findings, conclusions and recommendations. The audit was conducted in accordance to generally accepted. government auditors standards. date is currently unknown. In addition, we have previously reported on IRS’s difficulty in delivering planned capabilities on time and on budget. Further, a key phase of the replacement project was initially to be completed by March 2015, but IRS is currently planning to complete parts of this phase well later in the year. The IRS has not commented on the timing of the planned completion of the second phase of its replacement project, but it is expected to be complete by the end of the year or early 2015. This guidance calls for the policy to provide for an annual operational analysis of each investment that addresses cost, schedule, customer satisfaction, strategic and business results, financial goals, and innovation. Nevertheless, federal IT investments have too frequently failed or incurred cost overruns and schedule slippages while contributing little to mission-related issues, according to the guidance. The policy calls for a review of every federal IT investment every three years, with an annual analysis of the results. The guidance also calls for annual reviews of each new IT investment. assess costs, schedules, whether the investment is still meeting customer and business needs, and investment performance. While agencies generally conducted the required operational analyses, they did not consistently perform TechStat reviews on all of the at-risk investments. Table 5 provides details on the 23 investments and whether the operational analyses were carried out on them. The investments are listed in alphabetical order by the agency they were purchased from. The agency that purchased the investments was not identified until after the investment was made. The Integrated Fixed Towers Program Manager stated that since the investment had only become operational in October 2015, an operational analysis was not yet required. DHS plans to perform the analysis on the towers.to management. However, Commerce’s monthly process does not include all of the key elements of an operationalAnalysis. to management. To see the full report, go to: http://www.dailymailonline.co.uk/news/article-261552/Interim-fixed-tower-program-manager-says-operational-analysis-not-needed-since-investment-only-became- operational-in October 2015. the investment in August 2017. Performing the analysis once the investment is operational will enable DHS to determine whether it is meeting the needs of the agency and delivering the expected value. The Director of Treasury’s Capital Planning and Investment Control program stated that the department's policy does not require the analysis to be performed before the investment goes into place. The analysis will be conducted once the project is operational. The investment is expected to be completed by August 2017, according to the Department of Treasury. environment, as described in the strategy, include software licenses, e-mail systems, and human resource systems. We have previously reported on legacy IT and the need for the federal government to improve its oversight of such investments. For example, in October 2012, we reported on agencies’ operational analyses policies and practices. For more, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/29/technology/features/government-tech-strategy/index.html. and Treasury’s Departmental Offices IT Infrastructure End User Systems and Support. National Weather Service (the responsible bureau) reviews the status of the previous month's activities for the development, integration, modification, and procurement to report issues. An official from Commerce’S Office of the CIO stated that, in place of operational analyses, National Weather service reviews the Status of Activities for the Previous Month. The Weather Service is responsible for monitoring the weather in the U.S. for 24 hours a day. determine whether the investment should be kept as-is, modernized, replaced or retired. This critical process allows the agency to identify and address high-cost or low-value investments in need of update, replacement, or retirement. Agencies are, in part, maintaining obsolete investments because they are not required to identify, evaluate, and prioritize, the report says. The report recommends that agencies identify and evaluate, evaluate and prioritize their investments, and then make a decision on their future. direct the respective agency CIO to ensure that required analyses are performed on investments in the operations and maintenance phase. Further, to address obsolete IT investments in need of modernization or replacement, we recommend that the Secretaries of Agriculture, Commerce, Defense, Energy, Health and Human Services, Homeland Security, State, the State Department and the Department of Justice make the recommendations to the CIOs of these agencies. We recommend that these agencies make the changes to their IT investments to meet the needs of their agencies. summarized in table 7 and can be found in appendix V. We have previously provided guidance that organizations should periodically identify, evaluate, and prioritize their investments. These investments include those that are in O&M; at, near, or exceeding their planned life cycles; and/or are based on technology that is now obsolete, to name just a few. To see the rest of the report, see the full report at the bottom of the page and the appendix V of the appendix. that required analyses are performed on investments in the O&M phase, the department concurred and stated that it will reiterate and expand the department’s existing policies requiring such analyses. The department also concurred with the recommendation to identify and plan to modernize or replace legacy systems, the report stated. The report also stated that the department will continue to look for ways to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of the department's operations and maintenance services, including the use of data analytics and other tools. The lack of specific plans to modernize or replace these investments could result in wasteful spending on plans for 3 of the investments. The agencies did not provide specificity on time frames, activities to be performed, or functions to be replaced or enhanced. Further, there were no plans to replace or modernize 1 investment. The profiles of these systems and investments are listed in table 4. For more information on this report, visit: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/29/technology/top-10-government-spending-plans-2013/index.html#storylink=cpy. investments were moderate to high risk as of August 2015. They requested $922.9 million in fiscal year 2016 for these investments. Of the 23 investments, agencies had plans to replace or modernize 19 investments. However, the plans for 12 of those were general or tentative in that the agencies did were rated as moderate or high risk in fiscalyear 2015. While the agencies had specific plans to retire ormodernize some of these investments, most investments did not have specific plans with time frames, activities to be performed, or functions to be replaced or enhanced. we selected one system or investment per agency using the following factors: investment type (major or non- major), system or Investment age, and risk level as of November 2015. In particular, we sought to have a mix of systems and investments that included both major and non-major investment types, a range of ages, and a range. of risk ratings. The Contractor was selected for its ability to provide a high level of service to clients. The contractor was also chosen for itsability to provide high levels of services to clients, as well as the fact that it was based in the U.S. Business Financial and Administrative Systems investment is intended to provide business and administrative systems for the Department of Energy’s (Energy) Savannah River Site. System will manage human resources (including payroll, benefits, and retirement for 13,000 employees and pensioners), transparent and efficient. The investment will be made by a consortium of private equity and venture capital firms. The firm will be based in Washington, D.C., with offices in Atlanta, Atlanta, Savannah, and Washington, DC. It will be funded by a combination of public and private sources. financial reporting to Energy, supply chain, and project management. The investment is a commercial off-the-shelf system that runs on Windows and Unix servers using Oracle’s PeopleSoft applications. Specifically, the investment uses the PeopleSoft Supply Chain Management and PeopleSoft Financials modules. According to an agency official in Savannah River Operations, the project is expected to be completed by the end of the year or early next year. The project is being led by the Savannah River Company, which is based in Savannah, Georgia. the report as appropriate. In written comments, Commerce concurred with both of its recommendations. In comments provided via e-mail on May 3, 2016, an official from USDA’s Office of the CIO’‘s Oversight and Compliance Division stated that the department concurring with our recommendation. Regarding the recommendation that the Department of Commerce ensure that the report was published as appropriate, the official said the department ‘convinced’ us that this was the case. via e-mail on May 12, 2016, an official from Treasury’s Office of the CIO stated that the department had no comments on the draft report. In comments provided via e-mails on May 6, 2016 and May 8, 2015, a Transportation official said the department concurred with the draft. A Transportation official told CNN on May 9, 2016 that the Department of Transportation had no comment on the report. The report was released on May 10, 2016; it was released to the public on May 11, 2016. no comment on the recommendations. In written comments, State agreed with the recommendation and noted that it plans to follow OMB’s guidance once it is formally issued. The department also provided technical comments, which we have incorporated in the report as appropriate. In comments provided via e-mail on May 12, 2016, an official from OMB's Office of E-Government and Technology stated that it concurred with our recommendations. The agency also providedTechnical comments,Which we've incorporated in of the department. enhanced. We received comments on a draft of this report from OMB and the other 12 agencies in our review. Eight agencies (USDA, Commerce, HHS, DHS, State, Transportation, VA, and SSA) and OMB agreed with our recommendations. Defense and Energy partially agreed, and Justice and the Treasury stated they had also agreed with the recommendations. We also received comments from the Department of the Treasury, which said it agreed with some of the recommendations, but not all. have been modernized as recently as fiscal year 2015. Since OMB’s draft guidance has not yet been issued, Energy could not concur with this part of the recommendation, but plans to review and consider implementation of such guidance. Energy's plan to consider OMB's guidance when it is finalized is to consider it when it's released in the fall. The agency plans to consider the guidance when the draft guidance is issued in the summer of 2015. It will then decide how to implement the new guidance. consistent with the intent of our recommendation. Energy’s comments are reprinted in appendix VIII. The department also provided technical comments, which we have incorporated in the report as appropriate. In written comments, HHS stated that it concurred with our recommendation and is working to identify and plan to modernize or modernize the system. It is working with the Department of Health and Human Services to identify, plan and implement a plan tomodernize the health care system, according to the HHS. department policies and processes, and consistent to the extent practicable with OMB’s draft guidance. In written comments, Energy partially concurred with our recommendation. In appendix VII, Defense's comments are reprinted in appendix VII. Defense's plan is consistent with the intent of our recommendation, according to the report. The report also says that the Defense Department's plan to be consistent with O MB’S guidance is also consistent with its intent. The full report can be found at: http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-263852/Defense-plan-to-be-consistent-with-OMB‘s guidance. Commissioner of the Social Security Administration; the Director of the Office of Management and Budget and other interested parties. This report will also be available at no charge on our website at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staffs have any questions on matters discussed in this report, please contact me at 1-800-282-8255 or by e-mailing jennifer.smith@sasa.gov, or by phone at (703) 705-3157. GAO staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix XIV. Contact points for our Offices of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of this report. Our objectives were to (1) assess the extent to which the U.S. government is engaged in waste, fraud, and abuse, and (2) assess whether the government is doing enough to protect the public from such waste, Fraud, and Abuse. We are happy to answer any questions you may have. Torabi, and Jessica Waselkow. were on the ground in Iraq when the attack took place. They are now in the U.S. and working on a book about the experience. The book will be published by Simon & Schuster and will be available in English and Spanish. For more information on the book, visit www.simonandschuster.com. For confidential support on suicide matters call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org. PAID is a 50-year old COBOL-based system at the end of its life span. The system runs on IBM mainframes and uses an IBM database. Officials stated the system is not user friendly and requires extensive training in order to use the system successfully. VA officials stated that PAID is intended to be mostly replaced by the Human Resources Information System Shared Service Center. The center will consolidate several IT services to provide core human resources- related functions. It is expected to be completed by 2015. PAID system automates time and attendance for employees, timekeepers, payroll, and supervisors in the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) The PAID software has three major modules: Time and Attendance, Employee Master Record Downloads, and Education Tracking. Number of users: 2,900 system users across 200 human resources. The VA has more than 2,000 employees across 200 Human Resources departments and offices. For confidential support, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. Human Resources Information System Shared Service Center in 2017 is to consolidate human resources IT functions and services to provide core human resources-related functions. However, the target solution is experiencing cost overruns of $14.8 million and VA officials stated that they will not be using the solution. The VA will continue to provide benefits and compensation through a separate human resources system in the future, VA officials said in a statement. The system is expected to be fully operational by 2018, according to VA officials. The VA concurred with our recommendation and stated that it launched a new office in April 2016 that will provide lifecycle management oversight for portfolios of systems. In addition, it stated that the department is planning to launch an office that will focus on the systems' lifecycle. Findings and recommendations and had no additional comments on the report. The report was compiled by CNN's John Sutter and published by the Center for Strategic and International Studies at the University of California, Los Angeles. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. able to replace all of PAID’s functions. The agency is currently working on a transition plan. VA will determine whether VA should find another solution for the missing functionality or continue to keep PAID running indefinitely. The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) is using the Resource Ordering and Status System (ROSS) to replace PAID. ROSS is a part of the U.N.’S World Health Organization (WHO) and is based in Geneva, Switzerland. In 2011, OMB issued the Federal Cloud Computing Strategy. OMB’s guidance, released in February 2012, provided definitions of cloud computing services. In April 2016, we reported, among other things, that we had identified 10 key practices that if included in cloud service agreements can help agencies ensure services are performed effectively, efficiently, and securely. The report was based on OMB's guidance, which was released inFebruary 2012, and case studies to support agencies’ migration to cloud computing. OMB had not listed any savings from TechStats in its quarterly reporting to Congress since June 2012. OMB’s 25-Point IT Reform Plan included a “Cloud First’ policy that required each agency CIO to, among other things, adopt a cloud computing strategy. The agency has not said if it has saved any money from the TechStats program since 2012. The program was created to help the U.S. government save money by using cloud computing solutions across the government. agile, and enable innovation. It provides an approach for agencies to implement cloud-based solutions whenever a secure, reliable, and cost-effective cloud option exists and to use shared services for IT service delivery. It aims to increase return on investment, eliminate waste and duplication, and improve the effectiveness of IT. It also aims to reduce the cost of IT services and reduce the number of IT projects. It is based on a concept from the book "The Cloud Is the New Firewall" service could include cloud services or shared services from another federal agency or a private service provider. About 8.5 percent of federal agencies’ planned spending for fiscal year 2016 has gone toward provisioned IT services. The vast majority of spending going toward IT that is non-provisioned. Figure 1 shows how much of the federal government’s budget will go toward IT in fiscal year 2015 and 2016, and how much will go to IT in 2016 and 2017, and so on. to use shared services to increase return on investment, eliminate waste and duplication, and improve the effectiveness of IT solutions. Shared services are IT functions that are provided for consumption by multiple organizations within or between federal agencies. Examples of commodity IT areas to consider migrating to a shared service include IT systems, software, services, and IT infrastructure. For more information on how to migrate to shared services, go to sharedservices.org or call 1-800-Shared-Services (1-844-shared-services). A provisioned IT service is one that is (1) owned, operated, and provided by an outside vendor or external government organization, and (2) consumed by the agency on an as-needed basis. To identify provisionedIT service costs, break down O&M and DME costs to identify costs for provisioning IT services. For more information, visit the government- IT-Supplier's Credentials and Provisioning-IT-Costs site.