Many terms of service agreements are incompatible with federal law, policies, and regulations. To address this challenge, federal agencies have negotiated federal-compatible terms ofService agreements with social media vendors. These agreements modify or remove problematic language or clauses in standard Terms of Service agreements. Negotiated terms of Service can be developed individually by the federal entity, or through the assistance of the federal agency. The terms can be changed to reflect changes in technology or language in the agreement. The agreement can also be updated to reflect the changes in social media technology. role in social media efforts should be limited because the decentralized nature of social media makes the medium too unwieldy for large, centralized organizations to control. They may further argue that federal involvement might lead to standardization and rigid usage guidelines which might hinder the nimbleness ofsocial media to be applied in new and novel ways. They might conclude that state and locals should take the lead with social media with the support of the federal government. Some starting points would include pilot programs and public private partnerships. The term "social media" refers to Internet-based applications that enable people to communicate and share resources and information. Some examples of social media include blogs, discussion forums, chat rooms, wikis, YouTube channels, LinkedIn, Instagram, Facebook, and Twitter. Social media can be accessed by computers, tablets, smart and cellular telephones, and social media sites such as Facebook, Twitter, and Instagram. The term " social media" can also be used to refer to social networking sites like Twitter and Facebook. are from the federal government nor are they all governmental. The following is not an exhaustive list and some of the examples may change or quickly become outdated. Additionally, federal usage of social media varies from agency to agency just as its use varies from non-governmental entity to non- governmental entity. For more information, visit the White House Social Media Center at WhiteHouse.gov/Social-Media-Cabinet. for more information on White House social-media-cabinet activities. The hearings investigated how social media efforts could be enhanced. Social media was transforming preparedness, response, and recovery efforts in the private sector and how lessons learned in these sectors might be applied at the federal level. The hearings took place on July 4, 2013, and July 9, 2013. For more information on the hearings, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/07/04/social-media-hearings-cnn-4-9-2013. 75% of social media users use the medium to seek information about an incident including road closures, damage reports, and weather conditions. One noteworthy finding from the hearings was a reported need to enhance public and private partnerships to facilitate communications and collaboration between the two sectors. Legislation to address the issue is expected to be introduced in the near future, according to the hearing's chair, Senator David Leyonhjelm, who is from New South Wales. The hearings were held to discuss the need to improve communications between the government and the private sector. that some jurisdictions do not have the capabilities to effectively monitor social media for incoming requests for assistance. The use of social media as a tool to request assistance (similar to a call to 911) may be of potential interest to Congress. If so, Congress could explore the feasibility of using social media to make requests and investigate potential polices to help state, local, and federal agencies in need of help. For example, according to the West Virginia State Police, citizens should not use social media. to request immediate help because the organization does not. have the manpower and resources to monitor its social media around the clock. Local, and federal jurisdictions develop their capacity to receive and effectively respond to the requests. Congress could also investigate the use of a pilot program that would allow people to request assistance through social media. The program could then be evaluated to determine its effectiveness. A key issue of interest is the role of the federal government in responding to requests for assistance from the public. The issue of the day is how to respond to people who request assistance via social media, and how to make sure that the requests are received effectively. At the state and local level, groups are using social media to manage donations and organize volunteer efforts. At the federal level, social media is commonly used to provide information concerning what types of assistance is available to individuals and households.played a role after an incident through recovery efforts. For more information on how to help in the U.S., visit the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or go to www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org. For information on helping in the UK, visit the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch or click here. traditional forms of communication are not available. The use of social media to request assistance is likely to become more common. According to a study by the American Red Cross, younger people generally use social media more frequently than older segments of society. They are also more likely to request help through social media, believe agencies should monitor their postings, and have high expectations that agencies will respond quickly to their requests. There are also indications that older adults are increasingly using social media. As more older adults usesocial media, they too may develop similar expectations. A study conducted in 2012 by the American Red Cross found that 40% of the respondents said they would use social tools to tell others they were safe. That percentage is most likely higher today given the rapid proliferation and acceptance of social media in recent years. Other examples include Twitter, Facebook, Instagram, Snapchat and other social media sites like MySpace, Instagram and Snapchat. For more information on how to use social media, visit www.crises.org and @crises on Twitter. For confidential support on suicide matters call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch or click here. hearings also underscored the growing use of social media during emergencies and disasters. According to Suzanne DeFrancis, Chief Public Affairs Officer of the American Red Cross, 20% of Americans received some form of emergency information from an app. Surveys conducted in 2012 by the Red Cross found that 76% of people received emergency information via an app or social media. The Red Cross says it is working to increase the use of apps and social media to help people cope with emergencies in the future. of American expect help within three hours of posting a request on social media and 40% would use social media to inform others they were safe. Both of these figures are higher than the percentages reported (68% and 24% respectively) in their 2011 survey. The study also found that roughly 1 in 4 Americans expect help in the next three hours after posting a social media request on Facebook, Twitter or Instagram. The survey was conducted by the social networking site in June and July of this year. Crowdsourcing consists of obtaining needed services, ideas, or content by soliciting contributions from people. Social media can also use inputs to provide unique emergency and disaster information. For example, Crowdsourcing has been effectively used to provide information about a crisis or incident.examples of how information is disseminated through outputs. For more information on how to use social media, visit: www.crowdsources.org.uk or www.justgiving.com/crowd-sourcing. were also discussed as well as how crowdsourcing can be used to enhance the quality and timeliness of critical information. Crowdsourcing information can be geotagged with longitude and latitude coordinates. According to Mathew Stepka, Vice President, Technology for Social Impact for Google, during some disasters, authoritative sources may not have been available. The conference was held at the University of California, San Diego. For more information on the conference, visit www.cnn.com/cnnsummit. an inherent problem given the nature of social media platforms and the number of people disseminating information. Information that is false, inaccurate, or outdated could complicate situational awareness. In addition to inaccurate information, too much information can also pose a problem. As a disaster or crisis unfolds, the amount of information generated by users can be enormous. Sifting through this information can be a difficult task for emergency responders and first responders. For more information, visit CNN.com/sifting-through-disaster-information. There is some concern that individuals or organizations might intentionally provide inaccurate information to confuse, disrupt, or otherwise thwart response efforts. Malicious use of social media during an incident could range from mischievous pranks to acts of terrorism.help prevent or reduce the spread of misinformation. One tactic that has been used in the past to spread misinformation is to use social media to spread false information about an ongoing or planned event. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. Some reports have indicated that information from unofficial sources can be just as, and even more desirable than information from official social media websites. This is because citizens may think official sources are too slow, general, or inaccurate.are often trusted and used as information sources by the general public. Some reports have said that unofficial sources are as good as official sources for information about events such as the Olympics and Paralympic Games. These reports have been published in the New York Times, the Washington Post, and the Guardian. During Hurricane Gustav, a Community Emergency Response Team (CERT) used social media to send mass email notifications to team members through Facebook when its call notification system went down. The CERT group also updated status messages to notify first responders and citizens to notify them of the storm's progress. For more information on how to use social media, visit CNN.com/Heroes and follow @HeroesHeroes on Twitter and @CNNOpinion on Facebook. For confidential support on suicide matters call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. Facebook activated a feature called "safety check" during the Paris terrorist attacks to allow users to post if they are safe or not. The feature can also be used to check if others in the area are safe. The above are just some of the ways Facebook uses the feature to keep users informed of what is going on in the world. For more information on Facebook's safety check feature, visit: www.facebook.com/safetycheck. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. Officials and first responders should be aware it could be used for malicious purposes. In some incidents residents may be without power for 48 hours or longer. Another concern is the potential of overwhelming Internet traffic during crisis situations. For example, Internet traffic in Belgium after the terrorist attacks in Brussels slowed.requires a response. Yet many smartphones that emergency managers and officials consider alternative or backup options during extended power outages, or other occurrences that could prevent the use of social media. For more information on how to use social media for situational awareness and response efforts, visit CNN.com/situationalawareness. When power or landline service is interrupted, people generally continue to have access to information through social media platforms with SMS and Global Positioning Satellite (GPS) frameworks. Thus, certain elements of social media can remain viable during a power outage. For more, visit CNN.com/Impact and follow us on Twitter @ImpactCNN and @CNNOpinion for more information on how to use social media during an power outage in the U.S. and around the world. crisis situations. We encourage the subcommittee to explore innovative solutions to provide deployable 3/4G. In a June 4, 2013, hearing, Jason Payne of Palantir Technologies testified that internet and cloud technology, such as social media, are extremely valuable as long as people have power and connectivity. Without both, it's useless, he said. The subcommittee is looking for ways to make it easier for people to use social media in crisis situations. It is also looking at how to make the cloud more accessible for businesses. mobile telephone text messaging (SMS). The use of social media is an evolving phenomenon. Rapid changes in communication technologies in the past decade have enabled people to interact and share information through media that were non-existent or widely unavailable as recently as 15 years ago. In the last 10 years, social media has become more popular than it was in the 1980s and 1990s. It has also become a way of life for many people who are not used to using social media as much as they used to. and tablets have battery lives lasting twelve hours or less depending on their use. In some cases disaster survivors will not have the means to recharge their devices. In other cases, the device may have adequate power, but cellular towers in the area do not, significantly limiting their use in the event of a disaster. The device may also not have enough power to communicate with a mobile phone network in the case of a major earthquake or tsunami. The battery life of these devices can last between 12 and 24 hours depending on the device. government is paying for its various social media efforts with respect to emergencies and disasters. The number of personnel required to monitor multiple social media sources, verify the accuracy of incoming information, and respond to and redirect incoming messages is also uncertain. In addition, federal entities may experience a large volume of incoming messages from the public during a disaster. responding to each message in a timely manner could be difficult and may require an increase in the number of employees responding to incoming messages. knowledge concerning federal expenditures on social media use during disasters can help. within three hours of posting a request on social media. Some jurisdictions may not yet have the capacity or resources to meet this expectation. Others might argue that this expectation is unrealistic, particularly during large-scale disasters, due to the potential volume of incoming messages and posts. They may further argue that it is unrealistic to expect all requests to be answered within three hours, especially in the event of a major disaster, such as an earthquake or tsunami, within the next 24 hours. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here. speed, and accuracy of detecting and responding to levee failures. In addition, the application has also helped reduce human error by reducing instances of mislabeling or misreporting problems. Within the past decade, reports on successful use of social media during emergencies and disasters have spurred congressional interest and policy discussions, according to a report by the U.S. National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) NIST: Social media can be used to help prevent, detect, and respond to disasters. The emphasis on outputs could prevent the federal government from fully realizing social media's potential as an effective emergency management tool. A different approach would be to reorient the focus with an emphasis on inputs. The reorientation, however, could be a complicated matter. Some might argue that the federal may not be able to use social media as well as it could. The focus should be on the input, not the output, according to the federal, rather than on the outputs, the federal says. social media has played an increasing role in emergencies and disasters in both the public and private sectors. Facebook hosts numerous emergency-related organizations, including Information Systems for Crisis Response and Management (ISCRAM), and the Humanitarian Free and Open Source Software (FOSS) Project. There is also evidence that social media is increasingly being used at the community and household level to respond to emergencies and crises. The U.S. National Institute of Standards and Technology has released a report on the impact of social media on emergency planning and management. The federal government does not use a single platform for emergency and disasters. Rather, federal entities use different social media for different purposes. Some have platforms dedicated to emergencies and disasters while others have emergency and disaster information comingled with other agency information. When possible statistics on social media use are provided; however, not all entities collect such data. the other challenges described in this report including using social media to request assistance, inaccurate or malicious crisis information, information overload, and technical limitations. This list is not exhaustive. 3.5 million tweets with the hashtag #sandy were generated in 24 hours during Hurricane Sandy. roughly ten pictures per second were uploaded using Instagram. Social media can also be used by users to let family and friends know they are safe if they are near an incident or natural. The hashtag was used to send messages to friends and family in New York, New Jersey, Connecticut, New York City, Staten Island and Staten Island during the storm. The number of people using social media during the hurricane was estimated to be in excess of 100 million. The number of people using Twitter and Facebook spike during disasters because they are searching immediate information they cannot find. In a June 4, 2013, hearing, Jorge Cardenas, vice president of asset management and centralized services for Public Service Electric and Gas Company (New Jersey) stated that people use social media during disasters to get information they can't find elsewhere. To be useful, use the Daily Discussion to help people understand today's featured news stories and find out what's going on in the world. FEMA can use social media as an emergency management tool by integrating various social media platforms through the use of tools referred to as "social media management systems" FEMA can use the medium to conduct emergency communications and issue real time warnings; using social media to receive requests for assistance; monitoring user activities and postings to establish situational awareness; open shelters. The social media management system include software that includes software that monitors social media activity and posts. It can also be used as an external stakeholder outreach tool. Social media has made tremendous inroads into emergency management for a variety of reasons. Social media can provide accurate, reliable, and timely information. Notifications can also be sent to mobilize first responders to respond to an incident. Using social media for mobilization purposes can be particularly possible to obtain this information before first responders reach the disaster area. While current emergency communication systems have largely been centralized via one-way communication, some may argue that emergency managers and officials may need to embrace social media technology in order to be responsive to the public's needs. of community and household use of the media include warning others of unsafe areas or situations, creating ad hoc volunteer response groups, and raising funds for disaster relief and recovery efforts. Social media are also used for community outreach and customer service purposes by soliciting feedback on public safety-related topics. For example, the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) used Twitter to provide information on Zika virus prevention. social media is often used by organizations to provide key public information to the public. It allows people to communicate when traditional lines media. The use of social media for emergencies and disasters can be conceptualized as two broad categories of usage. Social media has proven to be a useful method for communicating when traditional forms of communication are ineffective or inoperable. In addition, there are strong indications that the use ofsocial media for emergency and disaster response will increase as people continue to embrace new technologies. Some may be concerned that overreliance on the technology could be problematic under prolonged power outages. They may further argue been plagued by communication challenges. social media is increasingly altering emergency communications. Information can flow in multiple directions (known as backchannel communications) Social media are increasingly seen by some as a supplement or replacement to "911" emergency system lines. Social media can be particularly useful when requesting assistance from a community. It can also be used as a way to share information with other members of the community, such as sharing photos and videos of people in need of help. It is a form of backchannel communication that can be useful in times of crisis. using uploaded images to create damage estimates; and using social media to conduct investigations and post-incident analysis. Social media sources have a broad range of applications in emergencies and disasters. The following sections provide examples of the ways in which social media are being used. Not all of these examples for Hurricanes Katrina and Sandy respectively). Social media has the capacity to accelerate the damage estimate process by transmitting images of damaged structures such as dams, levees, bridges, and buildings uploaded from tablets or smart phones. also uses social media through internal pages to conduct internal communications. For example, uploaded images of damages posted by social media users are circulated internally to help understand the extent of damages caused by an incident. The images, however, are not used for damage estimates. The National Guard Bureau also uses the social media site to send messages to members of the public and their families. The agency also uses it to communicate with the public about the state of the nation's economy. It is also used to share information about the National Guard's operations. used to support preparedness and response activities related to terrorist attacks and other emergencies. Social media could be used as a tool for such purposes by issuing calls for assistance to an area, or notifying officials of a false hazard or threat. Recommendations to improve DHS's use of social media for emergency management purposes, to improve public awareness of the type of information being disseminated through social media, and to improve information sharing among DHS and its components and among state and local governments. The report also looked at best practices and lessons learned on the use ofsocial media during the response to terrorism. governments; a review of available training for government officials on the use of social media in response to a terrorist attack or other emergency; and a summary of coordination efforts with the private sector to discuss and resolve legal, operational, technical, privacy, and security concerns. Another bill introduced in the House of Representatives would require the government to share information on its social media accounts with the public in the event of a terror attack or emergency. The bill was introduced by House Speaker John Boehner, R-Ohio. Social media has been used to disseminate a wide range of public safety information before, during, and after various incidents. Social media is being increasingly used to provide "real-time" updates as the event unfolds. For example, Orlando authorities used social media to inform the public on the shootings in the Pulse nightclub. information was used to construct incident timelines and retrieve first-hand accounts of the event as it unfolded. Monitoring information flows help establish "situational awareness" during an incident. awareness is the ability to identify, process, and comprehend critical elements of an incident or situation. At the local level, first responders can leverage social media, both to communicate and to gather and share real-time, dynamic information, to enhance situational awareness and assist in decision-making. Obtaining real-by-real-time information is an important part of first responders' job. For more information on how to use social media to help first responders, visit www.firstresponders.org. Social media could be used to raise funds in such cases through private contributions. However, it would not likely be capable of supplanting federal assistance altogether. Recovery from large-scale disasters can cost billions of dollars (the federal government provided approximately $120 billion and $50 billion in supplemental funding in 2012). The U.S. government provides about $60 billion to $80 billion in disaster relief each year, according to the Congressional Research Service. In 2012, the federal government also provided $50 million in supplemental funds. could consider providing grants to the private sector or investigate other methods that would help foster partnerships between the private and public sectors. FEMA provides a number of tools and models to help organizations start emergency management PPPs. These tools and Models could be expanded to include social networks and other forms of public-private partnerships. For more information on FEMA's PPP program, go to: www.fema.gov/PPP. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. A potential method that could be used to accelerate diffusion is through public-private partnerships (PPPs) There is no single, accepted definition of PPPs. A PPP is a contractual arrangement whereby the private sector would assume more responsibility than is traditional for the development and design of new technologies. Once developed, the new technology would be shared with the public sector. In the case of social media for emergencies and disasters, this could be achieved through social media P PPs. Some argue that government agencies can potentially achieve this. more objectives more efficiently through PPPs than they could on their own. Detractors, on the other hand, might argue that P PPs are complicated arrangements and require too much oversight. They may also be concerned about potential fraud and abuse of technology grants. Instances of inaccurate and false information may be more likely to be reported in the PPP system. PPP's can be used to achieve more objectives than they would be able to achieve without them, according to the World Economic Forum. Section 208 of the E-Government Act requires federal agencies to complete PIAs. The PIA uses the Fair Information Privacy Principles (FIPPs) to assess and mitigate any impact on an individual's privacy. In March 2011, the Department of Homeland Security completed a Privacy Impact Assessment (PIA) for the U.S. Department of Justice. The document that results from these mandated assessments is called a Privacy impact assessment (Pia) and is called the Privacy Impact assessment (PIAs) for federal agencies. DHS issued a Privacy Impact Assessment for the Use of Unidirectional Social Media Applications Communications and Outreach. The PIA does not cover users sending content to the Department. It describes the personally identifiable information (PII) and the limited circumstances under which DHS will have access to PII. In 2010, DHS published a PIA on the use of Social Networking Interactions and Applications (Communications/Outreach/Public Dialogue). Neither PIA covers other social media. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. activity such as monitoring initiatives, law enforcement and intelligence activities, and other similar operations. Some have argued that privacy laws can hamper the use of information obtained from social media during disasters. Such laws restrict how the government can collect, maintain, and use PII. Efforts are being made to develop software that could remove personal information from social social media messages without loss of vital disaster information. Congress could consider amending existing laws to make theUse of PII less restrictive during disasters, or investigate methods that could help the federal government develop software. Privacy concerns exist about the potential for the collection, retention, and data mining of personal information by the federal government with respect to its use of social media for disaster recovery purposes. Specifically, the use of status alerts and the creation of personal pages to establish cost saving opportunities. The federal government is considering using social media to identify cost-saving opportunities in disaster recovery. The government is also considering using the social media tool to establish new cost-savings opportunities in the event of a major disaster. Situational awareness may raise privacy concerns. Others are concerned how the information might be used. The E-Government Act of 2002 mandates that federal agencies conduct an assessment of the privacy impact of any information collected by the government. For example, would the federal government compile records after a terrorist attack to help investigate certain individuals? It's unclear if the information collected would be used to help with that investigation or for other purposes. It's also unclear whether the information could be used for any other purpose. Congress determine how the money has been spent and what resources have been provided to the nation. The financial information is also useful for congressional oversight of the entities that have received the funds and to evaluate the overall effectiveness of the expenditures. Financial information can also potentially help Congress decide how to spend the money. The information can be used to help Congress determine how to use the money and the resources that have been given to the country. It can also be used as a tool for Congress to determine the effectiveness of expenditures. decisionmaking and policymaking. This could include determining hardware and software costs, personnel costs, surge capacity during large-scale disasters, and the federal government's ability to keep pace with advances in and the social media. Congress could also explore ways to address and overcome some of these issues. It could also look at ways to keep up with changes in and changing patterns of public usage, such as the use of social media and mobile devices. The report was published by the Center for American Progress, a think tank based in Washington. parts of the country's networks. Belgian officials requested that users reduce their Internet consumption. Congress could examine whether parts of the United States might experience similar problems with Internet traffic. It is unclear how much the federal government would have to spend to address the problem in the U.S. and Belgium. The problem is expected to be resolved by the end of the year, according to Belgian officials. The Belgian government has not said how long it will take for the problem to be fully resolved, but it could be months. weather radios. The NWS can send weather alerts, and the National Center for Missing and Exploited Children can send AMBER alerts over IPAWS. In addition to alerts and messages sent by emergency management and governmental organizations, valuable crisis information is often disseminated by citizens. For example, an estimated an estimated 10,000 people are missing in the U.S. each day. For more information, visit the National Weather Service website or the National Institute of Standards and Technology's website. mobile phone users within a close proximity of a critical weather event. These alerts are 90 characters in length and may include information on the weather event and suggestions like " take shelter " or " avoid flood areas " As previously mentioned, surveys indicate that many citizens expect help from the government when it comes to weather-related emergencies. The National Weather Service has issued alerts for a number of weather events in the U.S. over the past few years, including Hurricane Katrina, Hurricane Gustav and Hurricane Ike. Emergency alerts used at the federal level include the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) Personal Localized Alerting Network known as "PLAN" Implemented in 2011, PLAN expands the emergency alert target emergency alerts to specific geographic areas, which then push the information to dedicated receivers with PLAN-enabled mobile devices. The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) oversees development and operation of the Integrated Public Alert and Warnings System (IPAWS), a national system for delivering emergency alerts and warnings to the public. system notifications sent over TV and radio to include mobile and smart phones. PLAN sends geographically targeted alerts through cell towers in the form of text-like messages to the cell phones of people who have requested to be notified in the event of an emergency. PLAN enables government officials to notify people in an emergency by sending text messages to their cell phones in the case of a fire, flood, earthquake, or other emergency. The system is available in the U.S., Canada, Australia, New Zealand, and the UK. Today, over 150 entities—including approximately 75 counties, 25 states, and the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico—have access to the IPAWS-OPEN gateway. The gateway allows them to transmit messages to cellular phones (using Wireless Emergency Alerts or WEA), radio and television (using the Emergency Alert System), and National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) The gateway was developed by the U.S. Department of Homeland Security and the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) The extent to which inaccurate information poses a problem to the emergency management community is not clear and claims of inaccuracy are debatable. Some studies have concluded that inaccurate information can hinder or slow response efforts. Inaccurate information could also jeopardize the safety of first responders and the community. The extent of the problem is still not clear. The full report will be published in the next issue of the magazine, which will be available in print and e-book editions from September to October. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. through the data for may be a challenge to emergency managers. The volume and speed with which available information is disseminated, combined with an inability to identify, verify, coordinate, aggregate, and contextualize it can leave this information unused and ultimately, unactionable. Against this backdrop, it is noteworthy that unofficial sources may be used to gather information. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. incident unfolds can help officials determine where people are located; assess victim needs; and alert citizens and first responders to changing conditions and new threats. Emergency managers can also use the information to direct certain resources to reduce damages, loss of life, or both. In some cases it might be a good idea to call in the National Guard to help with the search and rescue effort. In other cases, it may be a better idea to send in the air ambulance or other emergency response team to the scene. 10,000 reports each. Another useful source of information during an incident are crisis maps. Crisis maps combine information scattered across the Internet along with other information and places them on a single map. Users can use the crisis map to ascertain storm paths and flood zones, as well as identify storm paths. Users could also use the map to identify stormpaths, flood zones and storm damage reports, for example. The crisis map can also be used to determine storm paths, flood areas and damage reports. Congress could investigate the accuracy of emergency and disaster information. Congress could examine strategies and best practices that could increase organizational capacity to handle a large influx of information. The U.S. could examine methods that could be used to provide accurate and timely information in crises situations. On the issue of traditional broadcast channels, Congress could look at ways to improve their ability to handle large amounts of information in the event of a major emergency or disaster. For more information, go to: www.cnn.com. evacuation routes, shelter locations, and power outage areas. Information posted at the time of an event could be valuable later for investigative and research purposes. For example, viewers at the 2012 theater shooting in Aurora, CO, tweeted and posted messages moments before the attack took place. Forensic analysis of the 2012 Aurora theater shooting could be used to help identify the shooter and his accomplice. For more information, go to CNN.com/sabotage and follow us on Twitter @Sabotaging. New Jersey to check whether they were open and had gas available. Within a few days they had data for more than 1,000 different stations, which was fed into our Sandy crisis map automatically. The Department of Energy's call center ended up referencing this information. Study findings reported at the Study findings at the New Jersey Institute of Mining and Technology, which is based at the University of New Jersey at St. Peter and St. Gallen, New York. The study's findings were published in the journal of the American Journal of Mining & Metallurgy. Stepka provided an example of crowdsourcing in his testimony to the Subcommittee. According to Stepka, it was unclear during Hurricane Sandy which filling stations had gasoline. Stepka related that during Sandy, a group of student volunteers called stations in the area.as expansive information as individuals who are experiencing the incident first-hand. The subcommittee is expected to vote on the bill in the next few days. The hearing is scheduled to begin at 10 a.m. ET on Tuesday, September 25. SBA utilizes social media on several different platforms including Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, and blogs. Each SBA region has its own Twitter account to provide users with specific local information. Using social media SBA will often provide links to information on their website for more technical information and may link and share posts from FEMA and other agencies. SBA thinks of their social media as part of their larger digital engagement with users. and to help repair, rebuild, and recover from economic losses after a declared disaster. engagement section can also be activated to assist with social listening in the event of an emergency or major disaster. SBA has been a major source of assistance for the restoration of commerce and households in areas stricken by natural and human-caused disasters. The SBA offers low-interest, long-term loans for physical and financial assets. The agency also offers a range of financial services for individuals, businesses, families and small businesses, including grants, loans, and insurance. For more information, visit SBA.gov or go to www.sba.gov. outreach, approximately 1.6 million people have subscribed to SBA's e-newsletter online which often provides preparedness recovery advice. SBA comingles emergency and disaster information with other information about small business programs on their social media platforms. HHS directs and coordinates preparedness, but SBA often issue web pages dedicated to each declaration. The U.S. Small Business Administration is a federal agency that provides services to small businesses. The agency is based in Washington, D.C. and has offices across the country. how to apply for assistance, announce application deadlines, and provide information and links to other agencies and organizations that provide recovery assistance. In some cases, individuals and households do not qualify for FEMA Individual Assistance. The American Red Cross, or the Small Business Administration's Disaster Loan Program (SBA) can provide assistance to individuals and businesses in need of financial assistance. For more information, visit FEMA.gov/disaster or call the National Disaster Helpline at 1-800-273-8255. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90. FEMA Administrator Craig Fugate testified before the Senate Committee on May 5, 2011. Fugate said that social media can be used to improve disaster response and recovery capabilities. He was testifying on how to better incorporate social media at the federal level. He said that the federal government should use social media to improve its disaster response capabilities and response times in the event of a major disaster. The committee is still considering Fugate's testimony and will hold a hearing on the matter in the near future. Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs, Subcommittee on Disaster Recovery and Intergovernmental Affairs that he had met with representatives from Apple, Craigslist, Facebook, Google, Microsoft, and Twitter. According to Fugate, possible future applications include using the technology to better serve the public. Fugate: We need to harness the "capabilities of the digital world to better serving the public" to help victims of natural disasters in the U.S. and around the world. "We need to use the technology we have today to help the victims in the future," Fugate said. mobile networks, as well as mobile device charging stations, to the public during large-scale emergencies. Congress could also require FEMA to develop and deploy 3G and 4G mobile networks in presidentially declared disasters. The federal government could also provide grants to state and local governments to help them develop their social media capabilities, for example. The U.S. could also investigate the use of social media at the federal level to help inform residents during power outages, according to a report by the Center for American Progress. smartphone-friendly mobile versions of FEMA websites to allow users to access information, request assistance, and facilitate communication. Subsequent hearings were held by the Subcommittee on Emergency Preparedness, Response, and Communications Committee on Homeland Security on June 14 and 15, 2014. The committee is responsible for overseeing FEMA's emergency response and response plans. The panel is chaired by Rep. Kevin McCarthy, R-California, who is also the chairman of the House Homeland Security Committee. The subcommittee is also responsible for oversight of FEMA’s emergency response plans and response planning. FEMA began using Youtube in 2006, Twitter in 2008, and Facebook in 2009 and currently uses multiple social media platforms. FEMA primarily uses social media to disseminate information and coordinate recovery efforts. For example, FEMA provides information about the Small Business Administration's (SBA) Disaster Loan Program and/or services provided by the American Red Cross through social media. The information FEMA provides includes what people should do before, during, and after an incident. FEMA also usessocial media to inform people where and how to apply for federal and nongovernmental assistance. FEMA also provides a mobile app that provides weather alerts from the NWS and information on where to find to get a sense of where people in need are located and what supplies they might need. FEMA's app also allows users to take a photograph in a disaster area and submit it, along with a photo of the person in the photo, to be used in the FEMA social media accounts. The agency's social media cannot be used for individual or immediate requests for assistance, however, as it is not meant for that purpose. short text description, to the "Disaster Reporter" which gathers crowdsourced disaster-related information within the United States. FEMA has staff responsible for day-to-day social media operations but has no social media staff. FEMA also has a social media team responsible for managing the agency's official social media accounts. The agency's social media teams are based in Washington, D.C. and New York City, among other cities. FEMA's official Twitter account is @FEMA social media account, which is based in New York. the capacity to deploy people from Regional Offices for surge support. FEMA's social medial policies are guided by its Web 2.0 policy which describes how to sign up. For example, 10 people were deployed to the National Response Center from FEMA's regional offices to assist social media efforts during Hurricane Sandy. For more information, visit FEMA.gov/socialmedia or call 1-800-273-8255. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. FEMA developed negotiated terms of service agreements with various social media outlets. Doing so allows FEMA to quickly create a Facebook page, upload pictures and videos, or post information. The Government Services Administration (GSA) provides government-wide support, training, and assistance with social media platforms. In FEMA's case, the agency developed negotiated Terms of Service Agreements with Various Social Media outlets. Do you know a hero? Nominations are open for 2013 CNN Heroes. Nominators can be found at CNN.com/Heroes. FEMA's Office of External Affairs has a growing digital engagement section. Their responsibility includes designing and developing social media items. The digital. engagement section also advises FEMA on how to manage social media for third party outlets, how to moderate discussions (including which comments can be deleted), and what information needs to be retained in accordance with records management. For more information on FEMA's digital engagement, visit FEMA.gov/digitalengagement or call the agency's social media team at 1-800-273-8255. allows the agency to better handle information overload by eliminating non-critical information. Doing so helps FEMA focus or "listen" to relevant user information. Listening information is used to improve customer service, obtain situational awareness of an incident or situation, and discredit inaccurate information about the incident. It also enables FEMA to better respond to emergency situations in the event of an emergency. For more information, visit FEMA.gov or go to www.fema.gov/news/press-releases. H.R. 623 was enacted on November 5, 2015 ( P.L. 114-80 , the DHS Social Media Improvement Act of 2015) It amended the Homeland Security Act of 2002 to establish a social media working group. The law requires the social media group to submit an annual report to Congress that includes a review of current and emerging social media technologies being used by the Department of Homeland Security. It was introduced in the 113 th Congress and passed in the 114 th Congress. It is the first of its kind in the United States. 114 th Congress, H.R. 3517, requires the DHS Secretary to conduct a one-year pilot program with the American Red Cross. The program would research and develop mechanisms to better leverage social media to improve preparedness and response capabilities. The following section describes how some federal entities use social media for emergency preparedness, response, and communications. The section was referred to the Subcommittee on Emergency Preparedness, Response, and Communications. The subcommittee has not yet voted on the bill. other disasters, and (2) the delivery of response supplies to affected areas. The bill requires the DHS Secretary to issue a report to the House and Senate no later than 90 days after completion of the pilot program. It also requires the Secretary to report to both houses of Congress within 90 days of the program's completion. The program is funded by a federal grant from the U.S. Department of Homeland Security and the Department of Justice. It will cost $1.5 million. The platform automatically Tweets out river gauge levels and flow rates when they hit the flood stage. Similarly, the U.S. Geological Survey launched a pair of Twitter feeds to give out automated, real-time river levels and rainfall amounts during heavy rains in Texas.the 2015 snowstorms. The platform automatically tweets out river Gauge levels and Flow Rates when they reach the flood level. The Twitter feeds were launched in response to the floods in Texas in 2015. The U.N. World Meteorological Organization also launched a Twitter feed to give information about the weather in Europe. The U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) "Did You Feel It?" project creates automatic intensity maps based on "felt" reports submitted online. More than 2 million reports have been filed on this website, with 40 earthquakes receiving more than 1,000 reports. The project is a federal government crowdsourcing tool. The USGS project is based on the U.N.'s "Do You feel it?" website. The website is open to the public and allows people to submit reports of earthquakes and other events. roofing, and structural safety assessments. USACE social media platforms include Facebook, Twitter, Google+, Youtube, and Pinterest among others. The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers synchronizes outgoing information across the platforms and coordinates with other federal agencies such as FEMA and NWS. In general, the Emergency Operations Center and the Joint Operations Center are in charge of coordinating with other agencies and coordinating with the public. The National Weather Service is responsible for coordinating with federal agencies in the event of an emergency. At the start of FY2015, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers began collecting Facebook usage data. Field Office for each incident have external affairs personnel with social media responsibilities. USACE does not use incident-specific web pages or respond to individual requests. The text box at right provides composite data and the data box at the bottom provides aggregate data and data from each incident. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) provides emergency response activities through more than 40 planning and response teams (PRTs) These deployable teams have been specifically trained to perform USACE emergency response functions. These functions include provision of emergency power, debris removal, temporary housing, temporary. control and improving and maintaining navigable channels. For more information, visit USACE's official website or go to: www.usace.org/emergency-recovery-activities. Army Corps of Engineers identify and report breeches, seepage, overtoppings, and other areas of structural weakness in levees. The application allows the Corps to take a photo of problem areas and then "geotag" its precise location. According to Corps officials, the application has helped improve the efficiency of the Corps' levee work. The Army Corps of engineers is based in Fort Worth, Texas. The Corps is responsible for the construction of the Fort Worth levee system. The National Guard is both a state and federal organization. It is simultaneously the organized militia of a state or territory and a reserve component of the Army and the Air Force. Due to its size (over 450,000 individuals), trained personnel, and available equipment, it is frequently used for emergency response. Normally, the National Guard operates in a state status, under the control of state and territorial governors, who can order National Guard personnel to perform full-time "state active duty" in response to disasters and civil disorders. 32 remain under state control, but pay and benefits are provided by the federal government. The National Guard Bureau (NGB) is a joint activity of the Department of Defense. It serves as the channel of communications between the Departments of the Army and Air Force and the states on all issues. The NGB is also the source of information for the U.S. Army Reserve and the Air Force Reserve. It also provides information on the National Guard's readiness for duty in the event of an emergency. personnel are not subject to the restrictions of the Posse Comitatus Act. Under certain conditions, the National Guard can also be activated to respond to emergencies and disasters. Guard personnel who are activated under Title 32 of the U.S. Code can perform law enforcement functions. They can also respond to emergency situations under Title 31 of the Code. The National Guard is part of the Army National Guard and the Air National Guard. It is not a separate branch of the armed forces and does not have the same authority as the Army. NGB uses a variety of social media platforms including Facebook, Twitter, Google+, Instagram, and YouTube. NGB operates its social media efforts out of its public affairs office to educate and inform the public about National Guard preparedness and response efforts. The National Guard Bureau is a division of the U.S. Department of the Army. For more information on the National Guard, visit: http://www.ngb.org/news/press-releases/2013/01/30/national-guard-bureau-launches-social-media-program. The NGB monitors social media for situational awareness, and rumor control. Policy guidance for the NGB's use of social media is outlined in the Department of Defense's "Web and Internet-Based Capabilities (IBC) Policies. The IBC polices describe terms of service agreements, protocols for deleting user posts, and records management. In addition, the IBC Polices describe policies for deleting posts and keeping records. The NGB has no plans to use social media in the near future. National Guard uses response-specific analytics to help make data-driven decisions with respect to future applications of social media for emergencies and disasters. The National Guard Bureau does not use disaster specific web pages and does not respond to individual requests for assistance. In addition to flood, the National Guard is also involved in the aftermath of hurricanes, wildfires, and other natural disasters. For more information, visit National Guard’s social media site at www.ngb.org. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. results for FY2015. It is not specific to disaster or emergency related posts. The NWS is a component of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration within the Department of Commerce. It provides weather, water, and climate data, along with forecasts and warnings for the protection of life and property. The National Weather Service is part of the U.S. Department of commerce. It's based in Washington, D.C. and provides weather data, forecasts, and warnings to the public. For more information, visit the NWS website. NWS conducts Service Assessments to evaluate NWS products and services before, during, and after events. Every NWS Service Assessment since 2011 has included sections on the NWS's social media use. For an example, an assessment following a hydrological event would include a section on social media. Experts from both within and outside the N WS conduct these assessments. The NWS has no plans to change its social media strategy. For more information on NWS social media, visit www.nws.org. The NWS mainly uses social media as a tool to provide information about weather events to users. In some instances the field offices utilize social media information in conjunction with traditional spotter reports to identify and confirm weather events. This approach allows the NWS to serve NWS users with important safety information on a variety of hazards. The Weather Service's 122 weather forecast offices, along with other specialized field offices, national centers (e.g., National Hurricane Center), and regional and national headquarters use social media. The Hurricane/Post-Tropical Cyclone Sandy praised the NWS's use of social media as an important tool in increasing awareness of Sandy's threats. It also included a section on improving NOAA's web presence and using social media. While not necessarily social media, the N WS also sends out Wireless Emergency Alerts (WEA) to people in certain areas. The NWS may utilize social media to let users know a hurricane is approaching a particular area and that people should prepare for dangerously high wind and flooding. Department to keep citizens up to date in real-time throughout the Boston Marathon bombings and subsequent manhunt. The Boston Police Department also used social media to address and correct instances of misinformation. The National Weather Service (NWS) also usedSocial media to alert citizens in Massachusetts of road conditions during the marathon bombings and manhunt for the suspects. The NWS also used Social media to warn citizens of road Conditions during the Marathon bombings for the duration of the manhunt and for the aftermath of the bombings. The NWS does not have incident specific pages, but does use social media outlets to address specific threats. Local users can follow a field office for more specific information to their local area or the headquarter account for national or general information. Both local and national communities can follow the NWS on Twitter and Facebook. For an example, follow @nws on Twitter or @NWS on Facebook for more information on specific threats to the U.S. or the world. For more information about the National Weather Service, visit: www.nws.org. provides health information through social media during incidents and directs people to health resources through web links and hashtags. HHS does not use dedicated web pages for incidents and does not collect data on social media usage. Each subentity of HHS contains working groups with separate social media efforts that focus on their particular organizational mission and goals. The HHS working group is relatively small but has capacity to surge if needed for large incidents. The group monitors social media to dispel rumors, obtain situational awareness, and answer questions about preparedness and public health issues. HHS uses a variety of social media platforms including Facebook and Twitter. In particular, social media plays an integral role in HHS's National Health and Security Strategy. The strategy is designed to prepare communities for threats to health that are associated with emergencies and disasters. HHS also uses the AHRQ's social media platform to engage with the public on a range of health-related issues. For more information, visit www.HHS.Research and Quality (AHRQ) or www.Twitter.com. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) works with states and localities to detect, investigate, and prevent disease and injury. CDC responds and supports state and local efforts to save lives and reduce suffering when a disaster occurs. The working group also coordinates information with other organizations with preparedness and response responsibilities. To get in touch with the CDC, call 1-800-273-8255 or visit www.cdc.gov. For confidential support on suicide matters call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. activities and oversees public health agencies within the Department with responsibilities for emergency preparedness and response. These include the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), the Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA), the National Institutes of Health (NIH), the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), and the Agency for Healthcare. The Department of Health and Human Services is responsible for managing the nation's health care system. It also oversees the CDC, the FDA, and the National Institute of Health. CDC uses Twitter, Facebook, Pinterest, and YouTube among other social media platforms. CDC does not use incident-specific social media accounts, but does have web pages for specific incidents. CDC's primary social media focus is disseminating public health and preparedness information, but it also uses social media to answer questions and obtain situational awareness through listening. The agency does not respond to individual requests for social media support from the general public. It also does not comment on individual cases of patient care that may have been affected by social media. During the 2014 Ebola response, the social media team surged to meet the round-the-clock needs of the response and interest of the public. CDC uses a handful of social media staff in an emergency event, but has the capacity to surge if needed. Oversight for CDC social media is carried out by the Social Media Council—which consists of 15-20 individuals representing program areas within CDC. During an emergency, social media information is coordinated through CDC's Joint Information Center (JIC) and other partners.