officials in two states, the information they report in the semiannual activity reports is based on estimates rather than actual performance. For example, a Maine official told us that the data the state reports is generated by canvassing their regional staff. The state has found errors in the data, and the state has been working to correct them. The report is available online at CNN.com/Heroes, and on the CNN iReport app for iOS and Android. For the full report, visit CNN. recommends that the regions review each state’s data submission for reasonableness. When any of the states’ data appear questionable, the regions are asked to follow up with the states to obtain an explanation or an explanation of the data. The regions are also asked to review the data submitted by each state based on the state's prior reports and the regional program manager's knowledge of the state”s program. The data submission process can be completed in a matter of days or weeks. variability in the ways state officials described how they arrived at responses to certain questions. Some states provided explanations for their responses that were precise and grounded in reasonable mathematical or trend based assumptions. Others provided explanations that were not precise and were based on derived estimates or some other source. The full report is available at the bottom of the page, along with the answers to some of the questions. For more, go to CNN.com/Impact and follow us on Twitter @CNNImpact. 26 states and the District of Columbia generally reported having some internal controls on the data, and/or some data quality problems. 6 states reported having few, if any internal controls, or significant data quality issues. In tables 5, 6, 8, 9, and 10 in this appendix, we have identified the states that fall into each category. Overall, given the limitations in the information reported from some states, we believe the report is a good overall reflection of the state of the U.S. a.... ........................... None b. .. ........................ ... None c. ............................ None d. ................................... None 5. Is there any additional information about the way your states’ data for UST management is collected, entered, stored, and quality reviewed that would help inform our interpretation of these data? Federally regulated USTs: In this survey, we asked for information about how the data is collected and entered. We also asked for additional information on the way that data is stored, entered and reviewed. Arizona program official tells us the program is uncertain of EPA’s definition of the cleanups initiated performance measure. The state official expressed concern that the state’S definition of cleanup initiated may not agree with the EPA definition. The program reports a number of reporting elements, including the number of cleanups completed and the amount of cleanup completed. It also reports a total cleanup count, which includes the total amount of debris removed from the site and the level of cleanup that took place. reporting elements, at least one EPA region reminds its states of the EPA definitions each time a semiannual activity report is due. Other regions were less proactive, essentially relying on informal discussions, the experience of the state officials, or the posting of the definitions on the EPA Web. The EPA says it has no plans to change the way it defines the reporting elements in the next round of activity reports, which are due in May. The agency says it will continue to work with the states on the issue. region’s program manager did not expect that the agency's effort would provide any new information, except data to document what he already knew. An EPA headquarters official, who is closely involved with the effort, agreed that the Agency's information collection, at most, helped confirm what regions already saw as problem corrected data. Our interviews with EPA regional officials indicated that they were generally following this headquarters guidance. Nevertheless, in some cases regional officials were not aware of reporting problems with the states in their regions that our survey disclosed. reported in the past. A Wyoming official told us that the state tracks contaminated sites rather than releases. Because EPA reports call for data on releases rather than sites, Wyoming provides its best estimate of release data. Some of the reporting problems disclosed in our survey are related to the state's reporting problems related to contaminated sites, the official said. The official said the state is working to correct the problems. The state is also working to improve the reporting of contaminated sites and releases, he said. For confidential support, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255. placing an undue burden on states. In our response, we explained that we were not suggesting that states should try to identify new sites that they were not currently aware of. We merely report on sites without viable owners separately from the aggregated data that they already provided to EPA, the agency said in a statement. We are happy to clarify that we did not say states should report on new sites, but that they should provide aggregate data on existing sites. We also said that we do not recommend that states report on all sites without a viable owner. review of its files disclosed that the program had been reporting duplicate entries and releases that did not meet EPA’s definition. An Oregon Underground Storage Tank Program Coordinator told us that, in the process of cleaning up its database information, program officials found many sites being reported that were duplicates. “We’re trying to do the right thing,’’ the coordinator said. ‘We don’t want to be known as the agency that reported duplicate releases and entries.’ the District of Columbia) and then e- mailed the survey as an attachment on January 19, 2006. We asked respondents to return the survey by e-mail, fax, or mail by February 3,2006. We accepted responses to the survey through mid-October 2006 and conducted follow-up telephone calls. We sent e-mails reminders and conducted following-up phone calls to those who had responded to the original survey in January 2006. For more information on the survey, go to: http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/features/2006/01/19/survey-survey.html. of the surveys, and verified the computer programs used to generate survey results. From the population of 51 state contacts who were asked to participate in our survey, we received 50 questionnaires for an overall response rate of 98 percent. We did not receive a questionnaire from South Dakota. We didn't ask about South Dakota, but we did ask about the state's economy. We asked about the U.S. economy, and we asked about state of the economy, which we did not ask about. 2005 data. In addition to conducting a survey to address our three objectives, we also interviewed agency officials in a nonprobability sample of eight states. We talked with this group of selected this sample of states in order to discuss as many of our topics of interest as possible within a limited number of interviews. To select the states, we first reviewed all states’ responses to survey questions related to the relevant topics to determine which states would be able to provide information on these topics. We also interviewed officials in Florida, Iowa, New Jersey, Ohio, Pennsylvania, South Carolina, Texas, and Utah. We then attempted to contact all listed state officials via e-mail and asked them to tell us whether they or someone else in their state would be the most appropriate contact. In states where we were not able, a few officials identified more appropriate survey respondents. We are happy to make clear that this was not the case in all states. We apologise for any inconvenience caused. We will make it clear that we were unable to reach all of the listed officials in all the states that we tried to contact. discuss each topic of interest. We then calculated a score for each state based on the number of relevant topics they could discuss, as indicated by their survey responses. We interviewed all states that had scores at or above a threshold score that we determined, based on how many states had a score of at least 50. For more, visit CNN.com/soulmatestories and follow us on Twitter @cnnstories and @jennifer_j_soulmatt. We included a series of data reliability questions in the survey to assess the accuracy of the information provided to us by the respondents. We used a data collection instrument (DCI) to systematically and consistently record all available data reliability information. The DCI was then reviewed divided states into three relative categories, according to our assessment of the reliability of their survey responses. 17 states generally reported having fairly recent data quality reviews, several internal controls on the data, no significant data quality problems, and provided fairly precise and mathematically grounded explanations for their calculations. the report (i.e., to be presented in aggregate, as testimonial evidence) The survey data presented in appendix II are not reliable for state level comparisons. We conducted interviews regarding data reliability with a nonprobability sample of seven states (see next page for a further discussion of this sample of states) The report is intended to be viewed as an aggregate of the data from the seven states that were interviewed for the report. For more information on the report, visit: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/29/health/healthcare/index.html#storylink=cpy. noted that their responses were educated guesses. Given the limitations in the information reported from some states, we determined that the survey data are not comparable by state, nor should they be reported using such terms as “actual” sums, budgets, or outlays. The data are presented in the body are included in appendix II because of congressional request and in order to illustrate the range of responses states provided to selected questions and the wide variance in the reliability of those responses. With these provisos, the surveyData are sufficiently reliable as they are used in theBody of reviewed for quality, the procedures to ensure accurate data entry, and known limitations); (3) whether the data provided were actual or estimates; and (4) the assumptions, data, and calculations used to provide the actual or estimated data for selected questions. These interviews included in-depth questions focusing on topics such as the states’ database reviews and database limitations identified in their survey responses. We contacted state officials to clarify survey responses when necessary and used a centralized tracking document to record all changes. respond can introduce unwanted variability into the survey results. We included steps in both the data collection and data analysis stages to minimize such nonsampling errors. For example, in the research design and data collection stages, we took the following steps: We obtained from EPA its list of state contacts with nonrespondents. For selected survey questions, where we were able to, we independently corroborated survey data by comparing these data with EPA data. We then followed up with states and EPA as needed about discrepancies. number of tanks, releases, and cleanups, and financial responsibility and funding sources for cleanups. The practical difficulties of conducting any survey may introduce nonsampling error. For example, differences in how a particular question is interpreted, the sources of information available to respondents, or the types of people who do not answer the question. For more information on how to conduct a survey, visit www.surveymonkey.com/r/sSurvey. For confidential support on suicide matters call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org. We edit-checked all surveys before they were keypunched. We verified all key punched survey data against hard copies. When changes took place after a survey was key Punched, the updates were made in the computer program used to generate survey results. We recorded all changes and updates to the data to ensure all changes were recorded. For more information on how to key Punch a survey, visit www.surveymonkey.com/s/KeyPunch-Survey. pretests to ensure variation in size of workload and status of the state financial assurance fund. For these pretests, we sent agency officials a draft of the survey. We then interviewed the officials to ensure that the questions were clear and unambiguous; and terms used were precise, including our definitions of certain terms. The results of the pretests were published in the June 2013 issue of the New England Journal of Public Policy, which is published by the University of New Hampshire. For more information, visit the journal's website or go to www.newenglandjournal.com. definition of public funding; and (3) data needed to respond to the questions was available to the state officials. As a result of our pretests, we made changes to some of the survey questions. We sent an announcement on November 18, 2005, of the upcoming survey to state contacts (including state contacts) and sent out the survey on November 20, 2005. We made changes in the survey to reflect the changes we made in the state contacts' responses. We also changed the question wording to make it clearer. not know the number of times public funds had been used in these types of situations in the past. Checking financial responsibility coverage helps to ensure that owners or operators maintain adequate coverage. verifying during a site inspection that an owner or operator has the required paperwork to demonstrate coverage is a good way to make sure they have adequate financial responsibility. For confidential support call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of this report. Key contributors to this report are listed in appendix V. The objectives of this review were to provide information on (1) states’ estimates of the cost in public funding from state and federal sources, and (2) states' estimates of how much it would cost to implement the plan in each state. The report was compiled by the Office of Congressional Relations (OCR) and the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) relevant documentation on their reliability, including copies of audits of Treasury’s financial statements and internal controls. We conducted our work from June 2005 to December 2006 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. As described in appendix I, our assessment of the reliability of the data provided in this report is based on our assessment that the data is sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this review. We found the data elements that we used in the report to be sufficiently reliable to be used for this report. CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery. Visit CNN.com/Travel each week for a new gallery of snapshots from around the world. Visit iReport.com each week to see which photos have been featured in the latest Travel Snapshot gallery. The gallery will feature a new photo each week until the end of the year, with a selection of the best chosen to share with the world at large. For more information, visit CNN.org/Travel. Suite 575 Fax: (617) 788-0505 Please use your mouse to navigate by clicking on the field or check box you wish to answer. To select a check box or button, simply click on the center of the box. To change or deselect a checkbox response, simplyclick on the the response box response. To add a comment, click the comment button at the bottom of the page. To post a comment on this page, please click the comments box at the end of the article. check box and the ‘X’ will disappear. To answer a question that requires that you write a comment, click on the answer box ____ and begin typing. The box will expand to accommodate your answer. To help ensure consistency in survey responses from the various states, we provide definitions for each state. For more information on how to vote in the U.S., visit CNN.com/Heroes. For information on voting in the UK, visit The Guardian’s website. This questionnaire can be filled out using MS-Word and returned via e-mail to USTSurvey@gao.gov. You may print copies of the questionnaire and complete them by hand. If you choose to print the questionnaire, please mail or fax it to: Nico Sloss, Senior Analyst, 10 Causeway Street, New York, NY 10005. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. Thank you for completing the survey. Please save this file now and send an e-mail with your saved questionnaire file and supporting documentation as an attachment to: USTSurvey@gao.gov. In addition to the individual named above, Vincent P. P. make regarding the issues in this survey or other matters related to USTs? Thank you for completed the survey! Please save the survey file and send it to us with your supporting documentation. We will publish the responses in a weekly Newsquiz. terms in this survey at or near the point at which the term appears. Please consider these definitions when responding to survey questions. Have there been any reviews of the recent review? [Enter quality of the data? UST management? 4 digit year.] For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. will also make copies available to others upon request. In addition, the report will be available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staff have any questions about this report, please contact me at (202) 512-3841 or stephensonj@GAo. Department of the Treasury has no immediate plans to release a similar report in the near future. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org. data reported by states and presented in this appendix should not be used to compare state programs. The U.S. Government Accountability Office (GAO) is an agency of the legislative branch that reviews federal programs on behalf of the Congress. To see the full GAO survey of the 50 states, visit: http://www.gao.gov/survey/50-states-financial-councils-financing-cleaning-cleansup. For more information, visit the GAO's website: http:www.GAO.gov. an exact number or an estimate? a. 2001 ........................... b. 2002 ............................ c. 2003 ............................. d. 2004 .............................. e. 2005 ........................…. f. How did you calculate the number of new releases from USTs your state confirmed in each of the last five years? 8. How many new releases did your state confirm in the past five years, and how many were confirmed by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS)? of confirmed releases. Based on the numbers you provided above, your state’s cleanup backlog, as of September 30, 2005 is: 0. Is this number correct? Yes .................... No...................... a. What is the correct number? Please refer to this number when answering questions about your state's cleanup backlog in completing the program. The number is 0. 0.0.0 (0, 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65, 67, 68, 69, 70, 74, 73, 78, 80, 79, 82, 83, 84, 85, 86, 87, 88, 89, 90, 91, 92, 93, 94, 94,. 94, 95, 96, 97, 98, 99, 100, 100. In 2005, these states confirmed a combined 8,000 releases, compared with their projections of an average of about 7,400 releases per year for the next 5 years. In general, state officials told us that they based their projections on releases they had identified in the past. The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services says it has no immediate plans to change the way it releases drugs and other drugs. The agency says it will continue to work with state and local governments to identify and prevent drug and alcohol abuse. regulated USTs do you estimate that your state will confirm over the next five years? How did you estimate the number of new releases from federally regulated USTs that your states will confirm? How many new releases do you expect your state to confirm in the next 5 years? Share your estimates in the comments below or email us at jennifer.smith@dailymail.co.uk. Follow us on Twitter @dailymailonline and @jennifer_smith. We'll feature the best of the best in our weekly Newsquiz, and we'll also feature some of your photos. next five years? b. How many of these new releases over the next five years do you estimate will require at least some amount of public funding to clean up? c. What is your estimate of the number of new releases that will require public funding over that period of time? d. What are your estimates of how much public funding will be needed for each of these releases over that time period? i. What do you think? Share your thoughts in the comments below or post a video on CNN iReport. remainder of this survey. Considering the number of releases in your state’s cleanup backlog as of September 30, 2005, how many involve MtBE at levels requiring cleanup? Is this an exact number or an estimate? Number of releases with MtBE ...... a. How did you calculate the number. of releases that involve the release of MtBE in your. state? A. How many have affected groundwater at levels needing cleanup? B. How do you estimate the cost of a MtBE cleanup? .................................... a. How did you calculate the number of releases in your state’s cleanup backlog that have affected groundwater at levels requiring cleanup? 12. Is there any additional information about your state's data for UST management that would help inform our interpretation of your responses to questions about the scope of the UST program? 13. Do you have any questions or concerns that you would like to share with us? If so, please email jennifer.smith@mailonline.co.uk. as of September 30, 2005, the responsible party was unknown, unwilling, or unable to perform the needed cleanup (for example, “orphaned” or abandoned tanks). How many releases in your state’s cleanup backlog, identified above, come from tanks without a viable owner? Is this an exact number or an estimate? Number of releases .......................... a. How did you calculate the number of releases that come from Tanks Without A Viable Owner? 22. For how many releases has the state not yet determined whether a responsible party is known, willing, and able to do the cleanup? EPA computes your state’s “cleanup backlog” by subtracting the cumulative number of cleanups completed. How did you estimate the number of new releases over the next five years that will require at least some amount of public funding to clean up? What is your estimate of the total number of releases for which EPA-defined ‘cleanup’ is needed? How many releases do you think will require funding? How much will it cost to clean them up? Table 1 shows key tank- related data elements reported by EPA as of September 30, 2005. Of the almost 450,000 releases confirmed as of fiscal year-end 2005, cleanups had been initiated for about 93 percent and completed for about 74 percent. How many new releases from federally regulated USTs did your state confirm in each of the last five federal fiscal years? Is this your state? How many releases have you confirmed in the past five years? Tell us in the comments below. of public funding, what do you estimate is the average cost in public funds to fully address each release? Estimates range from $10,000 to $100,000 for each release. Estimates are based on the number of releases that impact groundwater at levels requiring cleanup. The average cost to address each of these releases is about $20,000, according to the estimates. The estimate is based on each release's number of impacts and the amount of groundwater it affects. The estimated cost to clean up each release is around $30,000-50,000. EPA has stated that releases that have contaminated groundwater are generally more complicated and more expensive to clean up. 34 states provided estimates for the average public cost toClean up all releases. States’ estimates varied widely: about 60 percent of these states reported that it was more expensive for them to Clean up releases involving groundwater contamination. About 40 percent of states said it was cheaper to Clean Up Releases that have Contaminated Groundwater. The average cost of cleaning up a release in a state is about $1,000. the cost can vary based on several factors, including the extent of contamination, the cleanup method selected, and the presence of MTBE or groundwater contamination. With regard to releases involving MTBE, EPA has reported that the additional cost for cleaning up these releases varies widely, from no additional cost to a substantial increase, depending on the history of the release. Most of these states reported that cleaning up releases with MTBE contamination costs the same or more than cleaning up other releases. Twenty-nine states reported estimates of average public costs for cleaningup releases withMTBE contamination and for all releases. We asked states to exclude from their estimates any money spent prior to September 30, 2005, to clean up these releases. States were unable to estimate the cost of cleaning up more than another 8,000 releases whose cleanup will require at least some public funds. Thirty-nine of the 43 respondents that expected to spend public funds to clean. up future releases also provided estimates of cleaned up using public funds is likely to decline in the future (see fig. 5). Some states that expect to spend. public funds for future releases are using a higher percentage of releases in their current backlog than of releases. they expect to identify in the next 5 years. In addition to the costs associated with known releases, states expect that they will use public funds to clean up a substantial number of releases that they identify within the next 5 years. States reported that cleaning up known releases from leaking underground storage tanks would cost an estimated $12 cleanup. Proving responsibility becomes difficult in cases where releases have occurred in the past and ownership of the property has changed. If responsibility cannot be established, the state must then fund any cleanup of the site. Using these estimates, we determined that the total cost toClean up releases projected to be identified in the next five years could be around $2.5 billion. reported that nearly half of these releases will require $100,000 or more to fully clean up. Just over half of the approximately 117,000 releases that states reported in our survey had not yet been fully cleaned up will be cleaned up using cleaning technology. About 5 percent of the releases will need $500,000 to $1 million to clean up, according to the survey. The survey was based on responses from more than 1,000 people across the U.S. and around the world. the cleanup? 23. In the past year, how much public funding from all sources was spent (in actual outlays) on cleaning up releases from USTs, both WITH and WITHOUT a viable owner? 24. How much do you estimate it will cost to complete the remainder of the cleanups for all of these releases? None ................. Go to Q25. a. How did you estimate the cost to. complete the rest of theCleanup for the backlog of releases from UTs without a viable. owner? site cleanup costs will be paid for exclusively by responsible parties. The number of these releases for which some amount of public funding will be required. How did you estimate these average costs in public funding? 16. In the past year, what was the total amount spent (in actual outlays) to pay for the public funding portion of cleanups at federally regulated UST sites? If possible, provide your best estimate of this number and the number of releases that will be covered by public funding. 14. Among those releases in the current cleanup backlog that will require at least some amount of public funding after September 30, 2005, excluding funds already spent on these cleanups, how many would you estimate will require public funding amounts in the following ranges? a. $0 - $99,999 ............................................... b. or an estimate? A. Public funding spent to clean up tanks WITH a viable owner ....... b. Public Funding spent to Clean up Tanks Without a viable Owner ....... Among the current sources of public funding for LUST cleanups, which sources, if any, do you believe have a high probability of no longer being available in the next 5 years, and why not? What were the primary factors you considered in making an assessment of the probability that additional sources ofpublic funding will become available for Lust cleanups in the coming 5 years? What do you think are the most likely sources of LUST funding in the near future? Share your thoughts in the comments below. provide the Congress with information about the magnitude of LUST cleanup costs across all 50 states and the resources available to state programs to address these cleanups. We are aware of similar survey efforts conducted in the past year by the Vermont Department of Environmental Conservation and by EPA’s Office of Clean Water and Wastewater. The U.S. Geological Survey is conducting a survey of the nation's largest watersheds to determine the extent of the damage caused by LUST. The survey is expected to be completed by the end of the year. of Underground Storage Tanks. We have discussed our survey with these parties and eliminated overlap where feasible. Your prompt response to this survey is very important. Without your state’s response, we will not be able to accurately report to the Congress on the magnitude of LUST cleanup costs across all of your states. We will be happy to share this information with the Congress if we receive a good response from your state. If you have any questions, please contact us at tips@dailymail.co.uk or call 1-800-273-8255. are the penalties and the circumstances under which they would be imposed? 57. Are there any issues that have not been covered in this survey that you anticipate affecting the availability of public finding for cleanups in the next 5 years? 58. Do you have any additional comments you wish to make about this survey? If so, please send them to: jennifer.smith@mailonline.co.uk. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. Some states view the cost recovery process as a deterrent to using the federal money for cleanup activities. Because they have state money available for cleanup efforts, states can use the federal. cleanups, thereby avoiding the time and expense of pursuing cost-recovery actions. A Region 6 official told us that some states view cost recovery as a deterring factor in using federal money to clean up waterways. The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers is responsible for cleaning up waterways around the country. 50 states, how states are financing these cleanups. Your prompt participation will help us avoid costly follow-ups. To answer some of our questions, you may need to coordinate your responses with other state agencies responsible for certain aspects of the clean-up. You can submit your responses at the bottom of the page. For more information, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/30/clean-up/stories/50-states-how-state-finance-cleanups. soon decided that funding staff positions was more cost effective than performing the cleanup and pursuing cost recovery. By funding additional staff positions rather than cleanup activities, states were often able to identify the responsible parties and force them to do the cleanup. states often were able to find the culprits and force the responsible party to pay for the cleanup, which can be an expensive and time-consuming process. The cost of the cleanup can be as high as $10,000 per person per day, according to a study by the University of Maryland. Our definition excluded money spent by federal, state, and local government agencies to clean up releases from tanks they either own or operate. To address our objectives, we developed and administered a serve as financial responsibility mechanisms, or funds appropriated by the state to pay for cleanup that would not otherwise occur. Do not include funds spent byFederal, state and local governmental agencies to Clean Up Releases from Tanks. This money would be considered to be provided by the responsible party. For more information, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/29/science/science-and-environment/clean-up-tanks/index.html. and type of UST cleanups in your state? Sources of Funding for Cleanup Public funding: Includes any funding controlled and/or provided by state and federal agencies. Other state funds that have not been approved by EPA to types of state cleanup funds: (1) state financial assurance funds that cover the cleanup of contamination from federally regulated USTs, which may or may not include tanks without a viable owner, and (2) funds that are devoted solely to the cleanup from tanks without an owner. Federal money from EPA’s Brownfields program can be used to clean up sites contaminated by petroleum under certain circumstances. Only certain governmental organizations, nonprofit organizations, and nonprofit educational institutions are eligible for Brownfields cleanup grants. In fiscal year 2005, EPA provided eligible entities with about $22.3 million in Brownfields grants for cleaning up Sites contaminated with petroleum. No responsible party can be found for the LUST Trust Fund, which was established in the 1970s to help clean up contaminated sites. cooperative agreement with EPA. EPA will undertake a cleanup only when there is a major public health or environmental emergency. In these circumstances, EPA’s involvement is to be limited to stabilizing the immediate situation, with the expectation that further cleanup will be conducted by the state. States are responsible for overseeing cleanup work performed by the party responsible for the contamination and for performing the cleanup at sites where sites where it has been found to be contaminated. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. site as “cleanup initiated” when the release has been confirmed and a case number assigned. According to the EPA definition, however, cleanup initiated requires that the state or responsible party has evaluated the site and initiated physical activity (e.g., removal or treatment of the contamination, removal of the contaminated soil, etc.) The EPA defines cleanup initiated as when the site has been evaluated and the state has begun physical activity on the site. The EPA definition of cleanup initiated is that it is when the state and responsible party have started physical activity, such as removal of contaminated soil. or monitoring of the groundwater or soil being remediated). Cleanup initiated should also be reported in situations where the state has evaluated the site and determined that no physical activity is necessary to protect human health and the environment. A Louisiana Underground Storage Tank Program official told us that a cleanup should be reported if the site is deemed to be safe for human health or the environment, but not if it is deemed unsafe for the environment or the groundwater to be pumped or monitored. The cleanup should be completed by the end of the month. EPA-defined site cleanup costs: “All costs associated with site response concerning prevention or mitigation of threats to public health, welfare, or the environment that may occur by a release (or suspected release) of petroleum from an underground storage tank. These costs include emergency responses, site.parties, not specific cost data.’’ ‘Site cleanup costs’ includes emergency responses and site parties. “Site clean-up costs” includes ‘site cleanup costs,’ which include “site response, site parties, and emergency responses’ help contain a release (secondary containment) for new and replaced underground storage tanks located near sources of drinking water. (2) require evidence of financial responsibility for tank manufacturers’ and installers’ certification. This coverage would provide for the costs of cleanup directly related to releases caused by improper tank manufacture or installation. In some cases, tank manufacturers or installers may have to provide financial responsibility coverage for the release of water from their tanks. In other cases, the state may require that any manufacturer or installer of an underground storage tank maintain evidence offinancial responsibility coverage. is located is purchased and rely on the new owner to clean the site up. States may have releases from tanks without a viable owner in their backlog because the owner or operator responsible for the tank failed to maintain adequate financial responsibility coverage. Maintaining adequate financialresponsibility coverage ensures that the tank is cleaned up by the new owners when it is released to the public. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. pays for cleanups. Michigan program officials previously told us that the state’s causation standard exacerbates the funding problem for tanks without a viable owner. The state requires that the present owner/ operator is responsible for a site’S contamination before it can be held responsible for clean-up costs, they said. The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers says it has no plans to close any of its tanks in the near future. The agency says it is working with the Army Corps to find a long-term solution. the chance becomes that they will contaminate drinking water and other sensitive resources, potentially putting human health and the environment at risk. In addition, when state financial assurance funds do not pay cleanup claims on a timely basis, tank owners and operators may delay cleanups. For example, tankOwners may not pay for cleanups for up to six months. The risk of contamination is greater if the tank is not cleaned up by the end of the year, when the state's financial assurance fund is supposed to be paid. funds may not be available to pay for cleanup in a timely manner, thus increasing the potential for contamination to spread and damage the environment and human health. A lack of available funds may result in taxpayers paying more of the cleanup costs than they would have otherwise paid. The cost of cleanup could be as high as $1.5 billion, according to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. The U.N. estimates the cost of clean-up could be in the region of $1 billion to $2 billion. Under the principle of “the polluter pays,” tank owners and operators are primarily responsible for the costs of cleaning up contamination from their leaking tanks. RCRA requires these owners and operator to avoid funding shortages, which could delay the cleanup of releases and potentially threaten human health and the environment. To see the full report, go to CNN.com/soulmatestories. For more information on the RCRA, visit www.rcra.org or call 1-800-273-8255. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here. fund for 240 sites. Other states assist or have assisted owners and operators with cleanup by operating insurance-type mechanisms. In the state of Washington, for example, the state’s reinsurance program helps owners of underground storage tanks obtain affordable pollution liability insurance by assuming part of the risk for each loss. Table 2 summarizes some of the key distinctions among state approaches to ensuring that tanks are cleaned up. For confidential support call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. states without such dedicated funds primarily reported that they use resources from other types of state funds, such as financial assurance funds, or from the federal LUST Trust Fund. Four states may wait until the property on which the leaking tank state attempts to recover these funds from the tank owners. Officials in three additional states—New Jersey, Texas, and Utah—also told us that public funds could be used in cases involving inadequate financial responsibility coverage, although they did not use such funds in these cases. percentage of releases in a state that are cleaned up using at least some public funding. One such approach is whether a state has chosen to set up a financial assurance fund that provides financial responsibility coverage for tank owners. Assess, in coordination with the states, the relative effectiveness of public and private options for financial responsibility Coverage to ensure that they provide timely funding for the cleanup of releases; and Better Better Better, an online tool to help tank owners understand their options for cleaning up their tanks. some cases a state’s fund may cover tanks without a viable responsible party as well as other types of tanks. In those cases, the survey provides a separate space to answer questions about such tanks. The survey is open to the general public and includes questions on tanks, tanks with tanks, and tanks without tanks. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. a fund. Responsible party funding: Includes both direct expenditures by responsible parties (for example, a tank owner paying out-of-pocket for all or a portion of the costs of cleanup) and indirect expenditures. A tank owner’s insurance company paying for all of or a part of the funded by responsible party funding. For more information, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/30/tank-cleanup/index.html#storylink=cpy. is left in place, the greater the potential for it to spread, further placing human health and the environment at risk. States reported that they primarily use financial assurance funds to pay the costs of cleaning up leaks from underground storage tanks. These funds accounted for $1.032 billion, or 96 yet fully known, according to a state official. If all underground storage Tanks that could have been affected by the flooding turn out to have had releases, the workload of the state assurance fund would increase by 25 percent. leaking underground storage tanks would likely require substantial amounts of public funds from state and federal resources. The public cost of cleaning up releases from tanks without a viable owner, as well as the number of releases in states’ cleanup backlogs that lack a viable owners, is not fully known. Some states did not expect public funds to be used to clean up any releases in their current backlog. This money, in turn, contributes to timely completion of cleanup and thus reduces the risk to human health and the environment. primarily through private insurance, according to state officials. In fact, over one-fifth of states’ public spending to clean up releases from underground storage tanks in 2005 came from state funds. Delaware, for example, reported spending $1 million in 2005 from a reimbursement from a private insurance company. In 2005, four of these states reported paying for such cleanups from state sources in 2005. The federal government never had financial assurance funds, but some states have provided cleanup funds to address releases. after June 1995 because it had insufficient funds to pay existing and future claims. Michigan state officials reported that several other funds provided cleanup money for underground storage tanks in 2005. Clean Michigan Initiative Bond Fund. This fund can be used to pay for many activities, such as the clean-up of underground storage Tanks in Michigan. The fund can also be used for a variety of other purposes, including the purchase of new vehicles and equipment for the state's roads and bridges. It can also pay for the cleanup of undergroundstorage tanks in the state. The full extent of releases from tanks without a viable owner is unknown. About 11 percent of the approximately 117,000 releases that have not yet been fully cleaned up came from such tanks. The public cost of cleaning up such releases is also not fully known. 26 states and the District of Columbia estimated that it would cost a total of $2.7 billion to complete the cleanups of known releases. Because most states reported that they clean upSuch releases using public funding, it is likely that many of the known releases from Tanks without a. viable owner will be. year for a variety of activities, including release prevention and inspections. This annual amount includes $200 million for cleanups of releases from leaking underground storage tanks. $100 million for activities including onsite petroleum. About $4.0 million of these grants were awarded for direct cleanup work, $13.3 million for site assessments, and $5.0million for revolving loan fund programs. According to data collected from the states and reported by EPA, EPA and states have made progress in cleaning up releases from underground storage. 45 states each reported spending an average of $24 million in 2005 to clean up contamination from leaking tanks. LUST Trust Fund money used for cleanup work is generally intended to pay for cleaning up releases from tanks without a viable owner. Nine states reported spending amounts that far exceeded their LUST trust fund distribution in 2005. More than $2 million each in 2005 alone was spent on cleanup of tanks without viable owners, report found. The report was published by the Center for American Progress, a nonprofit, nonpartisan research group. cleaned up using at least some public money. Six states reported that they had a state fund dedicated to tanks without a viable owner. What is the probability that any of the current sources of public funding for LUST cleanups will no longer be available in the next 5 years? Tanks without a Viable Owner. Consider tanks among your state’s cleanup backlog without a viability owner to be those tanks where, for the purposes of this survey, the LUST program is being used. at least some public funds. Tank owners or operators will pay the entire costs to clean up another 34 percent of these 117,000 releases. Some states expected all releases in their backlogs percent, of the estimated $1.076 billion from all state sources, to be cleaned up in 2005. State financial assurance funds generally pay for cleaning up releases from tanks whose owners participate in the assurance funds to satisfy federal financial responsibility requirements. The percentage of releases that states reported would be cleaning up using at least somePublic funds varied widely by state, as illustrated in figure 2. EPA estimates that releases cost about $125,000 to clean up. Most state financial assurance funds charge a deductible of $25,000 or less. Tank owners covered by these funds usually pay a relatively small deductible, while the funds provide sometimes large sums of public funding to complete the required cleanup. Because these deductibles are often small, they may not provide an incentive for tank owners to prevent releases from occurring. In many states, tank owners can rely on the funds to pay the bulk of cleanup costs. Methyl tertiary-butyl ether (MTBE) is a gasoline additive designed to reduce emissions and raise octane. In some cases, MTBE was added to gasoline to fulfill requirements set in the 1990 Clean Air Act Amendments. MTBE has continued to be detected in groundwater used for drinking water supplies. Those data elements can be found at: http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-293852/MTBE-found-underground-water-supplies.html. The Congress also took action through the 2005 Act to reduce the use of MTBE in gasoline by eliminating the requirement from the 1990 Clean Air Act Amendments. States reported that completing the cleanup of approximately 54,000 known releases from MTBE was a major accomplishment for the federal government. The act also eliminated the requirement for MTBE to be used in gasoline to reduce emissions from cars and trucks. It also eliminated a requirement that MTBE be used to reduce carbon dioxide emissions from vehicles. The bill was passed with bipartisan support. effects have not been conclusively established, but the federal government has determined it to be a potential human carcinogen. The effects of exposure to MTBE include headaches; eye, nose, and throat irritation; coughs; nausea; dizziness; and disorientation. Low levels of MTBE can make drinking water supplies undrinkable due to its low levels of the compound. The federal government says MTBE is a potential carcinogen and should not be used in drinking water supply. offensive taste and odor. EPA has not set a national standard for MTBE in drinking water. Some states have set their own limits on allowable levels of MTBE. Some have banned MTBE use in gasoline sold in the state, and some have banned its use in gas sold in that state. The EPA is investigating the health effects ofMTBE, but has not determined a national limit for the substance's use in the water supply. The agency is also investigating MTBE's health effects in gasoline. MTBE dissolves easily in water and does not cling to soil very well. It migrates faster and farther through the ground than other gasoline components. This makes it more likely to contaminate public water systems and private drinking water wells. MTBE’s health is closely monitored by the EPA and other government agencies. For confidential support call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. regulated underground storage tanks at least once every 3 years, beginning after the state has inspected tanks that have not been inspected since December 1998. For those states that currently inspect sites less frequently, the additional inspections, while intended to prevent leaks in the long term, could lead to a spike in the number of releases discovered. For example, officials in Texas told us that underground storage tank facilities in their state are inspected about every 10 years, according to Texas officials. The 2005 Act requires each state receiving federal funding to inspect all of their underground storage Tanks on a 3-year cycle. on average. Releases in this state that may not have otherwise been found for as long as 10 years may be discovered much sooner, leading to an increase in confirmed releases. Finding these releases sooner may mean that the contamination would be less extensive, however, it may also mean that it would be more expensive to clean up the contaminated areas. For more information, visit the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency's website. For confidential support, call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here. our report is included as appendix IV. As agreed with your offices, unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier, we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date. At that time, we will send copies to the EPA Administrator and other interested parties. We will also send copies of the report to the White House, the State Department, the Department of Health and Human Services, and other agencies. We have no plans to release the full report until after the 30-day deadline. projections on recent trends, although officials in a few states specifically noted that they expected to identify fewer releases in the future. Most states use financial assurance funds to pay for cleaning up releases from underground storage releases from leaking underground storage tanks. We selected these regions primarily because survey responses from one or more states in these regions raised questions about similar data they had reported to EPA. We spoke with officials in these states to get their views on how they plan to address these releases and the federal funding available to address them. that they require more urgent cleanup. The longer contamination from these releases is left in place, the greater the potential becomes for the contamination to spread. The farther these contaminants are allowed to spread, the more likely they are to spread to other parts of the country. The timeliness of cleanups of releases from underground storage tanks is especially important because the longer they are left, the worse the contamination can spread. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. into one of four categories. The most urgent category includes releases deemed emergencies, all of which were being actively cleaned up as of August 2006. The remaining categories are ranked based on how soon the release is likely to affect human health and the environment, as well as its impact. For more information, visit the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services' official website, or call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here. The number of cases that your state has encountered over the past 5 years in which tank owners did not have adequate financial responsibility? 56. Does your state ever impose penalties on responsible parties for multiple releases from federally regulated USTs? Yes ....................... No......................... Go to next question. a. The circumstances under which penalties could be imposed on tank owners for multiple, or repeated, releases, in their survey responses. B. The amount of money that the tank owner would have to make up to cover the cost of the release. EPA had not developed guidance to implement these provisions of the 2005 Act as of December 2006. Two states even commented in their responses to our survey that they anticipated diversions in 2006. Concerns have been raised about whether tank owners have incentives to prevent releases from their second release. None indicated that increased penalties were imposed simply based on the occurrence of a second release, according to the survey. The survey included responses from 20 states that provided comments in response to a question regarding multiple releases. The results of the survey were published in the December 2006 issue of the journal Environmental Policy. Oklahoma reported performance data on all tanks regulated by the state, including the aboveground storage tanks. Maryland undercounted the number of “active tanks” by excluding tanks that were only temporarily out of service. To help ensure the accuracy of the states’ semiannual activities reports, EPA has asked the states to submit their own reports to the agency for review. The EPA will then make any necessary changes to the states' reports to ensure they are accurate and up to date. states without taking into account the number of such releases in each state. We continue to believe that such reporting would be worthwhile and would not present an undue burden to most states. In our survey, 37 states and the District of Columbia reported data on theNumber of tanks without viable owners that had known releases. Taking this information into account in our report, we recommended that EPA collect available data from the states regarding the Number of tanks in each states that had no viable owners. In commenting on this recommendation, EPA expressed concern about higher for two reasons. 11 states reported they did not know how many of the releases in their backlogs were from tanks without a viable owner. 17 states reported that there were approximately 4,000 releases from tanks for which they had not yet determined whether a viable owners could be found for the tanks. The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers says it has a backlog of more than 100,000 tanks that could be released. The agency says it is working on a plan to reduce the number of tanks in backlogs. by an independent person who assessed the accuracy of DCI data entries and the reasonableness of the judgments on the reliability of states’ survey data. As expected, there was wide variability in the level of oversight of the databases states use to track underground storage tank information. There was similar do not know if responses for South Dakota would have differed materially from those of the states that completed the survey. From the responses we received, we gathered information about (1) state databases used to track Underground Storage Tank Information. specific to federally regulated underground storage tanks for selected questions. Instead, they generally provided us with either data including a different universe of tanks or data prorated based on the number of federally regulated storage tanks in the state for these questions. Most survey questions that asked asked for data that asked for information about federally regulated tanks were answered with a no or a negative answer. For more information, visit the U.S. Department of Energy's National Institute of Energy and Environmental Protection's National Tank Census website. EPA develops information on states’ needs and performance from states” semiannual activity reports on their tank numbers and cleanup activities. EPA also aggregates elements of the reports to measure program performance against the national goals it establishes in accordance with the Government Performance and Results Act. For fiscal year 2005, EPA’s goals for the underground storage tank program included (1) completing 14,500 cleanups, and (2) completing 30 cleanups. The EPA has not released a list of the cleanups it has completed.  states provided data with gaps or further clarifications needed in key areas, such as the number of release sites awaiting funding. EPA regional officials described this first effort as a collection of baseline information, and the agency decided to a viable owner. This information would improve EPA’s ability to determine how to most effectively clean up abandoned underground storage tanks within their boundaries.states. In a November 2005 report, we recommended that EPA collect available information from states, in their reports to the agency, regarding the number and cleanup status of all known abandoned storage tanks. collect data again in 2006 without changing its method. Results for 2006 were not available as of December 2006. The 2005 Act also included language providing that EPA may withdraw approval of a state fund for financial responsibility coverage without withdrawing approval of the overall state underground storage tank program. It is not known if the 2005 Act was ever implemented by the EPA in the first place. It was not known whether the 2005 act was ever used in any way by theEPA in the early years of the agency’s existence. The survey was focused specifically on federally regulated underground storage tanks, as defined by EPA. A few states reported they were not able to provide us with data we would need to discuss the relevant topics with to obtain sufficient information for the purposes of this report. We also conducted interviews with regional program officials from EPA’s Underground Storage Tank Program in six EPA regions to gather additional information about (1) states’ primary sources of money for addressing the problem and (2) how they plan to address it. survey to state officials responsible for underground storage tank programs or, where applicable, for state cleanup funds, in the 50 states and the District of Columbia. Such data aid in our continuing reviews of the Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) Underground Storage Tank program. States were selected for the of the report as aggregate information on what states estimate their underground Storage Tank and Leaking Storage Tank numbers and funding to be. We report all states’ responses to selected questions only in appendix II, because of the known limitations in the reliability of state level comparisons. The EPA is seeking information about underground storage tanks. Two other professional organizations also conduct surveys about underground tanks. The New England Interstate Water Pollution Control Commission and the Association of Water Engineers are two of them. The EPA is asking for information from officials named on lists of state contacts from two other professional groups. To contact the officials on EPA’s list via e-mail, we sent the e- mail regarding the most appropriate contact to officials named in the list of contacts from the two other organizations. the total for the states within each region. Second, EPA regional officials consider the components of the state formulas, along with additional factors, to determine the actual amount to be distributed to each of the states in their region. Additional factors that may be considered, according toEPA regional officials, include the state's level of poverty and the state of the economy at the time of the grant. The grant is funded by a combination of federal, state and local sources. The total amount awarded to each state ranges from $1.2 billion to $2 billion. include states’ actual need for money in light of such things as funding carryovers from prior years. For the most part, the EPA regional officials whom we interviewed stated that deviations from the formula distributions, when they occur, are usually relatively minor. The formula is based on the U.S. Census Bureau’s report on the number of people living in poverty in the United States. It also takes into account factors such as population growth, poverty levels, and the cost of living, among other things. EPA agreed with our recommendations and provided information on the agency’s plans and activities to address each of them. The agency indicated that it has issued draft guidelines that would help states verify that tank owners and operators maintain adequate financial responsibility coverage. For more information, visit the EPA's website at www.epa.gov/tank-owners-and-operators. For additional information on EPA's Tank Owners and Operators Program, visit www.EPA.gov/. For more on the EPA Tank Owners & Operators program, visit http://www. EPA.com/Tank-Owners- and operators. require inspections of underground storage tanks to assess compliance with financial responsibility requirements. Regarding our recommendation that EPA improve its oversight of the solvency of state assurance funds, the agency indicated that it would strengthen its oversight by improving a recently developed monitoring tool and by developing guidance for its guidance for the state assurance fund. The EPA indicated that they would strengthen their oversight by improved a recentlyDeveloped monitoring tool. The agency would also strengthen its Oversight of State Assurance Funds by developing Guidance for its Guidance. the future public funding needs for EPA’s UST program. Ensure that states verify, on a regular basis, that tank owners and operators are maintaining adequate financial responsibility coverage, as required by RCRA. Improve the agency’S oversight of the solvency of the UST Program. The Administrator, EPA, should take the following four actions to ensure UST is funded: 1. Check tank owners’ financial records regularly; 2. Make sure they’re meeting their financial obligations; 3. oversight process. EPA indicated that it would consider conducting such a study in conjunction with the states. The agency is considering a study to assess the relative effectiveness of public and private options for financial responsibility coverage. It is also considering a recommendation to better focus how EPA distributes program resources to states, the report says. The report is published by the Center for American Progress, a nonprofit that promotes free speech and scientific inquiry in the United States. For more, go to: http://www.carterpartners.org/. contaminated soil and water; providing safe drinking water to residents at the site of a tank leak; providing for temporary or permanent relocation of residents; and providing reasonable and necessary administrative and planning expenses directly related to these activities. The Energy Policy Act of 2005 (the 2005 Act), enacted in 2005, was enacted in response to the Gulf oil spill. The Act provides for the evacuation of residents and the relocation of those who need to be relocated. The act also provides for temporary and permanent relocation. approximately $190 million in fiscal year 2005. The 2005 Act also included several other provisions regarding inspections, operator training, and financial responsibility, among other things. Some of these provisions impose ongoing requirements on states. For example, the inspection provision requires each state receiving federal funding to inspect all of its its its facilities. For more information on the 2005 Act, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2005/05/01/15/05act/index.html#storylink=cpy. the following general categories of activities: testing tanks for leaks when one is suspected; investigating a site to evaluate the source and extent of petroleum assessing the number of individuals that may have been exposed to petroleum contaminants and the seriousness of exposure, and estimating resulting health risks. Cleaning up. Testing for leaks and assessing the source of petroleum contaminants. cleaning up. testing for leaking tanks and evaluating a site for petroleum. Clean up. Tests for leaks. Testing tanks for leaking and evaluating the source. of petroleum at a site. for each of the following categories: (1) administrative activities, including LUST Trust Fund program management, general management and administrative support, program guidance and implementation, and training; (2) enforcement activities,including all actions necessary to identify a leaking underground storage tank site’s potentially responsible party; issuance of letters, notices, and orders; and (3) enforcement actions, including all actions needed to identify the potential responsible party. For more information, go to the U.S. Department of Energy's website. we are concerned with federally regulated USTs, as defined by EPA. These tanks include “any one or combination of tanks (including underground pipes connected thereto) that is used to contain an accumulation of regulated substances.” The volume of the tank, and the volume of pipes connected to it, must be at least 10 feet in diameter. The tank must also have at least one underground pipe connected to the tank. The volume must be more than 10 feet, and must contain at least two underground pipes. if the storage tank is situated upon or above the surface of the floor. 6. What are the cumulative data for the number of federally regulated USTs for your state, first as of September 30, 2004, and then as of Sept. 30, 2005? Are these numbers exact or estimated? Cumulative is the total number of U.S.Ts that have been regulated by the federal government in your state. 7. What is your state’s share of the federal market for USTs? Share your data in the comments below. responses to these questions? 51. How do responsible parties who have active federally regulated USTs in your state demonstrate financial responsibility? 52. Please list the number of tanks covered by the various available financial responsibility mechanisms below. Is this an exact number or an estimate? 53. State financial assurance fund......... b. Federal financial responsibility fund......... a. Federal bank guarantee fund......... c. Federal state financial guarantee fund...... a. State state financial assurance trust fund......... d. Federal State financial responsibility trust fund. percent or more beneath the surface of the ground. This term does not include any farm or residential tank of 1,100 gallons or less capacity used for storing motor fuel for noncommercial purposes. Tank used for storage heating oil for consumptive use on the premises where stored; (c) tank used to store heating oil on premises where it is stored. The U.S. Department of Energy says it has no plans to increase the amount of fuel being stored in underground tanks to the level of the surface. septic tank; (d) certain pipeline facilities; (e) surface impoundment, pit, pond, or lagoon; (f) storm- water or wastewater collection system; (g) flow-through process tank. (h) liquid trap or associated gathering lines directly related to oil or gas production and gathering operations. (i) storage tank situated in an underground area; or (j) a storage tank in an area that is not accessible to the outside world by public access. on groundwater for potable water; and (3) a performance-based bonus to states that meet or exceed the national averages for the numbers of cleanups initiated and completed. The distribution formula does not consider the number of releases from tanks without a viable owner in various states, nor does it consider the amount of water released from tanks that are not owned by viable owners. It also doesn't consider the total number of gallons of water that have been released from the state's water treatment facilities. inspections, groundwater protection, and enforcement; and $55 million for delivery prohibition, operator training, and release prevention and compliance. An additional $50 million per year is authorized from the general fund to cover administrative expenses and other activities. Net revenue to the LUST Trust Fund from taxes on petroleum products totaled $1.2 billion in 2013. The trust fund is intended to provide a source of revenue for the state and local governments in the event of a state of emergency or disaster. from investments adding an average of $49 million. Net revenues in fiscal years 2001 and 2005 also included relatively small amounts expended from the fund by EPA and subsequently recovered from the parties responsible for the contamination and redeposited to the fund (see table 3). States’ revenues from the LUST are shown in the table below. The LUST was established in the 1990s by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to address the problem of contaminated drinking water in the United States. The tax has been in effect continuously since 1987, except for a short period in 1990. Since 1987, the fund balance has been growing at an average rate of about $129 million per year. By fiscal year-end 2005, the LUST Trust Fund had collected about $3.7 billion in revenue and appropriations totaled about $1.2 billion. Figure 11 shows the changes in the trust fund balance from 1987 through 2005, with interest accruing to the fund each year as well. August 2005, expanded the permitted uses of the LUST Trust Fund. appropriations from the trust fund have averaged about $71 million in recent years. Typically, about 80 percent of the money is distributed to the states to support their cleanup programs. Financed by a $0.001/gallon excise tax on gasoline and gasoline and diesel fuel, the fund has been in existence since the 1970s. The 2005 Act authorizes appropriations through fiscal year 2011 of $555 million per not been made final as of December 2006. focus how EPA distributes program resources to states, including LUST Trust Fund money. EPA said it would work toward ensuring that state- reported data are consistent with existing EPA definitions and are limited to federally regulated underground storage tanks. Also, EPA stated that it would consider changes to improve the distribution of future LUST trust fund money. For more information on EPA’s LUST program, visit: http://www.epa.gov/lust/. For more on the EPA's LUST fund, visit www.EPA.gov. As of December 2006, EPA Office of Underground Storage Tanks officials stated that EPA had not accurate. and effectively distribute LUST Trust Fund dollars to the states. States are not required to report data to EPA on the number of releases from tanks without a viable owner. Although one of the purposes of the fund is to help states clean up releases, EPA could encourage the remaining states to gather such information as well. In addition, developing national data on the extent to which releases remaining to be cleaned up are attributed to tanks without viable owners would be useful. small portion of the individual states’ cleanup program budgets. In fiscal year 2005, the states used about two-thirds of their distributions to fund program administration and enforcement activities and one-third to fund the cleanup of sites. Appropriations from the LUST Trust Fund have been relatively stable since fiscal year 1998. to the responsible parties; oversight of the cleanups; and activities associated with cost recovery actions; and (3) cleanup activities consisting largely of emergency responses, site investigations, exposure assessments, and corrective actions. Between fiscal years 1998 and 2005, annual appropriations from the trust fund have ranged from about $65 million to $76 million per year. Over this period, EPA distributed an average of about 80 percent of the annual appropriations to states to support their cleanup Trust Fund’s annual appropriations represent a relatively small part of many states’ cleanup program revenue in any given year. In fiscal year 2005,EPA distributed about $58 million of LUST Trust Fund money to the states, or about $1.2 million per state. Programs. EPA uses the balance of the annual appropriations to support cleanup activities on Indian lands and its own cleanup-related activities. Forty-eight states reported spending about $15 million in LUST Trust Fund money on site cleanup activities in 2005, by far the largest single source of federal money for this cleanups in Indian Country. (3) decreasing newly reported confirmed releases to fewer than 10,000. On the basis of the states’ reports for fiscal year 2005, EPA reported that all the goals were met. Under cooperative agreements with EPA, states receive distributions from the LUST Trust Fund to help cover the cost of administering their LUST cleanup programs. According to EPA, over the past 10 years, on average, states have used roughly one-third of their Lust Trust Fund money by spending category. EPA generally relies on states to ensure that tank owners and operators comply funds or private forms of coverage are more effective in ensuring timely cleanups. Yet EPA has required states to report this information because of concerns regarding the burden this might place on some states. Some states require the use of state money for cleanup, and thus the federal money is used for administrative or enforcement activities, particularly salaries. An EPA official in Region 4 took issue with states that do not use LUST.money for staff salaries. Some states actually require the Use of State Money for Cleaning, which is used to pay for environmental cleanup. The money is also used for other administrative and enforcement activities such as salaries, an EPA official said. The federal money can also be used for enforcement activities. EPA headquarters uses a formula to determine the amount each state should receive. The formula is based on a minimum distribution of $300,000 per state. A need-based amount is considered, as well as the percentage of the population relying on underground storage tanks and releases in the state. The money is then divided among the regions based on the formula EPA headquarters uses to distribute LUST Trust Fund money to the regions. For more information, visit EPA.gov/LUST and the EPA's website. The 1986 amendments to RCRA established the LUST Trust Fund to finance the cleanup of petroleum releases from underground storage tanks. Until recently, states could use these funds only for cleanup and related administrative and enforcement activities. The 2005 Act also extended until 2011 the tax on petroleum products that capitalizes the federal LUST Fund. Under EPA policy, except in rare circumstances and in Indian Country, states will address underground storage tank releases that are financed by the Lust Trust Fund under an appropriate way. The fund is not available to be used for or installation. Department of the Treasury officials responsible for managing the LUST Trust Fund interviewed EPA headquarters and regional officials. We gathered documentation regarding appropriations of money from the fund to EPA, states’ expenditure of fund money, and the balance of the fund and its annual revenues. We selected these sources based on EPA officials’ indications that they were the most appropriate sources for the purposes of this report. For Treasury’s LUST trust Fund Financial Statements, we obtained and reviewed the fund balance and revenues collected into the fund. states about topics such as their use of LUST Trust Fund money, restrictions within their state financial assurance fund on accepting claims. We interviewed regional officials about these apparent discrepancies, as well as about the regions’ processes for distributing money from the LUST Fund. To obtain further information about the federal funding to address these releases, we interviewed state officials about their state's financial assurance funds. We also interviewed states about the solvency of states’financial assurance funds, and the process of phasing out their stateFinancial Assurance Funds. the state’s unobligated balance of federal LUST Trust Funds, if any? Is this an exact number or an estimate? State’S unobliged balance ofFederal LUST Fund amounts listed above that would help inform our interpretation of your interpretation of this question. Is there any additional information about the LUST trust fund amounts listed below? If so, please share it with us in the comments below. If not, please send it to jennifer.smith@dailymail.co.uk. state’s fund dedicated to tanks without a viable owner in the past year? Is this an exact number or an estimate? Amount deposited........................... a. Is this amount for the latest federal fiscal year (10/1/04 to 9/30/05)? Yes .................... No...................... b. On what date does your reporting year begin? Beginning date of reporting year 39. Approximately how much of the amount deposited into your state’S fund dedicated. to tanks with no viable owner was from each of the following sources? a. Flat rate fees assessed on tanks....... b. Fees/taxes What was the amount of the outstanding claims (claims received by the state program for which funds have not yet been obligated) on your state’s fund dedicated to tanks without a viable owner as of September 30, 2005? Is this an exact number or an estimate? Obligated ...................................... 42. During the past 5 years, what amount of funding, if any, did your state divert from its fund for purposes other than those related to as of Sept. 30. 2005? 43. As of Sept Sept. 2005, had your state decided to stop accepting new government or the state (local government only)? 44. If applicable, for what purposes didyour state divert funds from the fund Dedicated to Tanks Without A Viable Owner? dedicated to tanks without a viable owner after a certain date? Date after which revenues will no longer be collected. No decision made to stop collecting claims. 46. How capable is your state’s fund dedicated to tanks. Without a viable owners of meeting future demands upon it? . Able. 47. Can the state afford to keep the tanks in good condition? Able. 48. Is the state capable of maintaining the tanks? Able to maintain the tanks. 49. Is there a way for the state to make sure that the tanks are maintained in a safe and secure manner? following sources? Is this an exact number or an estimate? a. Flat rate fees assessed on tanks.. b. Fees/taxes assessed on a per-unit basis on fuel(s)........................... c. Interest ....................................... d. Cost recovery ............................. . . . 30. What do you anticipate will happen to revenues to your state's financial assurance fund dedicated to tanks without a viable owner over the next 5 years, compared with the annual revenues accrued to the fund? State Fund Dedicated to Tanks without a Viable Owner 37. What was the status of your state’s fund dedicated to tanks without a viable owner as of September 30, 2005? . Not applicable, never had fund in the past year? Large increase................ Moderate increase......... Stay about the same...... Moderate decrease........ Large decrease............... a. What were the primary factors you considered in making this assessment? 41. What. was the overall balance of. your state's fund dedicated for tanks without viable owners? fund over the next 5 years, compared with the annual revenues accrued to the fund in the past year? Large increase................ Moderate increase......... Stay about the same...... Moderate decrease........ Large decrease............... a. What were the primary factors you considered in making this assessment? 31. What was the overall balance of the fund over the past 5 years? 31: How much has the fund changed in the last 5 years and how much is it expected to change in the next five years? 32: What are the main factors that led you to make this decision? a. Yes....... No ........ b. Yes......... No ........ c. Yes...... No ........ d. Yes..... No ........ 2. Which of the following types of information does each of the databases you listed above contain? (e.g. location) a. .......................................................... b. ........................... c. ........................................................................................... d.  ........................................................................................................................... 3. What procedures are used to ensure that the information in each database is correct? a. What is the type of information that each database contains? A. What are the types of data in each databases? all data contained in the databases you listed above are accurately recorded? a. What are the known limitations of the current data (e.g., data elements that are known to be incomplete, incorrect, or out-of-date) for each of the databasesyou listed above? 4. What do you think is the best way to get the most out of the data you've collected so far? 5. What would you like to change about the way the data is collected? 6. What is your best way of getting the most from the data? How frequently, if at all, does your state check whether a tank owner’s financial responsibility is current? At least annually ................................................................................................ Every 1 to 2 years .............................................................................................. Every 3 years. As events warrant (e.g. upon tank installation or upgrade, upon a release).. d. State does not check financial responsibility ................................................ ....................................................................... 54. Of the 54 states surveyed, 54 said they check tank owners’ financial responsibility on a regular basis. Over the past 5 years, how many cases has your state encountered in which tank owners did not have adequate financial responsibility? Is this an exact number or an estimate? Number of cases ............................ a. How did you calculate the number of cases? b. How much, if any, of the total amount diverted over the past five years had been reimbursed to the state fund dedicated to tanks without a viable owner years or longer...................................................................................... State does not check financial responsibility..................................................... ........................................................................... 55. $100,000-$499,999 .................................... c. $500,000-999,999 or $1,000,000 or more ................................... Number for which costs cannot be e. estimated.................................................... f. How did you estimate the number of releases that fall into each category of funding? 15. Based on your experience with cleanups of leaking federally regulated USTs that require some amount of funding. 16. What do you think the cost of a clean-up like this would be if it happened today? Is this an exact number or an estimate? b. Enforcement costs .................... c. Site cleanup costs ..................... d. Total costs ................................ e. Are these amounts for the latest federal fiscal year (10/1/04)? A. Able to meet most .................................................................... Able to met some ................................................................... Not able to meet any................................................................ A. Not able, to meet all or to meet some at all. A. Can't meet any at all or not at all at the same time. date? Date after which revenues will no longer be collected. No decision made to stop collecting claims. 36. How capable is your state’s financial assurance fund of meeting future demands upon it? . Able to meet all......................................................................... Able to meeting most .................................................................... Able to met some ................................................................... Not able. Not able to meet some or not at all. Not at all at least at the moment that you are aware of. Not capable of meeting all or most of the demands that are placed upon it. Financial test of self-insurance ....... c. Corporate guarantee ........................ d. Insurance coverage.......................... e. Surety bond ..................................... f. Letter of credit................................. g. Trust fund set up by owner or operator ........................................ h. Bond rating test (local government only) ............................................. i. Financial test of local government only ......................................... j. Guarantee from another local ........................................................ j. Bond ratings test ( local governmentOnly) ........................ i. Bond Ratings test (Local GovernmentOnly) before or after a certain date (e.g., an eligibility sunset date)? No ....................... Yes...................... d. What are the eligibility dates for releases? [Fill in either or both dates as applicable.] [Enter mm/dd/yy.] e. Are there other restrictions on accepting and paying claims? 38. How much was deposited into your account? 27. Please describe the deductible amount(s) or before or after an eligibility expiration date? No...................... Yes .................... d. provide this amount for the latest federal fiscal year (10/1/04 to 9/30/05).] Is this an exact number or an estimate? Total outlays................................... a. On what date does the year for which you are reporting start? a. Federal LUST Trust Fund .............. b. Other federal sources .............................................. c. State financial assurance fund ........ d. State fund dedicated to tanks without a viable owner ................................ ...................................... g. Why is this amount different? 9/30/05)? Yes .................... No...................... h. On what date does the year for which you are reporting start? 18. Is there any additional information about the amounts of public funding listed above that would help inform our interpretation of your responses to these questions? 19. What additional sources ofpublic funding are you reporting? Yes ................... No..................... h. on what date do you report that you started reporting? On what day do you start reporting that you began reporting? On what date does your reporting year begin? According to EPA, states may sometimes not spend a given year’s entire LUST Trust Fund award in the year the funds are provided. As of September 30, 2005, what was in the trust fund? Yes .................... No...................... f.to 9/30/05)? Yes ................... No..................... f. to 9/29/05? Yes    to 9-30-05? No   to 9-29-05. for data for a specific year referred to the federal fiscal year. If states were unable to provide data, we asked them to provide us with the starting date of their alternative reporting year. As a result, we present such data in the report as for the past five years. For the past 10 years, for data for the last five years, we have asked states to give us the start date of the previous year. We have presented such data as the beginning of the current fiscal year or the end of the last year. The state expects that more than 95 percent of releases in its current backlog will be cleaned up using at least some public funding. State laws addressing when a specific owner or operator is considered to be responsible for a release can affect who is less likely to voluntarily report releases if they know that reporting a release could lead to a mandatory cleanup. The state financial assurance fund will be reimbursed by the state for performing that cleanup for an extended period, an EPA regional official says. To ensure the state’s fund, the state will be using a combination of state and federal funds. do not use their financial assurance funds to provide financial responsibility coverage for newly identified releases. Florida and Arizona expect particularly sizable declines. These states expect that owners or operators will use private sources of financial responsibility Coverage to pay for the cleanup of most releases identified in these states. Florida, Arizona, and Georgia are among the states with the highest levels of releases in the U.S., according to the report. The report was published by the National Association of State Energy Agencies (NASEA) on November 14, 2013. did not comply with applicable regulations or failed to report a release. New Hampshire officials indicated that, while the state has authority for administrative fines and civil penalties in cases involving multiple releases, such actions are not automatically imposed. Instead, fines and penalties may be assessed if a release is deemed to have been in violation of regulations or the release was not reported to the proper authorities. The state has the power to impose fines or civil penalties if the release is found to be in breach of regulations, the state said. Twenty-three states reported cases of inadequate coverage in the past 5 years. Only 7 states and the District of Columbia reported no cases. The number of cases involving inadequate financial responsibility coverage may indicate that at least some public funds will be used to pay for coverage. Forty-seven states reported that they anticipate identifying about 37,000 releases over the next five years. Of these 48 respondents, 43 reported inadequate coverage cases; 19 other states reported they did not know the number of such cases in their state. the number of cases they had encountered in the past 5 years in which tank owners did not have adequate financial responsibility coverage. Only about one-third of the states reported that they required annual proof that tank owners or operators were maintaining coverage. In general, states that we talked with more in-depth about financial responsibility said that they attempted to check this coverage on a regular basis. The remaining states generally reported to us that they checked this coverage. We are happy to share our findings with you. waterfront improvements and cleanup of contaminated lake and river sediments. Seven states and the District of Columbia have never had funds that provided financial responsibility coverage. In these states, tank owners and operators use other ways of demonstrating financial responsibility. They use private insurance and self-insurance, according to our survey. The survey was conducted by the Environmental Defense Fund and the Center for Responsible Waterfronts (CRW), a non-profit based in Washington, D.C. It asked people to share their thoughts on waterfront improvements, cleanup and other issues. as required by federal law. Some options that owners or operators can choose for coverage either require annual updates or are often renewed annually. Owners or operators that self-insure, or choose to demonstrate that they have sufficient assets to cover costs resulting from a release, must prepare an for the past 5 years. If states do not verify coverage on a routine basis, it may be difficult for them to know whether owners or operator will have the required coverage in the event of a release. If required coverage is not in place when a release occurs, less often or not at all (see fig. 4). Do not check (7) Other (9) States that do not check financial responsibility coverage on an annual basis may not know if owners or operators are maintaining required coverage. For example, nearly half of the states do not annually check with federal financial responsibility regulations. EPA lacks assurance that states are adequately overseeing and enforcing financial responsibility provisions. We found that only about one-third of states check coverage on a annual basis, while the remaining states generally reported they check less frequently ornot at all. annual letter with financial information supporting their ability to pay. Owners or operators that choose private insurance for financial responsibility coverage must pay annual premiums to maintain coverage. EPA does not provide states specific guidance on whether or how frequently states should engage in routine verification of financial information. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. state officials expect it to remain in place at least until 2008. In 2005, EPA’s Office of Underground Storage Tanks began collecting information from states on various aspects of their financial assurance funds. According to some EPA officials, however, the data collected were of limited usefulness. One EPA official said, “I don’t think we’re going to see any major changes in the way that these funds are managed.’’ The goal of the effort was to provide a better tool to monitor state financial assurance. funds’ soundness and help EPA work with states to resolve any soundness issues. The guidance also specified that monitoring state funds should be accomplished as soon as possible. This includes collecting baseline data on relevant fund soundness measures from each state. It also includes evaluating the baseline soundness of each state fund, and monitoring these measures over time to check for developing problems. The guidance was issued by the U.S. Treasury Department's Office of Thrift and Disability Services on June 6. It was issued as part of the department's 10th annual State of the Treasury report. In response, EPA has formed a workgroup to examine the issue of how to assess the soundness of state financial assurance funds. The workgroup will also develop criteria for guidance on the conditions under which it might withdraw fund approval, including what would constitute a lack of financial soundness. The guidance had previously been issued by the U.S. Department of Treasury in 2008. The U.N. has issued a similar guidance to the Treasury Department in 2009, but it has since been withdrawn. it provides reasonable assurance that funds are available to pay for cleanup costs. Lack of timely cleanup is a concern because the longer pollution from releases is, the longer the cleanup costs and other liabilities. If funding levels or claim processing time has a negative impact on the cleanup of releases from underground storage tanks, then EPA would be concerned about the financial soundness of the fund. If the fund assets are greater than liabilities, or there are sufficient resources to meet current demands, then the normal timing of payment is not significantly delaying cleanups. if the funding levels or claim processing time caused undue delays in cleaning up releases, thereby potentially harming human health and the environment. In Texas, for example, claims substantially exceeded revenues during the early years of the state’s financial assurance fund. By 1992, the fund had a backlog of unpaid claims, and by 2013, it had more than $1 billion in outstanding claims. In the U.S., claims have exceeded revenues in many states, including Texas, where the fund was created in the 1970s. Financial assurance funds may take on additional liability from tank installers and manufacturers. Some states may turn to state financial assurance funds for financial responsibility coverage. Additional liability could strain the resources of some states’ funds, says senior official in EPA’s Office of Underground Storage Tanks. The 2005 Act directs EPA to require that each state receiving federal funds either implement “secondary containment” for new and installers. It also requires that states implement ‘ secondary containment’ for tank manufacturers. financial assurance funds that were approved by EPA to provide financial responsibility coverage. EPA can withdraw this approval if a fund no longer provides coverage that ensures timely and adequate cleanup of releases. The funds in each of the six states that stopped providing financial responsibility. coverage for new releases did so after a certain deadline. Tank owners and operators in these states now demonstrate financial responsibility Coverage state financial assurance funds to provideFinancial responsibility coverage, according to EPA guidance. Unless EPA improves how it monitors the soundness of state financial. assurance funds, it will not be aware of deficiencies in coverage before they occur or in. sufficient time to take action. Tanks in several states are funded by state gasoline taxes. In several states, financial assurance funds limit the number of cleanups they perform. Under EPA guidance, EPA officials are responsible for determining whether a financial assurance fund is financially sound. According to EPA guidance on the subject issued in 1993, a state assurance fund can be financially sound if it provides reasonable assurance that money is available to pay for clean-up releases in a timely and appropriate manner. In some states, the funds limit clean-ups based on funding availability. and/or provided by state and federal agencies. Money from the federal Leaking Underground Storage Tank (LUST) Trust Fund, state financial assurance funds, other state funds that have not been approved by the Environmental Protection Agency. State financial assurance fund: Any state fund used to pay for cleanups of releases from federally regulated USTs. We do not make a distinction between funds that EPA has approved as a financial responsibility mechanism and those thatEPA has not approved. We recognize that in the U.S. As of September 30, 2005, 37 states had funds that met federal requirements for financial responsibility, according to EPA. An additional 6 states had such funds in the past but these funds no longer provided coverage for new releases. 7 states and the District of Columbia have never had funds to meet federal financial responsibility requirements for the federal government. In 2005, the U.S. had more than $1.2 trillion in federal funds to spend on health care, education, infrastructure, and other programs. In 2004, there were $2.7 trillion in such funds. In 2003, there was $3.2 billion in such funding. a state financial assurance fund collects revenue from various sources in a given year can depend on its balance. Many states have maximum limits on the overall balance of their funds. Generally, if a state’s maximum limit is reached, its fund ceases collecting revenues from one or more of its funds. If a state has a maximum limit of $1.5 billion, it can only collect up to $2 billion a year. If it has a balance of $3 billion or more, it is able to collect as much as $4 billion. If the balance is less than $3.2 billion, the fund can collect as little as $1 billion. revenue sources until the fund balance drops below a minimum threshold. For example, Idaho has not collected certain fees for its fund since 1998 when the balance of its fund exceeded $30 million. The fund will again begin collecting revenue from these fees once its fund balance is below that threshold, a state official says. For more information on Idaho's fund, go to: http://www.idaho.gov/funds/general-revenue-and-benefits/idaho-funds. bills totaling about $170 million. This amount exceeded the fund’s annual income by approximately 300 percent. New claims arriving daily added to the backlog. In order to catch up, the fund temporarily slowed down some cleanup work. Even though the fund stopped accepting new releases after December 22, 1998, new claims continued to come in. The fund has since been able to make up for some of the lost revenue by paying out more money to the fund's pension fund members and other creditors. claims against the state financial assurance fund after a certain date? Date after which claims will no longer be accepted No decision made to stop accepting claims......... 35. As of September 30, 2005, had your state decided to stop collecting revenues for the state Financial Assurance Fund? If so, please send us a photo of the fund and your name, address and phone number to jennifer.smith@mailonline.co.uk. If you want to send a picture of your state's financial Assurance fund, please email jennifersmith@MailOnline.com. For more information on how to send photos, visit www.jennifersmith.org. Claims it accepts based on the amount of funds it has available to pay for those claims? Yes ....................... No......................... b. Is your state fund setting priorities for paying claims to conserve funds? Yes    c. Isyour state’s fund dedicated to tanks without a viable owner ONLY accepting claims for releases that occurred before? Yes,  No, or  Yes,   or  no.  ‘Yes,’  ‘No’, ‘I’m sorry, I don’t know.’ paid by responsible parties and any maximum amount the state financial assurance fund will pay for each release from a federally regulated UST. How much was deposited into your state’s financial assurance. fund in the past year? Is this an exact number or an estimate? Outstanding claims ......................... $ 33. If applicable, for what purposes did your state divert UST financial assurance funds? 34. As of September 30, 2005, had your state decided to stop accepting new UST releases?  Accepting and paying all valid claims without restriction. Go to Q27. Is your state fund limiting the number of this type of fund.......................... Skip to Q47. Fund is no longer active ..........................................................Skip to Q37. Not applicable, never had this kind of fund. Go into Q38. Accepting claims with some restrictions, such as a limit on the amount of money you can accept. Go back to the page you came from, or click here to go to the next page. this survey we ask about both types of funds as applicable to your state. Has your state EVER had a state financial assurance fund, as defined in (1) above? Yes ....................... No......................... Skip to Q37. What was the status of your state’s financial assurance Fund as of September? Yes  “No” “I don’t know”  “Yes’”“I’m not sure” diverted funds for specific programs, such as Brownfields grants and loans, a lead-based paint removal program, and cleanup of groundwater contamination. Officials in two states where diversions occurred reported a negative impact on the state program’s ability to do its job. In Florida and South Carolina, officials said the diversions had a “negative impact” on the program. In North Carolina, they said the impact was “significant” and “profound.” provide financial responsibility coverage for new releases. Officials in Pennsylvania and South Carolina were uncertain about the 2005 Act’s impact on future diversions in those states. A South Carolina official, for example, believed that the provisions could discourage the state from making relatively small diversions. In Pennsylvania, officials were unsure about the impact of the Act on their states. In South Carolina, officials said they were unsure of the impact on their state’S diversions, which are relatively small. diversion between 2001 and 2005. The 2005 Act included language providing that, if a state diverts resources from its financial assurance fund, EPA may not distribute a certain portion of LUST appropriations to that state for enforcement purposes. This provision affects only the 37 states whose financial assurance funds still from thefinancial assurance fund because the loss of federal funding would more than offset the gain from the diversion. If the state needed to divert a large amount of money, even relative to the $1.3 million overall distribution it received from EPA in 2005, the disincentive would not be. 16 states diverted nearly $435 million from their funds between 2001 and 2005. Officials in most of these states reported that the diverted amounts went to the state’s general fund or to offset state budget shortfalls. In the largest case of a diversion reported to us, for example, the Pennsylvania financial assurance fund loaned the legislature $100 million in 2002. State officials reported that this diversion did not impact the fund's operations, however, because the fund still had more than enough money to meet its current expenses. Florida spent almost $150 million on cleanups in 2005. Michigan’s fund, however, no longer provided financial responsibility coverage on groundwater. As of August 2006, less than 40 percent of the releases in these categories were being actively cleaned up. In Florida, for example, $20 million was diverted in 2002, meaning that the cleanup of less urgent releases, which otherwise would have been addressed, was delayed, state officials say.. Officials we we we are having difficulty paying for all of its cleanups. State financial assurance funds may also be affected by future natural disasters, such as hurricanes Katrina and Rita in 2005. As late as June 2006, the impact of the flooding caused by these hurricanes on Louisiana’s financial assurance fund was not known.and therefore any cleanup required would be less costly. The state of Louisiana is expected to make a decision on how to use the funds by the end of the year or early next year. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. clean up a release that otherwise would have been paid for by a responsible party. For example, according to Florida officials, the state has cleaned up about 350 sites annually in past years using public funding. Of these sites, approximately three to four sites per year involved responsible parties that would have had to pay for the clean-up if not for the public funding, officials say. For more information on the program, go to: http://www.florida.gov/news/press-releases/2013/01/31/clean-up-program.html. did not maintain adequate financial responsibility coverage. Florida estimated an average cost of $380,000 in public funds to fully address each release requiring public funds. Consequently, Florida may have spent more than $1 million per year on such sites in the past. Florida officials noted that the state does not have a financial responsibility policy for the release of prisoners. The state does have a policy for releasing prisoners, but it is not clear if it has a policy on releasing prisoners at the same time or at a different time. As of February 2006, the state was only authorizing cleanup work that the fund could pay for within 90 days. Officials generally preapprove cleanup work only at the sites where contamination is most severe. After an initial assessment of each site’s contamination,. the state categorizes releases after an initial assess of each. site”s contamination. South Carolina. is one of the most contaminated states in the U.S., with more than 100,000 people living in contaminated areas. The state is home to more than 1,000 contaminated sites. fund is only able to actively conduct cleanup work at about one-third of the 12,000 remaining sites. The approximately 8,000 other sites in the fund’s backlog await cleanup. These cleanups will not occur until money becomes available for them, or, potentially, the risk posed by the sites increases so much, the fund says. The fund will only be able to clean up about one third of the remaining sites when money is available for it to do so. For more information on the fund, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/29/environment/cnn-cleanup-fund-cleanups. State taxes on gasoline and other fuels accounted for about $1.3 billion (92 percent) of this income to state funds. States reported that financial assurance funds also received revenues totaling about $42 million (3 percent) from fees paid by tank owners and operators. Only four states’financial assurance funds collected tank fees. State’s financial assurance fund may not be available for cleaning up underground storage tanks. State taxes are generally considered to be paid by the consumer. The federal government has no plans to use the funds for this purpose. but not gasoline taxes in 2005, and tank fees were the primary source of revenues for only three of these funds, according to our survey. In addition to gasoline taxes and fees on tanks, states also reported small amounts of revenues from sources such as interest and cost recovery. Whether gasoline taxes or tank fees are the main source of revenue for your state is up to your state's governor or state legislature. If you live in a state that does not have gasoline taxes, please contact CNN iReport at tips@cnn.com. At federal fiscal year-end 2005, state financial assurance funds in 39 states held unexpended balances of approximately $1.3 billion. Four states did not have or did not report a fund balance. Individual states’ fund balances ranged as high as about $207 million. The top five states—Pennsylvania, Florida, Texas, New Jersey, and California—accounted for more than half of the total balance in these funds. Because many state assurance funds also pay to clean up releases from other types of tanks, the entire balance of any one fund may not be known. Nine states reported that their funds limit the amount of cleanup work they finance based on funding availability. Of the 43 states that have had financial assurance funds, balance drops to $15 million. Diversions from state financial assurance fund may also limit some states’ ability to pay for cleanups under certain circumstances. States may sometimes decide to withdraw or withhold money from stateFinancial assurance funds. The situation of three such funds, as described by state officials, is as follows: North Carolina. The revenues to the state’s financial assurance. fund have not been sufficient in recent years to address all of the fund's high- million per year, according to this official.