of arguments made by Justices who have opposed the doctrine—suggests that, if confirmed to the Court, he might be willing to entertain arguments opposing the Court's use of the dormant Commerce Clause doctrine to strike down state environmental laws. Justice Scalia viewed federalism as the legal of federal power vis-à-vis the states. It is difficult to conclude with certainty that he would be as receptive to federalism based arguments as was Justice Scalia. What is apparent, however, is his clear interest in upholding the "essential principles of federal-state comity" The report focuses on areas of law where Justice Scalia can be seen to have influenced the Court's approach to particular issues. The report begins by discussing the nominee's views on two issues. It ends with a view toward how the nominee might approach those same issues. Click here to read the full report and to see the full list of questions and answers. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. opinion took a different view of this argument based on perceived congressional intent, opining that the court would be substituting its view of desirable social policy for that of Congress if it were to adopt the plaintiff's proposed interpretation. Criminal law is an area where Justice Scalia had a significant impact on the Supreme Court's decision in the case of "Dodd v. Maryland" In that case, the court ruled in favor of the plaintiffs in a case that was later appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court. years that Justice Scalia served on the Supreme Court, the late Justice was a well-known proponent of originalism, textualism, and the view that clear rules should guide the work of the lower courts. Justice Scalia was a vocal critic of the substantive due process doctrine. He regularly joined majority opinions that limited the scope of the doctrine, and he dissented in cases where the Court recognized new fundamental liberty interests. Whereas Justice Scalia's views on abortion and the right to marry were consistent with his originalism and textualism. Justice Scalia, for instance, often pointed to his vote to strike down a law prohibiting the practice. Both have emphatically rejected what may be described as "results-oriented judging" and, instead, emphasized that judges must render decisions that do not necessarily conform to their personal preferences. The judge and the justice seem to align in that both have rejected what might be called " results-oriented Judging" and have emphasized that a judge must make a decision based on the facts, not on personal preference. Justice Scalia regularly criticized majority opinions that failed to provide broader or clearer guidance to the lower courts. While the nominee has.sentiment that "if it is not necessary to decide more, it is necessary not to decision more," Justice Scalia has said he is open to the idea of giving the Supreme Court a more expansive role in the law. The nominee has said that he is "open to the possibility" that the court could provide a broader role for the high court to play in the future. considered one of the more liberal voices on the Court when he retired in 1994. The difficulty in attempting to predict how a nominee will approach the job of being a Justice remains even when the nominee has had a lengthy federal judicial career prior to nomination. Federal appellate judges are considered to be the most experienced federal appellate judges in the country. The Supreme Court has the power to confirm or reject a nominee for the Supreme Court at any time in the course of a year. The Senate could vote as early as next week on whether to confirm the nominee. Nominee says three judges "brought him up in the law" Judge David Sentelle and Justices Byron White and Anthony Kennedy are among those he mentions. Some commentators have compared the nominee to those jurists, as well. The judicial and judicial and legal process is a complex one, however, and the nominee's comments have been met with some criticism. The White House says the comments were made in jest and were not meant to imply that the nominee is a jurist. cabining its application as he did in the majority opinion in Gutierrez-Brizuela and in another case discussed below, De Niz Robles v. Lynch. As a result, if he were to succeed Justice Scalia, the nominee's opinions could suggest that he might favor a narrow interpretation of the law. The nominee's decisions could also be seen as a sign that he would be more likely to side with the majority in future Supreme Court cases, such as those involving the death penalty and the Voting Rights Act. lead him, like Justice Scalia, to eschew consideration of contemporary foreign practice as an aid to interpreting the Constitution's meaning. The nominee has not addressed such matters in the cases that have come before him. The Tenth Circuit docket involves few cases touching upon international law issues, and the handful that have been heard have been narrow and focused on domestic issues. The Supreme Court has the power to overrule the Tenth Circuit if it so chooses, but it has been reluctant to do so in the past. the matter. Justice Scalia wrote a dissenting opinion in that case, objecting to the majority's decision on pragmatic and constitutional grounds. In Justice Scalia's view, and in a view similar to the nominee's, Brand X impermissibly permits "[j]udgments within the powers vested in courts by the Judiciary Article of the Judiciary" Justice Scalia was a member of the Supreme Court from 1987 to 1991. He was the first member of that court to vote on the issue of same-sex marriage. the people's lives, liberties, or property without a decision maker insulated from the pressures other branches may try to bring to bear. Echoing a concurrence from Justice Scalia, the nominee also exhibited some doubt regarding the continued viability of the longstanding distinction between public rights and private rights as a matter of law. The nominee's comments were in response to a question from CNN's John Sutter. Sutter: "I think it's a good question. I don't know what the answer is" The nominee has expressed concerns about results-oriented judging. He has also expressed, as Justice Scalia did, constitutional concerns with the use of legislative history materials. His general views on the role of the courts, suggest that the nominee, if elevated to the Supreme Court, is unlikely to interpret the substantive component of the Due Process Clause expansively. He authored and joined several opinions that can be interpreted as strengthening the protection of the due process clause. The nominee has noted the risks of judges cherry picking among legislative history material to support their preferred interpretation. Amendment—he has written little. It is unclear to what degree the nominee's conclusions reflect his own approach to federalism questions, or what he perceives as adherence to Supreme Court precedent. In general, gleaning any general trends respecting the nominee’s views in this area of law is difficult, particularly because it is unclear what his views are on federalism. The nominee's views on the amendment are not clear, and it is difficult to get a sense of what they are on. concurring or dissenting opinions are filed, it still may be difficult to determine the preferences of the nominated judge. The act of joining an opinion authored by another judge does not necessarily reflect full agreement with the underlying majority opinions he authored. He has also frequently concurred or dissented to take issue with majority opinions that, in his view, reached issues that were unnecessary to the court's ultimate holding. In a similar vein, while the nominee has occasionally questioned precedent that he viewed as inconsistent with the rule. Some judges will decline to dissent unless the underlying issue is particularly contentious. The fact that a judge joins in a majority opinion may not be taken as indicating complete agreement. Rather, silent acquiescence is a sign of a judge's "silent acquiescence" to the majority. For example, in an effort to promote consensus on a court, some judges will refuse to dissent in a case. For more, go to CNN.com/soulmatestories and follow us on Twitter @soulmatthewstories. Of the approximately 180 published majority opinions authored by the nominee, only one has been reviewed in a formal opinion by the Supreme Court. The Supreme Court ultimately affirmed the Tenth Circuit decision by a 5-4 vote. Five additional opinions that Judge Garland has authored are further detailed in Table 3 of the nominee's conflict-of-the-law opinions on the issue of same-sex marriage. The nominee has also authored five additional opinions on the same issue, which are detailed in Table 3 of his controversy on this issue. may be understood to mean something more like 'I accept the outcome in this case, and I accept that the reasoning in the majority opinion reflects what a majority of my colleagues has agreed on' Using caution when interpreting a judge's vote isolated from a written opinion may be particularly important when it comes to a case involving the death of a family member. For more information on how to interpret the verdict in a case, go to: http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/features/2013/01/27/the-death-of-a-family-member-is-the-final-judge's-vote-isolated-from-a written-opinion.html. entire time period. In addition, while the existence of a concurrence may not necessarily signal disagreement with the majority opinion, some scholars have suggested that separate opinions can be used to gauge the ability of a judge to secure a unified view of the court. To the extent such views are held, they may be used as a gauge of the judge's ability to secure the court's unified view. In the case of the Supreme Court, the opinion of the majority of the justices may be considered the majority view. The opinion of a minority of the judges, however, may be the minority view. factors, and may simply depend on the personality and preferences of an individual judge, or the nature of the dispute before the court. For instance, the fact that Judge Gorsuch's majority opinions garnered relatively few dissents may be a product of the cases. Thus, the data may reflect other factors, such as the judge's personality and preference for a particular case or the circumstances of the case at the time of the decision. The data may also reflect the individual judge's preference for the particular case, as well. the doctrine in both the majority and concurring opinions in Browder is notable. After all, the majority decision ultimately concluded that the underlying legal questions raised by the case did not broach "any serious borderline disputes" The court holding that the plaintiffs had properly alleged a violation of their rights is notable, as is the majority's conclusion that the case didn't broach any "serious borderline disputes," the majority said. The majority also said that the court held that the Plaintiffs were correct to allege a violation. and is less frequent than the rate at which Justice Scalia dissented when he served as an appellate judge on the D.C. Circuit. On the other hand, there may be limits to what can be gleaned from this data. The choice to write separately is one that stems from various factors, such as the nature of the cases and how they are decided. It is not known whether the Supreme Court will take up the issue again in the coming months or years. The court is expected to vote on the issue in the fall. important with votes on procedural matters. For example, a judge's vote to grant an extension of time for a party to submit a filing generally does not signal agreement with the substantive legal position proffered by that party. And while some observers have highlighted votes by Judge Gorsuch in favor of the Supreme Court, there are other judges who have voted in the opposite direction on the same issue. The Supreme Court is expected to take up the issue in the coming days and weeks, with the vote set to take place in the fall. A vote to rehear a case en banc could signal disagreement with the legal reasoning of the panel decision. We do so because federal courts of appeals decide cases in three judge panels. En banc review is extraordinary, and is generally reserved for conflicting precedent within the circuit which makes application of the law by district courts unduly difficult, and egregious errors. A judge wants the we think thePanel decision is mistaken, we say. We think the Panel Decision is mistaken. The Panel Decision Is mistaken. entire court to have an opportunity to correct a perceived error by the panel. On the other hand, as one federal appellate judge noted in a dissent from a decision denying a petition for a rehearing en banc: Most of us vote against most such petitions and suggestions even when in important cases. A vote for or against rehearing a caseen banc or on other procedural matters does not necessarily equate to an endorsement or repudiation of a particular legal position. Despite having served on the federal appellate bench for a decade, case to reach a jury. No doubt a testament to contemporary civil litigation practices that ensure before any trial is held every stone will be overturned in discovery. The parties endured the sort of staggering delay and (no doubt) equally staggering expense the parties endured here. The case was settled out of court, but the judge ordered a jury to hear the case. The judge ordered the jury to return a verdict of not guilty, and the case went to a mistrial, which the judge overturned. The trial was adjourned until next month. raised in appropriate future cases, I believe we would do well to consider closely its invitation to restore the balance between state and federal courts. For we should be able to expect both that justice will be done in cases like this one and that it will be doing it while we still have the power to do it. We should also expect that we can expect justice to be done while we are still able to do so. We can't expect justice while we're still alive, and we shouldn't expect it to happen while we live. Federal courts are not normally in a position to espouse freely their views on particular legal issues. Unlike the Supreme Court, which enjoys "almost complete discretion" in selecting its cases, the federal courts of are bound by Supreme Court and circuit precedent, he says. The Supreme Court has "almostcomplete discretion" to decide cases, he adds, but federal courts have "almost no discretion" on the question of who gets to decide a case. The U.S. Supreme Court will rule on the case in the next few days. appeals are required to hear many cases as a matter of law. As a result, the appellate courts consider "many routine cases in which the legal rules are uncontroverted" Perhaps indicative of the nature of federal appellate work, the vast majority of cases decided by three-judge panels of federal courts are decided by judges on three-to-four-member panels. The Supreme Court has the power to overturn the lower court's decision in many cases, including those involving the death of a federal employee. could succeed on the Court, cast critical votes in several closely contested cases. Federal law reads federal law relatively expansively to restrict the ability of plaintiffs to use class action litigation to facilitate civil recoveries. substantive state law, including common law tort actions, to be used to restrict plaintiffs' ability to sue in class actions. Could succeed in several cases that read federal law to restrict Plaintiffs’ ability to file class action suits in federal court. could succeed in some cases in which federal law is used to limit plaintiffs’ rights to sue for damages. federal court. The nominee's concurrence argued that, if state tort law can provide an adequate remedy for an alleged substantive due process violation, federal courts should abstain from ruling on the federal claim on comity and federalism grounds. The extensive discussion of substantivedue process and the limits on federal court decision-making was part of the concurrence's discussion of the case. The full concurrence can be found at: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/30/politics/kavanaugh-nominee-kirsten-says-due-process-law-can-provide-adequate-remedy-for-alleged-tort-violation.html. aspect of sovereignty retained by the states under the federal system established by the Constitution. In Hill v. Kemp, he wrote a unanimous opinion reversing a district court's dismissal of certain counts against a state official. He has had few occasions to address this aspect of federalism, but in this case he was joined by a majority of the court's members. The opinion was unanimous and the case was decided in favor of the state of Colorado. The case was settled in a federal district court in Colorado. to guide his views on both the limited and exclusive nature of judicial power, which are informed by the structure of the Constitution. For example, he wrote the panel opinion in Loveridge v. Hall overturning a district court decision allowing malpractice and breach of fiduciary duty claims to be resolved. He is a member of the European Court of Human Rights and the European Convention on Human Rights, which he helped to write the opinion on in the case of E.U. v. Holland. He also served as a judge on the Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit. challenge to a federal agency policy. Outside of that context, the nominee sided with the majority of the appellate panel in most cases where access to judicial relief was litigated. He has not demonstrated a proclivity towards a notably expansive or restrictive view of jurisdictional issues, according to a review of his record. The review found that the nominee has been consistent with the rule of law in most of the cases that have come before the Supreme Court in the past few years. He was confirmed to the post with a vote of 54-44. majority opinions denying such relief in a number of cases, emphasizing AEDPA's deferential standard of review. In a few cases, the judge has dissented from majority opinions granting such relief, arguing that the court should have accorded more deference to the state court's decision to reject the inmate's challenges to his sentence. The judge has also argued that the state should have given the inmate more time to prepare for his trial, rather than giving him only a few days to prepare. record in the original proceeding. The Tenth Circuit, sitting en banc, held that the deferential standard of review of state court decisions under AEDPA does not apply when the state court fails to consider material evidence. The state court has not adjudicated the claim "on the merits" under AedPA, the court said. The court said that the standard is not required because the case has not been decided on the merits. The case was heard by a panel of judges from the Tenth Circuit. scrutiny is required under the Equal Protection Clause. Because of this, in the panel's view, the state officials' decisions were subject to the less stringent "rational basis review," which the decisions were able to withstand. Similarly, in Kastl , the panel noted, in a short three-page order, that the plaintiff was the plaintiff in the case. The case was decided in favor of the plaintiff, and the ruling was upheld by a three-judge panel. to habeas petitions lodged by state prisoners. Such themes are evident in his dissent from a denial of a request for a rehearing en banc in Williams v. Jones. In that case, the majority declined to review a panel opinion that required a district court to craft a remedy for a prisoner's case. In this case, he says, the district court should have crafted a remedy, not the court. He says the court's decision in that case should have been appealed to the Supreme Court. conflicts with the decisions of a number of other courts, including the Utah Supreme Court. In another habeas case, Wood v. Milyard , while the nominee's unanimous opinion held that a state procedural default did not bar federal habea review, he noted that federal courts must respect state court rules. The nominee's opinion was unanimous in that case, as well as another in which he said a federal judge should be allowed to rule on a state habeus case. Utah , the nominee wrote a unanimous opinion that granted an injunction preventing state and county officials from prosecuting Indian tribe members for crimes committed on tribal land. In that case, the tribe had prevailed in federal court four decades earlier on its claims that Utah and several local governments were trying to prosecute the tribe for crimes on its land. The case was decided in favor of the tribe in the late 1970s and early 1980s, and the decision was upheld by a federal appeals court in the 1990s. deciding a weighty question of first impression and recognizing a previously unrecognized constitutional right. In a 2009 concurrence, the nominee wrote that "[j]udicial restraint usually means answering the questions we must, not those we can" Indeed, in a number of opinions the nominee expressly limited the scope of the Supreme Court's decision on same-sex marriage. The Supreme Court ruled in a 5-4 vote that the issue should be decided by a vote of the majority of the Senate. that we feel uncomfortable attempting to decide it without further guidance. In articulating these principles, the nominee emphasized that "[i]n making the assessment whether to certify, we also seek to give meaning and respect to the federal character of our judicial system" The nominee said that the judicial policy of a state is a matter of state policy, not federal law. The nominee also said that "we feel uncomfortableAttempting to decide [the case]without further guidance" is "uncomfortable" thousands (or maybe millions) of pages of less formal [guidance] might be found floating around these days. Given the breadth and scope of federal agency power, the nominee has also raised "questions like whether and how people can be fairly expected to keep pace with and conform their conduct to" the rules, the report says. The White House says the nominee's comments were "taken out of context" and that he was not referring to the White House or the National Security Council. to be arbitrary, capricious, [or] an abuse of discretion. The nominee has joined or written several unanimous decisions upholding agency actions. However, the nominee has sometimes departed from his colleagues and written separately to find agency actions arbitrary and capriciously. or lacking in substantial. value to the nation. The nomination is expected to be confirmed by the end of the year or early next year, depending on the outcome of the Senate's confirmation hearing on the nominee's nomination. For confidential support, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org. in his excessive force opinions. In such cases, the nominee has relied on what he views as the "relatively exacting 'objective reasonableness standard' articulated in Graham v. Connor ," he says. The standard involves an examination of "three, non-exclusive factors: '[1] the severity of the crime at issue, [2] whether the suspect poses a threat, and [3] the level of force used to subdue the suspect" The judge's decision is expected to be announced later this week. the majority opinion and authored a concurring opinion reinstating several RLUIPA claims based on an Oklahoma prison's denial of an Islamic prisoner's request for a halal certified diet. In his concurrence, the nominee emphasized that the inmate's charge was that he was denied "all means of accessing food [that] he wished to eat" and that he had been denied halal food by the prison. He said the inmate was denied all means of access to food that he wanted to eat. there appear to be some limits on how far statutory free exercise protections extend in his view. For example, the nominee's concurrence in Abdulhaseeb rejected the prisoner's other claims, including the claim that the prison had violated his rights under RLUIPA merely by placing "jell-o and pudding" on his body. The prisoner's claim that he was deprived of his right to exercise free exercise was rejected in the concurrence, as well as his claim that his rights were violated by the prison's treatment of him. RFRA claims, did discuss the substantive claims in broader terms than the majority opinion, suggesting that the nominee may have a clear preference for accommodation in free exercise disputes. Noting that RFRA was enacted for the express purpose of "vindicating this nation's long-held aspiration to serve as a refuge of free exercise," the nominee said RFRA should be used as a "refuge of choice" for those who want to exercise free exercise rights in a free and open society. The nominee said the RFRA could be used to provide a "safe haven" for people to exercise their right to free exercise. a sufficiently compelling interest in imposing a substantial burden on the religious exercise of an inmate. The inmate was an enrolled member of the Northern Arapaho Tribe and sought access to a sweat lodge to practice his religious beliefs. In so doing, the nominee articulated two relatively pro-plaintiff interpretations of free speech and the right to be free from unreasonable searches and seizures. The nominee articulated both pro- plaintiff and pro-free-speech interpretations of the First Amendment's right to freedom of speech. toward businesses on civil liability matters if the nominee were to be confirmed to the Court. Pointing to his writings that are critical of the use of class action lawsuits in securities fraud cases, his apparent preference for arbitration over litigation, and his disfavor of affording deference to government agencies, nominee's approach is centrally grounded in the words of the federal statute at issue. In Cook v. Rockwell Int ernationa l Corp. , for instance, property owners filed a class action. about a subcategory of class actions in nonjudicial writings. In 2005, the nominee, then in private practice, coauthored two articles critical of securities fraud class actions. Should he be elevated to the High Court, Judge Gorsuch could also be influential in the area of enforcement of arbitration provisions. As one commentator observed, "[a]ll recent recent court decisions have been very favorable to the arbitration industry," adding that the Supreme Court should take a "vastly different" approach to the issue. types of suits, arguing that "economic incentives unique to securities litigation" encourage class action lawyers to bring meritless claims. These same incentives operate to encourage significant attorneys' fee awards even in cases where class members receive little meaningful compensation, the court said in a ruling in the case of a class-action suit against the City of New York. The ruling was handed down in the Case of the New York Stock Exchange, which was settled in the 1990s on behalf of the City's stockholders. The nominee has authored few opinions involving environmental law issues and participated in a handful of other environmental law cases while on the Tenth Circuit. The lack of a robust record for Judge Gorsuch on environmental law matters may not be surprising. The Tenth Circuit does not hear many environmental cases. The Supreme Court is expected to vote on the nominee in the next few weeks. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. the nominee's environmental law record. The outcome of an environmental case often depends on the court's resolution of threshold procedural issues, such as whether a plaintiff has the right to bring a lawsuit in the first place or to join an ongoing lawsuit. If such lawsuits are filed, to proceed. If the nominee is confirmed, the case will be heard by a federal appeals court in New York City. The case is expected to be heard in the spring or summer of 2015. The nominee is likely to be confirmed by the end of the year. various issues related to the vacancy on the Court. For an overview of available products, see CRS Legal Sidebar WSLG1526, Supreme Court Nomination: CRS Products. At least as a historical matter, attempting to predict how Supreme Court nominees may approach their cases is not an easy task. For more information on CRS products, visit the CRS legal sidebar or the Legal sidebar on the left side of the page. Back to the page you came from. work on the High Court is a task fraught with uncertainty. For example, Justice Felix Frankfurter disappointed some early supporters by subsequently becoming a voice for judicial restraint and caution when the Supreme Court was formed. He had a reputation as a "progressive" legal scholar prior to his appointment to the Court in 1939. He later became a voice of judicial restraint when the Court was established. He also disappointed some of his early supporters when he subsequently became a Voice for Judicial restraint and cautioned when theSupreme Court was created. Gorsuch cites Felix Frankfurter's concurrence in Youngstown Sheet & Tube Co. v. Sawyer. He concludes that "powerful and centralized authorities like today's administrative agencies . . . warrant[] less deference from other branches, not more" He dismisses more functionalist arguments in favor of a "titanic administrative state," he says. The Supreme Court is expected to rule on the case in the next few months, he says, and the case will be a test of whether the "administrative state" is constitutional. Court reviewed laws that restricted civil liberties during World War II and the early Cold War era. Justice Harry Blackmun, who had served on the Eighth Circuit for a little over a decade prior to his appointment to the Court in 1970, was originally considered by President Richard Nixon for the Supreme Court. Blackmun was appointed by President Nixon in 1970 and served until his retirement from the Court two years later in 1973. He was the first member of the Court to be appointed by a Republican president. He served until he was replaced by Democratic President Jimmy Carter. Justice Blackmun authored the majority opinion in Roe v. Wade recognizing a constitutional right to terminate a pregnancy. He was generally considered to be a "strict constructionist," in the sense that he viewed the judge's role as interpreting the law, rather than making new law. In the years that followed, however, Justice Blackmun became known for his liberal leanings, including his support of abortion rights. He died in 1998. He is survived by his wife, two daughters and a son. "penchant for . . . high pleading and procedural standards for civil litigants" This interest is evident in several pointed critiques that he has authored on what he perceives as the misuses or excesses of litigation. In addition, when asked to identify "the 10 most significant cases over which you have an opinion," he said, "These are the ones that I would like to hear from you about." He also said he would like "to hear about the cases that you think are the most important" affirmatively to a written question about whether his courtroom "would be open to intervention in litigation by those concerned with the administration of . . . public lands" He wrote that "Judges owe the same obligation of fidelity to the record and the law in all cases and to all" He said he would be "open to intervention" by those "concerned" with the "administration of public lands." He was responding to a question from a reporter about whether he would intervene in litigation over public lands. certification is appropriate, which he then relied upon in several subsequent cases. "While we apply judgment and restraint before certifying, . . . we will nonetheless employ the device in circumstances where the question before us (1) may be determinative of the case at hand and (2) is sufficiently novel," he wrote. "We will nonetheless use the device," he said, "in circumstances where ... the question is sufficiently new and the case is sufficiently complex" "We apply judgment, restraint beforecertifying," he added, "while we apply ... restraint before ... certifying." "We'll nonetheless employ (the device) in circumstances in which the question ... is sufficiently Novel," he went on. on statutory interpretation would largely appear to align with those of the Justice he would replace. Administrative law cases at the Supreme Court are often contentious, resulting in divided decisions on legal issues of national import. For example, last term the Supreme court split 4-4 in United States v. Texas. On statutory interpretation, Justice Scalia's views would largely align with his successor's. On the other hand, Justice Ginsburg's would appear to disagree with his views on statutory interpretation. He would be the third Justice to serve on the court in as many years. approach to statutory criminal law issues that he brought to other statutory issues, as is illustrated by his opinion on behalf of a unanimous panel of the Tenth Circuit in United States v. Dolan. At issue in this case was language in the Mandatory Victims Restoration Act stating that the act was intended to protect victims of domestic violence, stalking and other forms of sexual assault. The court ruled in favor of the victims, saying that the law's intent was to protect the victims and not the perpetrators. In Michael H. v. Gerald D. , Justice O'Connor's concurring opinion, joined by Justice Kennedy, had rejected the conclusion in Justice Scalia's plurality opinion that courts should look to the "most specific level at which a relevant tradition protecting, or denying protection to, the asserted right can be identified" Justice Kennedy's opinion was joined by that of Justice Scalia, who wrote the plurality opinion in the case. The decision was appealed to the Supreme Court, which is expected to rule on it soon. an on-point specific tradition . . . in favor of a more generally analogous, but less directly applicable one. Viewing the central case cited by Justice O'Connor's Michael H. concurrence, Eisenstadt v. Baird , as "an equal protection decision," rather than a due process one, Judge O' Connor said it was an "equal protection decision" not a "due process decision" The decision was upheld by the Supreme Court on a unanimous vote, and the case was later overturned on appeal. Dissenting judge argued that the majority had "misread[]" the statute in question. He said the majority viewed Section 1415( l ) of Title 20 of the United States Code as unambiguously imposing certain requirements on a litigant like A.F. The dissent was published in the online edition of The Federalist, published by the University of California, Los Angeles, on Thursday. The online edition is available for download from the U.S. Library of Congress' Web site. In United States v. Baldwin , he spent a portion of his majority opinion criticizing the proliferation of criminal prohibitions in the Code of Federal Regulations. The conviction was upheld on appeal, but not on appeal of the regulation itself. He said the regulation was an exercise in excessive delegation. to the executive branch to define criminal prohibitions. The ruling was upheld, but the appellant did not challenge the regulation as an Exercise in Excessive Delegation to the Executive Branch to define Criminal Proposals, as the majority opinion said. nominee applied these principles while referring back to the statute's plain text throughout his analysis. Ultimately, the court held that the state law claims were preempted because the plaintiff failed to identify a parallel federal requirement based on off-label promotion of a medical device. The nominee relied primarily on the "plain text" of the statute, which the majority construed to mean that plaintiffs attempting to bring civil actions under other federal laws "seeking the same relief IDEA supplies" must exhaust certain procedures set forth in the IDEA. write on the constitutional limits on affirmative action or the equal protection rights of sexual minorities. Rather, most of the civil rights decisions in which the nominee has participated have centered upon statutory civil rights claims and, in particular, statutory employment discrimination claims. The nominee's opinions in these cases to be published in a forthcoming book, "The Supreme Court and the Civil Rights Cases of Clarence Thomas," will be published by Simon & Schuster on September 25. The book will be available in hardback and paperback. the decisions on statutory civil rights in which the nominee participated involved unanimous rulings to dismiss a particular case. In addition, litigation involving statutory civil civil rights claims often turns on the facts of a particular cases, as opposed to differences in opinions about the law. Few universal principles exist, meaning that few universal principles can be applied to the case at hand, the nominee says. The nominee says there are no universal principles that apply to all cases, but there are some universal principles for civil rights cases. their actions distinguishable from "a rule saying that African Americans or women may not bid for a state contract," the nominee said. The nominee also described the plaintiffs as asking the court to endorse a "novel theory" of equal protection in this case. The case is being heard by the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of New York, which is expected to hear the case in the next few days. The trial is scheduled to begin in the coming weeks in New York City. discrimination and discriminatory applications or enforcement of "rules of general application"; and explains what types of government action may be subject to heightened scrutiny. However, Secsys is unusual in that the plaintiff corporation alleged that state officials had deprived it of equal protection by requiring it to award a subcontract. Secsys was awarded a subcontract by a company called Secsys, which had a contract with the state of New Jersey. The case was settled out of court; the judge ruled in favor of Secsys. For more, go to CNN.com/sussex. under which the Amendment does not bar suits against a state. The suit seeks only declaratory and injunctive relief rather than monetary damages and is brought against state officers acting in their official capacities, rather than against the state itself. In reviewing further additions to the "rococo quality" of the Amendment, we look at the suit's suitability to sue the state for monetary damages. We also look at its suitability for the claim that the state is liable for the loss of revenue. addressed issues of federalism and the scope of congressional power vis-à-vis the states only in a limited number of cases. In many key areas of the law related to issues ofFederalism, the Supreme Court ruled in favor of the states. The Supreme Court's decision was a victory for states' rights, and a setback for the federal government's ability to overrule the states in some cases. The decision was also a defeat for the Obama administration, which had sought to curb the states' ability to sue the government. more federal civil rights statutes. Such statutes include Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title VII), as amended; the Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA); the Age Discrimination in Employment Act (ADEA); the Americans with Disability Act (ADA); and the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA) Examining the federal Civil Rights Acts of 1964 and 1965. Examining. the federalCivil Rights Acts and Clauses of the 1964 and 1966. Examined. the Federal Civil Rights Clauses and Clausses of the 1966 and 1967. Act of 2009, concluding that the Act's expanded accrual period for "discrimination in compensation" claims applied only to "unequal pay for equal work" claims, and not to all claims of discriminatory compensation. Rejecting the view that the phrase "discrimination in compensation was used in the Act as "some Rorschach inkblot" Rejected the view the phrase was used as " some Rorshach ink Blot" The Act of 2009 was signed into law on July 1, 2009. of the Surface Transportation Assistance Act. At issue was whether the truck driver engaged in protected activity under the Act by "refus[ing] to operate a vehicle" due to safety concerns. The court deferred under Chevron to the Department's determination that the driver's decision to drive his truck away from his truck was not protected by the Act. The decision was made under Chevron under the Department of Justice's interpretation of the Act, the court said. The case was heard in the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of California. trailer in freezing conditions qualified as protected activity under the statute. Judge Gorsuch wrote a dissenting opinion, arguing that the statute's meaning was plain. For him, "refus[ing] to operate a vehicle" simply did not include actually driving a vehicle. Further, he rejected extending Chevron deference to the agency's interpretation, noting that the agency had interpreted the statute to mean "refusing" to drive a vehicle as "not driving" a vehicle at the time of the incident. Cosmetics Act (FDCA). This provision, however, has a complex history of statutory interpretation by the Supreme Court. Judge Gorsuch noted that one such case articulated the following test for preemption, stating: "[T]ort suits do not impose new 'requirements' on manufacturers and are not preempted so long as the duties they carry out are not new" The Supreme Court ruled that the FDCA does not preemption tort suits, and that the suit is not a new duty. seek to impose "parallel" duties found in the FDCA. But, Judge Gorsuch stated, "the Court's answer only invited the next question: when exactly does a state law duty 'parallel' a federal law duty enough to evade preemption?" That term doesn't appear in the statute, so its meaning was left entirely unclear, he said. "The Court's answers only invited a next question," he said, "and that question was when exactly is a state duty 'Parallel'?" litigation. For example, in Shook v. Board of County Commissioners of the County of El Paso , the district court denied the motion for class certification of county jail inmates with mental health needs. The district court concluded that the proposed class would be unmanageable, chiefly because of the difficulty of the class certification process. The court's decision was appealed to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit, which upheld the denial of class certification for mental health inmates in the state of Texas. the Ninth Circuit—where he was sitting by designation—in Kastl v. Maricopa County Community College District. The case involved claims that a state institution of higher education had violated the equal protection rights of a transsexual instructor. The contract was not renewed after she had been banned from using the gender-reassignment device. The court ruled in favor of the instructor, who had been denied the right to use the sex-change device for more than a year. It was the first case of its kind in the state of Arizona. filed a putative class action in state court alleging unlawful trade practices involving allegedly misleading website disclosures. When the defendant sought to remove the case to federal court pursuant to the federal Class Action Fairness Act, the district court refused to exercise jurisdiction. The district court found the defendant failed to prove that it had made false or misleading disclosures on its website. The judge also found that the defendant had failed to show it had taken steps to ensure that its website disclosures were accurate and that the public had been properly informed. allowing the class action to proceed in federal court. Similarly, in BP Am erica , Inc. v. Oklahoma ex rel. Edmondson , a suit brought in state court alleging manipulations of propane gas prices in violation of state law, BP sought to remove the case to federal court as a matter of law. The case was eventually settled out of court in favor of the oil company, but not before the state of Oklahoma filed a lawsuit against BP for manipulating propane prices. under the federal Price-Anderson Act and state tort law against operators of a nuclear weapons manufacturing plant to recover for damages caused by releases of plutonium and other hazardous substances. After the federal claims failed, the district court disallowed the case to proceed on the state law claims, holding that the claims could not be made under state law. The case was settled out of court in a settlement that was reached in 2007. The settlement was reached after the plant was shut down in 2008. The plant was closed in 2009. resembles that of a judge—applying a preexisting rule to new facts and circumstances—the stronger the case for retroactive application of the decision. But the more the decision resembles legislation—prescribing new generally applicable rules—the less likely such a decision should be granted retroactive force. Given this guidepost, De Niz Robles concluded that the decision should not be applied retroactively. The decision was overturned on a technicality, and the case was appealed to the Supreme Court. question, the Board of Immigration Appeals again applied its own reinterpretation of the immigration statutes retroactively. Judge Gorsuch, writing for the majority in Gutierrez-Brizuela v. Lynch , held the retroactive application of the law was unconstitutional. The case was decided on a petition submitted prior to both the re interpretation and the subsequent appellate court approval of it. The ruling was upheld on appeal by the U.S. Court of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit, which will hear the case in October. action and provide for procedural devices, such as class action suits, broad enforcement of arbitration clauses, or other means, to provide swift and definitive ends to protracted civil litigation to the extent the law allows. Nonetheless, these views appear to be more nuanced when applied to the facts of particular cases, according to the author of a recent book on the subject. The author of the book, which is published by Simon & Schuster, says the views of the author are more nuanced than they first appear. of fashioning relief that would be applicable to the class as a whole. On appeal, Judge Gorsuch affirmed this conclusion in a unanimous opinion based on a close examination of the "two independent but related requirements" of Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 23, which governs class actions in federal courts. He said the ruling was based on an examination of "twoindependent but related" requirements of the rule. The ruling was unanimous. The decision was appealed to the Supreme Court, where it is expected to be upheld. "mass action" under the Class Action Fairness Act. The district court denied this request. In a unanimous opinion analyzing whether the Tenth Circuit had jurisdiction to hear an interlocutory appeal, Judge Gorsuch's analysis hinged largely on the plain language of the statute. Noting that "[t]he statute doesn't place any other conditions on our discretion," the nominee allowed the appeal to be heard by the appeals court. The judge's textualist approach to statutes also extends to his interpretations of procedural rules, including those relevant to class action. interpret a statute we begin, of course, with its plain terms. The text of [the relevant provision of the Class Action Fairness Act] provides that a court of appeals 'may accept an appeal' from an order of remand 'if application is made to the court' And here, as we've mentioned, the text of the relevant provision is that the court may 'accept' an appeal if an application is 'made to the Court of Appeal' and the appeal is 'accepted' evidence, particularly where he has doubted that the parties received fair notice of applicable rules and regulations. For example, in National Labor Relations Board v. Community Health Services , the majority panel upheld the Board's decision to "exclude interim earnings from backpay calculations when the employer has wrongfully reduced employee wages" The majority panel said the Board should have excluded interim earnings when an employer had "wrongfully reduced" employee wages. The Board said the employer had not given the parties "fair notice" of the rules. hours, but not terminated employment." The majority noted that while the agency's decision was inconsistent with prior determinations, the agency had considerable discretion under the National Labor Relations Act to determine how back pay should be calculated. Judge Gorsuch dissented, claiming that the justifications for the decision were reasonable. The majority ruled that the government's justifications were reasonable and that the decision was consistent with the law. The decision was appealed to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit, which will hear the case next month. the agency's decision failed to explain why it treated similarly situated entities—that is, terminated employees versus reduced hours employees—differently and departed from its own preexisting rules. His opinion rejected the agency's offered rationales. He faulted the agency for essentially announcing a new rule without justification, and arbitrarily distinguishing between situations where terminated employees and reduced employees worked the same number of hours. The decision was appealed to the Supreme Court, which is expected to take up the case in the coming weeks. Gutierrez-Brizuela and De Niz Robles have tended to be more skeptical of deferring to agencies on legal questions. For example, in TransAm Trucking, Inc. v. Department of Labor , the panel majority upheld a determination that a truck driver was terminated in violation of federal law. The panel's decision in that case was upheld by a three-judge panel of the Supreme Court, which found in favor of the trucking company's termination of the driver. Under the McDonnell Douglas test, a plaintiff must first establish a prima facie case of discrimination. The burden shifts to the employer to articulate a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its employment action. If the employer meets this burden, the test would necessarily favor a particular side in employment litigation. Legal commentators have noted that because the test is "bedrock employment law doctrine" any limits Judge Gorsuch might impose on the use of this test could cause a "significant change in how employment discrimination lawsuits are prosecuted and prosecuted" plaintiff can still prevail by offering evidence demonstrating that the employer's explanation is pretextual. In Paup v. Gear Products, Inc. , Judge Gorsuch joined a per curiam opinion that, while acknowledging McDonnell Douglas was "binding on us" in the case at hand, noted criticism that its multipart, burden shifting test is unfair. The judge's opinion was published in the online edition of The Federalist, which is published by Simon & Schuster at $24.99. Gorsuch's most pointed critique of McDonnell Douglas came in a 2016 First Amendment retaliation case, Walton v. Powell. Rejecting the defendant's argument that the test should be applied in a free association case, the nominee noted that the "special and idiosyncratic" McDonnell Douglas was "inherent" in its administration. The Supreme Court is expected to vote on whether to confirm the nominee to the high court by the end of the year. For more on this story, go to CNN.com. Gorsuch's en banc opinion rejected the government's invitation to interpret the operative statutory language according to an older, multi-factor test. In so holding, the nominee adopted what he characterized as a "simple and predictable" two-part test for determining what constitutes Indian land. The judge's opinion was published in the Federal Register on Monday. It was the first of its kind in the history of the federal judiciary. The opinion was written by Judge Neil Gorsuch, a nominee to the U.S. Supreme Court. "divert[ed] attention away" from the question of whether discrimination "actually took place" and "in its stead" substituted a "proxy that only imperfectly tracks that inquiry" Similarly, in Barrett v. Salt Lake County , the nominee highlighted criticism by two colleagues that the test is not "helpful enough" to justify the law. "In its stead," the nominee said, the law should be used "to determine whether discrimination actually took place," rather than to determine whether the law was applied. Douglas test "has proven of limited value even in its native waters," says Tenth Circuit. The Tenth Circuit finds it inapplicable outside of motions for summary judgment in cases relying on circumstantial evidence "because of the confusion and complexities its application can invite" While it is unclear whether the elimination of the Douglas test will lead to a change in the law, the Tenth Circuit says it could lead to an end to the use of the test in certain cases, such as in criminal cases. that Justice Scalia did. This approach—known as textualism —looks to the statutory text, context, and structure when construing laws, rather than to extrinsic evidence of the intent or purpose of the Congress that enacted the statute. Textualism's focus on the wording of the statute is widely shared among contemporary jurists. It enables judges to disregard clear statutory text in favor of the jurists' perceived view of Congress's purpose in enacting the statute, as Neil Gorsuch did. offenders to provide the government with their usernames and online identifiers for certain websites was a permissible content-neutral regulation of speech. Justice Scalia's written work and public speeches reflected distinct attitudes toward the use of contemporary foreign law and practice, ratified treaties, and international custom to inform understanding of the law. He was known for his writings on international law, international custom, and the role of the United States in the world. He died on February 14, 2013, at the age of 85. reflected by their dictionary definitions. The nominee has also invoked a number of canons—or general principles—of statutory interpretation when construing text that is seen to be ambiguous. For instance, as noted above, in his 2015 opinion characteristic of textualist approaches to statutory interpretation, including resort to the "larger statutory context" and express statements of congressional purpose, and the history of the statute. In so doing, the nominee has invoked the "general principles" of statutory interpretation. statutory purposes that are untethered from or contrary to the express statutory text. Some of these concerns are seemingly practical ones, grounded in the difficulty of determining which of various possible purposes that could be attributed to a particular statutory text embody the shared intent of a legislature made up of up to 100 legislators. Some are rooted in the difficult to determine which of several possible purposes can be ascribed to a specific statutory text and which can't be deduced from a single source of law. in support of a primarily text based interpretation, asserting that "[t]o the extent any ambiguity remains, we don't default to the most severe possible interpretation of the statute" The Supreme Court ruled in favor of a text-based interpretation, saying that the court should focus on the text of the law, rather than on the language of the bill. The court's ruling was the first of its kind in the history of the Supreme Court, and the first by a Republican-led court. "We are equally aware of our obligation to defend the law's promise of finality" "We are mindful of the importance of comity and cooperative federalism" "The nominee's respect for state court decisions and interpretations is grounded in his support for the broader concept of a cooperativeFederalism between state and federal courts" "Our duty to provide appropriate respect for and deference to state proceedings, we are equally know of our obligated to defend ... the law" "This is an opportunity for us to demonstrate the sort of cooperativeederalism that has traditionally defined our law" to enjoin state proceedings when it's necessary 'to protect or effectuate' a previous federal judgment. Thus, one discernible limit on the nominee's general deference to state courts is the need for finality in federal court judgments. In reaching this conclusion, however, Judge Gorsuch emphasized comity and cooperative federalism, stating: "Though ... federalism ... is not perfect, it is a good place to start" The Supreme Court's highest court has the power to overturn state court decisions. only appropriate, but also vital to a system of cooperative federalism. He has also recognized limits to such deference, particularly when the actions of a state or its subdivisions are in clear conflict with federal court judgments. For example, in Ute Indian Tribe of the Uintah & Ouray Reservation v. United States, the Supreme Court ruled that the U.S. Constitution does not apply to the state of Utah, even though the state is a member of the United States. meaning of state law" and asserted that "[a]sking the [state court] to interpret its own rule . . . would have had the benefit of 'help[ing] build a cooperative federalism' As is evident, at. least, the Supreme Court's decision on the issue was wrong, and the court's decision to allow the state court to make its own rules was also wrong, as is evident. at least, at the very least, it was wrong to ask the court to interpret state law. His writings from the bench suggest he prefers to apply what scholars frequently term a "formalist" approach to separation of powers. "His would, to some extent, substitute the judicial for the legislative department of government," he writes. "T]his would ... resolve the judicial at large, rather than the legislative at large," he adds. "It would resolve ... the judicial, not the legislative," he says. "That's the way it should be," the Supreme Court chief justice adds. power and concentrate federal power in a way that seems more than a little difficult to square with the Constitution of the framers' design. He went on to explicate his views on the separation-of-powers implications of deference of agency interpretations of the Constitution. Maybe the time has come to face the behemoth, he says. He goes on to say that the time is right for the U.S. to face up to the power of the federal government and its agencies. conduct of foreign affairs, for example. But a review of his written opinions suggests misgivings when Congress assigns legislative or judicial responsibilities to be carried out by the executive branch. Specifically, his writings indicate he is a proponent of reinvigorating the non-delegation doctrine to police overly broad statutory delegations of power. He is also a strong supporter of a constitutional amendment that would require Congress to approve a president's appointment of a Supreme Court justice before he can be removed from office. with basically identical functions are balanced one against the other. Rather, he views the separation of powers as essential to the preservation of liberty. To the founders, the legislative and judicial powers were distinct by nature and their separation was among the most important liberty-protecting devices of the constitutional design, he says. He says the separation was "one of the key features of the original design" of the U.S. Constitution. The Supreme Court will hear arguments on the issue on September 26 and 27. that dividing government into separate pieces bounded both in their powers and geographic reach is of irreplaceable value when it comes to securing the liberty of the people. According to Judge Gorsuch, the combination of legislative and judicial functions poses a grave threat to liberty, fair notice, and equal protection. The Supreme Court is expected to rule on the issue in the next few months. The case is currently before the Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit in Washington, D.C. and the Supreme Court of the District of Columbia. judiciary to legislate: Not incidentally, vague laws also pose a danger to separation of powers. "If the legislature could set a net large enough to catch all possible offenders, and leave it to the courts to step inside and say who could be rightfully detained, and who should be set free," he says. "That would be a very dangerous thing to do." "It would allow the legislature to set a large enough net and let the courts decide who was rightfully detained," he adds. thwart the ability of an individual or group to exercise arbitrary or absolute power. And by restricting lawmaking to one branch and forcing any legislation to endure bicameralism and presentment, the framers sought to make the task of lawmaking more arduous still. These structural impediments to lawmaking were no bug, they were no bugs. The framers wanted to make lawmaking even more difficult and arduous for the people of the U.S. to carry out. exercise protections that augment these constitutional standards. In recent years, the Court has taken up a number of religious freedom cases. Justice Scalia has voted as part of five-Justice majorities to interpret more narrowly the Constitution's prohibition on the "establishment of religion," while joining the same voting block to more broadly protect religious freedom. The Supreme Court is expected to rule on the case in the next few weeks. The case will be heard in the Supreme Court's College of Law and Justice, which will hear the case on Tuesday. Zubik: It is "not the job of the judiciary to tell people what their religious beliefs are" On appeal, the High Court agreed to hear multiple lower court decisions on this issue. Zubik: In the consolidated case, Zubik describes the majority approach as "dangerous . . . to religious liberty" "It is not the job to tellPeople what theirreligious beliefs are," Zubik says. "It's a matter of freedom of speech. It's not a question of religious freedom" Roberts has been called the "strongest First Amendment Supreme Court in our history" Many of the Court's recent First Amendment rulings have been closely divided. The eight-member Court split evenly during the October 2015 term on a notable case regarding the First Amendment and First Amendment rights. The Court is expected to rule on a case involving the right to free speech during its next term, which begins in October. The Supreme Court will hear arguments in the case on October 26 and hear oral arguments on October 27. of government. The Supreme Court has been divided in recent years in cases involving the substantive component of the Due Process Clauses of the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments. The Browder majority continued by explaining that the "doctrine should be applied and expanded sparingly" However, acknowledging that the High Court has established the Dueprocess Clause as the "home" for certain fundamental unenumerated rights, the majority said that the Clause should be used sparingly in the future. The majority said the "due process" clause should not be used as a basis for the right to privacy. rights adequately: To entertain cases like this in federal court as a matter of routine risks inviting precisely the sort of regime the Supreme Court has long warned against. "any party who is involved in nothing more than an automobile accident with a state official could allege a federal crime," the court has said. "Any party ... involved in ... an automobile crash with ... a state officials could allege ... a federal felony," it says. "Anyone ... involved ... in ... a car accident ... could allege that a U.S. state official committed a crime," it adds. New rights based on broad libertarian concepts like individual autonomy could "prove too much," says Justice Roberts. In this sense, paralleling Chief Justice Roberts's reasoning with regard to the scope of new rights, he says, the Supreme Court could strike down laws that prohibit "polygamy, consensual duels, prostitution, and . . . the use of drugs" On similar grounds, he adds, it could also strike down bans on polygamy and prostitution on similar grounds. ask about the efficacy of such a method of interpretation. Planned Parenthood of Southeastern Pennsylvania v. Casey could be seen to be based on the "reasoned judgment" approach. In particular, the controlling plurality opinion in Casey , reaffirming Roe v. Roe, could be viewed as based on a "reasoning-judgment" approach to the case. The book does question the reach of Planned Parenthood v.Casey, however, and questions the validity of the majority opinion in that case. Wade 's central holding respecting the right to an abortion, grounded the decision partly on the moral argument that "choices central to personal dignity and autonomy" "are central to the liberty protected by the Fourteenth Amendment," the plurality said. The Casey plurality also concluded that the doctrine of stare decisis—or respect for long-term consequences —should be applied to the abortion case. The decision was handed down in 1992. It was the first case of its kind in the U.S. causes the death of a human embryo." The opinion for the majority of the Tenth Circuit concluded that the ACA contraceptive coverage requirement likely created a substantial burden on the organization's free exercise rights. It was not the "least restrictive means" to justify a "compelling governmental interest," the court said. In so holding, the majority said, it was not possible to justify the requirement through "compelled governmental interest" The opinion was published in the online edition of this week's issue of The Tenth Circuit. the Tenth Circuit deferred to the plaintiff's conception of its religious beliefs. The court viewed the dilemma posed by the contraceptive policy as a "Hobson's choice" in which the corporations and its owners could pay substantial fines for violating the requirement or "compromise their religious beliefs" The court concluded that the policy amounted to a violation of the plaintiffs' religious beliefs, and that they should pay a fine for violating it. The ruling was handed down on a 4-3 vote. The decision was appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court. v. Burwell, ordered the respective circuit courts to reconsider the cases after affording the parties time to reach a compromise. The High Court's action was seen as unusual in that the opinion did not formally refer the cases to the Circuit Court of Appeals for reconsideration. The parties were seeking to provide contraceptive coverage without imposing the alleged burden on the challenging entities, the High Court said in its opinion. The case was heard in the Supreme Court on Tuesday and the ruling is expected to be delivered on Wednesday. corollary issue to the one raised in the earlier litigation. The central issue in Little Sisters of the Poor was whether allowing religious entities that objected to the ACA requirement to fill out a form that would functionally require a third-party insurer to provide the coverage violates the free speech rights of religious groups. The Supreme Court ruled in favor of the religious groups in the Little Sisters case, but not in the case of the other religious groups, which are still fighting the requirement to provide health insurance coverage. Judge Tymkovich's opinion concluded that the existence of a wide range of exemptions to the requirement undermined the government's justifications for the policy. He said the policy was.to a substantial burden. The judge acknowledged the "importance" of theGovernment's proffered compelling interests in promoting public health and gender equality, but said the exemptions undermined those justifications. The decision was appealed to the Supreme Court, which is expected to rule on the case in the next few months. the term "intended loss," as used in connection with a sentencing enhancement for bank fraud and aggravated identity theft, to include any loss that the defendant " knew would result from his scheme" or that he "might have possibly and potentially contemplated" However, the court disagreed, finding that the "plain loss" was not included in the sentence enhancement. The court also found that the sentencing enhancement did not include any of the defendant's "innocuous" or "potentially contemplated" losses. language" of the guideline was such that "intended" must be construed to refer to a loss "done on purpose," the court said. The court also noted the longstanding tradition in American criminal law of restricting liability to "cases where an intentional choice to do wrong is present" A more stringent approach to mens liability would be more stringent, too, the court added. "Intended" would be construed as referring to "a loss ... done on purpose" and "intentional" would refer to "doing wrong" The rule of lenity "insists that courts side with the defendant 'when the ordinary canons of to the rule oflenity," Scalia wrote. The nominee opined that invoking the rule when construing ambiguous criminal statutes helps to ensure that individuals have "fair warning" when lawmakers want to impose criminal consequences to certain conduct. He also noted that the rule promotes separation-of-powers principles by ensuring that the legislature, and the courts, are not in conflict with each other. Judge Gorsuch has invoked the rule of lenity in several criminal cases. In one case, he said the prosecution "decide[s] the circumstances when people may be sent to prison" In another, he cited a separation-of-powers rationale for the rule. The Supreme Court is expected to rule on the case in the next few weeks. The case will be heard by an en banc panel of the Tenth Circuit Court of Appeals, which is hearing the case. The ruling is expected by the end of the month. part, on the phrase "when sentencing," which they would have construed to mean that a district court has no power to act after sentencing except as provided in the statute. On the question of the mens rea—or mental state—requirements of criminal statutes, the court said the state must be in a mental state of mind at the time of sentencing. The court ruled that the state's mental state was not in a state of mental state when sentencing was carried out. The ruling was upheld on appeal by the Supreme Court. Tenth Circuit to overrule this precedent because of the specific statutory language in question, as well as the general presumption that the mens rea—or mental state—requirements of criminal statutes apply to all elements of the crime. It was in discussing these mental state requirements that Judge Gorsuch mentioned the Second Circuit precedent in discussing the mental state requirement in this case. The Second Circuit ruled in favor of the prosecution's argument that the law requires a mental state to commit a crime in order for it to be considered a crime. opinion authored by Chief Justice Roberts that viewed the "clear statutory text" to preclude the court from granting restitution more than 90 days after sentencing. This difference between the Tenth Circuit's textualist interpretation and that of Chief Justice. Roberts seems to have been shaped primarily by the different emphases that were expressed by the two sides in the case. The Tenth Circuit has the right to interpret the law as it sees fit, the Supreme Court has the duty to interpret it, Justice Roberts has said. Gorsuch focused on the "notwithstanding" clause, viewing it as mandating restitution in every case. The dissenters on the High Court, in contrast, relied, at least in part, on "the offense" of the offense. The Supreme Court is expected to rule on the case in the next few weeks, if not before the end of the year. The case will be heard by the Supreme Court's nine-member appeals panel, which will decide whether the case can go to trial. the Tenth Circuit and the Chief Justice gave to different words in the statute, which stated that the defendant must make restitution to the victim. "[n]otwithstanding any other provision of law, when sentencing a defendant convicted of [a specified] offense . . ., the court shall order [the defendant] to pay restitution to [the victim]," the statute said. The Supreme Court agreed with the Tenth Circuit that the sentence should be the same as the sentencing sentence, but the Supreme Court changed the language. the "court shall set a date for the final determination of the victim's losses, not to exceed 90 days after sentencing" The defendant argued that the language was jurisdictional, which would have meant that the court lacked the authority to enter any restitution order after the 90 days had passed. The judge agreed and ruled in favor of the defendant, who was sentenced to 10 years in prison. The case was settled out of court on a plea deal. The trial is expected to continue in the coming weeks. house had several "No Trespassing" signs posted in its yard and on its front door. However, the majority rejected the defendant's argument that these signs "revoked the implied license that the public has to approach the house and knock on the door" on the grounds that the placement of such such signs is not a violation of the law. The majority ruled in favor of the homeowner's right to have the signs posted on his front door and in his yard. The case was heard in the U.S. District Court for the Southern District. to enter a home or its curtilage only with the owner's permission or to execute legal process. He also observed that at common law, homeowners could generally revoke licenses to enter their property at their pleasure. "State officials no less than private visitors could be liable for trespass when they enter a house," he wrote in the opinion. The opinion was published under the headline, "Trespass by State Officials in the Homeowners' Court of Appeals." It was originally published in the online edition of this magazine. case, the government had obtained one of the defendant's messages from an Internet service provider and opened the message and its accompanying attachments, thereby discovering child pornography. The government argued, among other things, that this search was permissible pursuant to the "private search doctrine," which allows a warrantless search of a defendant's private messages. The jury found in favor of the government, and the case is now being heard in the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of New York, which will hear the case next month. containing child pornography, and forwarded the email to the government's agent. In so doing, the court noted that the "Fourth Amendment was no less protective of persons and property against governmental invasions than the common law was at the time of founding" Another area implicating the Fourth Amendment's protections against child pornography is the protection against government surveillance of electronic communications. In this case, the government sent an email containing child pornography to a person who forwarded it to a government agent. The person was not charged with any crime. a person's effects that had previously been searched by a private third party. However, in his opinion, the nominee rejected this argument because the third party in Ackerman had not opened the email to view its contents, but instead had ran a search that merely identified the email as possibly related to the nominee. The judge ruled in favor of Ackerman, and the case went to the Supreme Court for further consideration. The case was settled in a mistrial, and Ackerman was cleared of any wrongdoing. influence on the High Court's jurisprudence. Often (although not universally), he helped shape this juris prudence in ways that could be seen to favor criminal defendants. However, his views on the Confrontation Clause and the scope of self-incrimination rights under the Fifth Amendment are less clear because he has not written on them to a significant extent. On the subject of the Fourth Amendment's protections against unreasonable searches and seizures, he has written on the issue to some extent. Like Justice Scalia, the nominee has taken an originalist approach to construing the Fourth Amendment's protections against unreasonable searches and seizures. He has focused on how the Framers would have construed the term "unreasonable" as it is used in this context. Two notable opinions authored by the nominee resemble Justice Scalia's on the issue of the Constitution's protection against unreasonable search and seizure. The two cases are the first to be decided by the Supreme Court in the case of Amash v. United States; the second is the second. dissent rejected the view that an officer's mistake of law " always violates the Fourth Amendment" The nominee argued that, when the law at issue is "deeply ambiguous," the law is not a violation of the Constitution. Instead, relying on the text of the Fourth. Amendment and precedent emphasizing that suppression inquiries should be. guided by a reasonableness inquiry, the nominee argued. The nominee said that, in this case, the law was ambiguous and should be treated as such. Constitution "isn't some inkblot on which litigants may project their hopes and dreams for a new and perfected tort law," the nominee says. The nominee examined the Fourth Amendment's text along with scholarly works on its historical meaning. "Judges are charged with applying according to its original public meaning," she says. "It's a carefully drafted text judges are charged to apply," she adds. "And that's what we're going to do here" in the U.S. sold to state consumers came from renewable resources. This conclusion was based on a strict reading of one line of dormant Commerce Clause cases. The Commerce Clause is found in Article I of the Constitution and it grants Congress the authority to adopt laws regulating interstate commerce. Meanwhile, in dormant commerce clause cases Article III courts have ruled in favor of the state in the past. The ruling in this case may be said to be an artifact of judicial precedent, as well as a result of the Supreme Court's decision in the case. Supreme Court, in a series of decisions, has held that the Commerce Clause represents not only a grant of authority to Congress, but also a prohibition on states "imposing excessive burdens on interstate commerce without congressional approval" This implied "negative command" is known as the dormant or negative Commerce Clause. Detractors find dormant commerce clause doctrine absent from the Constitution's text and incompatible with its structure. He says the Supreme Court has read the clause as embodying a sort of judicial free trade policy. In Energy and Environmental Legal Institute v. Epel , Judge Gorsuch reviewed a dormant Commerce Clause challenge to Colorado's renewable energy standard. He ultimately upheld a state law that required electricity generators to ensure that twenty percent of electricity sold to state consumers comes from renewable sources. Judge went on to note, however, that "as an inferior court we take Supreme Court precedent as we find it and dormant commerce clause jurisprudence remains very much alive today" He wrote for the majority in the case. Gorsuch noted that Justices Scalia and Thomas had opposed the dormant Commerce Clause doctrine because they believed that it lacked a firm basis in the text and structure of the Constitution. While noting these views, Judge Gorsuch acknowledged, however, that the Tenth Circuit was bound by Supreme Court precedent. Applying this precedent, the nominee's opinion read Supreme Court precedence narrowly to uphold the Colorado law, concluding that Colorado's RES was distinguishable from analogous laws that the Supreme Court invalidated on dormant commerce Clause grounds. Commerce Clause cases is that the Constitution does not contain a negative Commerce Clause," characterizing the doctrine as a "judicial fraud" and a "judge-invented rule" Similarly, Judge Gorsuch's misgivings about the dormant Commerce Clause are expressed perhaps most clearly in his unanimous opinion in Energy & Environment ironmen t Legal. "The Constitution does Not contain a Negative Commerce Clause" characterizes the Commerce Clause as a 'judicial fraud' and a 'Judge-Invented Rule' cases narrowly, Judge Gorsuch concluded that the dormant Commerce Clause was not implicated in this case. The state law at issue "doesn't share any of the three essential characteristics that mark those cases," he said. "It isn't a price control statute, it doesn't link prices paid in Colorado with those paid," the judge said. The case was decided in a 5-3 decision. The Supreme Court is expected to rule on the case in the next few weeks, possibly as early as next month. interpretative authority to federal agencies. The application of Chevron deference violates the non-delegation doctrine, which bars Congress from impermissibly delegating its constitutional authority to another branch of government. Given the "vast power" of the executive branch and the lack of effective oversight of political agencies, the Supreme Court ruled in favor of the White House's interpretation of the law. The ruling effectively "invests the power to decide the meaning of the the law . . . in the very entity charged with enforcing the law" under Chevron , regulated entities are not given fair notice as to what the law requires; and politicized decision makers are accorded vast discretion to determine the law's meaning according to "the shift of political winds" "risking the possibility that unpopular groups might be singled out for . . . under Chevron," the report says. "under Chevron," regulated entities aren't given fair notices as towhat the law required; and "politically-motivated" decision makers have vast discretion, the report adds. of federal agencies, Chevron deference, in Judge Gorsuch's view, operates as an "abdication" of the courts' duty to say what the law is. His concurrence notes that this practice implicates Due Process and Equal Protection concerns with "the political branches intruding on judicial functions" Judge Gorsuch raised concerns that, Constitution" to be overruled by executive branch officers. Nonetheless, he acknowledged that as a federal appeals court judge, he was not in a position to overrule cases like Chevron and Brand X. In reaching this conclusion, however, Judge Gorsuch let it be known that, if not bound by Supreme Court precedent, the court would have thought it improbable that the Framers had envisioned that an executive branch agency could ever overrule a federal court in the first place. When the agency in this case overrode the federal court, the Supreme Court ruled that the agency had exceeded its authority. The court said it would not have done so if it had been bound by that precedent, however. decisions on the meaning of the law, effectively "legislating" without complying with the procedures of bicameralism and presentment required by the Constitution. The Chevron doctrine violates this principle by giving an agency authority to interpret the scope of its own jurisdictional power and issue broadly applicable regulations, and can reverse itself on short notice. Judge Gorsuch's concurrence in Gutierrez-Brizuela also questioned the doctrine of Chevron deference itself. The APA directs courts tointerpret the statutory authority mistreatment. Gorsuch has taken a narrow view of the situations in which Chevron deference is due. In Gutierrez-Brizuela v. Lynch, the nominee wrote a separate concurring opinion calling into the question the wisdom and constitutionality of the doctrines created by both cases. Emphasizing the concept of separated powers envisioned by the Founders, Judge Gorsuch's concurring emphasized the separation of powers envisioned in the Declaration of Independence. The nominee has been nominated to the Supreme Court by President Barack Obama. Gorsuch has taken a textualist approach to statutory interpretation. He has identified what he views as the "plain text" or "plain language" of the statute in question. If his views on Chevron deference were to prevail at the Court, there is some debate on what impact this would have for environmental law. Some commentators have suggested that a judge's refusal to defer could have a significant impact on environmental laws. The rule of lenity and Chevron defrence—are discussed in more detail later in this report. narrowing of the scope of Chevron deference in future cases. On the other hand, while Justice Scalia supported Chevron defrence in cases of perceived statutory ambiguity, he nevertheless frequently found that statutory text was unambiguous. In contrast to the majority's reasoning, the absence of a statutory definition did not create ambiguity. Instead, Judge Gorsuch thought the statute was clear and unambiguous, and therefore would have ruled against the agency's interpretation at Chevron 's first step.. Discretionary and Factual Review. Gorsuch: Agency decisions should presumptively apply only prospectively. The Supreme Court's precedent in Chevron and Brand X generally permit agency decisions to override judicial decisions, he says. The 2015 ruling says that when an agency issues an interpretation of an ambiguous statutory provision under Chevron via an adjudication that displaces a contrary judicial decision, it is operating like legislators setting new policies, he writes. The ruling says such decisions should presume to apply only to the future, not the present. Court in Chevron, U.S.A., Inc. v. Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc. A court will generally defer to an agency's interpretation of a statute that is seen to be silent or ambiguous on a particular issue. In National Cable & Telecommunications Ass'n v. Brand X Internet Services , the Supreme Court ruled in favor of the cable company in a case involving its Internet service. The court ruled that the Internet service provider was not liable for the violation of the law. Court interpreted Chevro n to extend to an agency's interpretation of a silent or ambiguous statute even if a court had previously interpreted the statute in question. As a statistical matter, under the Chevron doctrine, courts have often deferred to an agencies interpretation of its own statutory authority. In this case, the court agreed to defer to the agency's interpretation of the statute. In the end, the agency was right to interpret the statute as it did, and the case was settled in favor of the agency. affected party's reliance interests. The Tenth Circuit had previously deferred to an agency's interpretation of an ambiguous statute under Chevron and Brand X when the agency prospectively applied a the application of deference in this situation. In other words, at least in the Tenth Circuit, De Niz Robles did not read Brand X to apply when an agency seeks to apply its interpretation retroactively. The details of the procedural history is quite complex and beyond the scope of this report, but it is likely to have a significant impact in the future. Disputed cases. In the views of the nominee, however, Brand X runs contrary to this constitutional alignment by permitting executive branch agencies to displace the judiciary's legal determinations. As a consequence, Judge Gorsuch suggested that under Brand X , judicial declarations of what the law means are no longer authoritative, because such decisions are "subject to revision by a politically accountable branch of government" Under Brand X, he argued, the executive branch is empowered to render legislation in disputed cases. For the nominee,. the constitutional remedy when the political branches disagree with the judiciary’s interpretation of the law is legislation. Under the Administrative Procedure Act (APA), a reviewing court must set aside agency action that is "not in accordance with law" or is "in excess of statutory jurisdiction, authority, or limitations, or short of statutory right" Pursuant to the framework established by the Supreme Court, this case was decided in favor of the agency in the case of the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) This is the first time the NTSB has been involved in a statutory review case. The court held that EPA was not required to provide notice and comment to change a "tentative" interpretation of its own rules. Although the decision upheld EPA's change in its interpretation, the court showed some skepticism toward "agency . . . rulemaking procedures" The decision was made in accordance with the APA'sNotice and comment rulemaking procedure. The court also ruled that EPA's decision to change its interpretation of the regulations was in accord with that of the American Public Health Association. decrease in regulation. Given the range of environmental statutes that require the government to take an active role in environmental protection, one commentator has suggested that judicial scrutiny of agency decisions would not necessarily result in a legal outcome that was less protective of the environment. Another potentially relevant issue implicated by judicial review of final agency actions regarding environmental regulations is the scrutiny courts should provide in reviewing agencies' interpretations of their own regulations, including interpretations that alter previous interpretations. The Supreme Court is expected to rule on the issue in the next few months. plaintiff in an environmental case has satisfied any jurisdictional and procedural requirements to bringing a lawsuit. A court might review the substance of the federal agency action at issue. Sometimes, an action by an environmental agency may be based on that agency's interpretation of a statute that it administers, such as the Magnuson-Stevens Act of 1972, which regulates the use of heavy industry in New York City and New Jersey, among other things. In the U.S., a court may also review a lawsuit based on a claim that a federal agency violated a state law or regulation. consistent with the circumstances surrounding the issuance of the order and the agency's subsequent conduct. Environmental cases may also implicate other constitutional issues, including the relationship between federal and state authorities. One question that may arise is whether the Constitution's Commerce Clause should render invalid certain state environmental laws. The Supreme Court is expected to rule on the case in the next few weeks. The case will be heard in federal court in Washington, D.C., on September 14. The hearing is expected in the afternoon. The court upheld the reinterpretation, which subjected the wastes to more stringent management requirements. The agency's new interpretation conflicted with a previous "tentative" interpretation the agency had made in a report to Congress. Neither the agency's original interpretation of its regulations nor the subsequent re Interpretation was made in the court's ruling on the case. The case was heard in the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of New York, which covers New York City, New Jersey and Staten Island. to the merits, a plaintiff will need to establish standing, a procedural threshold that has, at times, impeded environmental litigation. Judge Gorsuch has had limited opportunities to evaluate intervention matters in environmental cases. In 2013, he dissented from a majority opinion holding that environmental groups were entitled to intervene as of right. In a related procedural matter—persons' ability to intervene in ongoing litigation—Judge persons appearing before them—regardless of who the litigant is or what the nature of the claim may be. as in 2015 when EPA and the Army Corps of Engineers promulgated a rule defining the scope of waters protected under the Clean Water Act. In United States v. Magnesium Corporation of America, he wrote a majority opinion upholding EPA's reinterpretation of its Resource Conservation and Recovery Act regulations governing mineral processing waste. As noted elsewhere in this report, Judge Gorsuch has broadly expressed skepticism regarding the extent to which judges should defer to an administrative agency's reasonable or findings. Applying binding precedent, he has shown some deference to agencies' interpretations of their own environmental regulations. more formalist approach to the law. For example, in Hydro Resources, Inc. v. EPA , Judge Gorsuch concluded that the Environmental Protection Agency had incorrectly determined that certain property was "Indian land" Judge Gorsuch has also authored or joined other majority opinions in a number of other cases touching upon environmental issues in which the Tenth Circuit has taken a more formalist view of the law than the Supreme Court has taken in the past. The Tenth Circuit is a federal appeals court based in Denver, Colorado, and has a seat on the U.S. Supreme Court. The majority opinion concluded that the environmental group would suffer injury from order that allowed a coal mining project to go forward in Utah's Lila Canyon. The court, citing Tenth Circuit precedent, determined that it owed deference to the Bureau's interpretation of the order because that interpretation was that of the Bureau. Judge Gorsuch joined the court's opinion deferring to the BLM's interpretation and said the court should defer to the agency's interpretation. The majority opinion was written by Judge Neil M. Altschuler. positions in favor of the industry group plaintiff during the litigation. Judge Gorsuch dissented, arguing that the environmental groups lacked a right to intervene in the case because their interests were already adequately represented by the government. He said a shift in the Forest Service's position was "speculative" Although his decision was upheld, he said, the decision was not a "victory" for the environmental community, which he said had a "right to be represented" by the U.S. government. dissent in Backcountry argued that the environmental groups should not have been allowed to intervene in the case. The opinion also implied that he might have voted in favor of the groups joining the litigation if the government had abandoned its efforts to enforce the law at issue. Once a Once a Backcountry member, Backcountry no longer has access to the website. Backcountry.com is no longer a part of Backcountry and has been closed to the public since 2008. The website is now open to the general public. federal agency action, there is no discernible trend in his environmental standing jurisprudence. For example, his opinion for the majority in Backcountry Hunters & Anglers v. U.S. Forest Service provides one example of a case that was dismissed because the plaintiffs lacked standing. In this case, the plaintiffs challenged a federal agency action. The plaintiffs challenged an act of Congress that would have made it easier for hunters and anglers to hunt and fish in the backcountry. temporary U.S. Forest Service order that allowed motorcycles—but prohibited all-terrain vehicles (ATVs)—on certain forest trails. Judge Gorsuch, writing for a unanimous court, determined that the appellants lacked a genuine stake in the outcome of the proceedings. In dismissing the case, the nominee wrote that a victory for the appellant "would seem to do nothing to help—and perhaps much to hurt—[their] cause," which was to reduce vehicles on forest trail. The majority reasoned that the groups had a right to intervene because the Forest Service might not adequately represent their interests if, for example, the agency shifted policy. In a lawsuit challenging a Forest Service plan that allowed for limited off-highway vehicle use in New Mexico's Santa Fe National Forest, the majority ruled in favor of the groups. The lawsuit was filed by the New Mexico Wilderness Association. The majority's decision was appealed to the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of New Mexico. Tenth Circuit's docket is devoted to administrative agency appeals. Percentage far below that of the D.C. Circuit, where over half the docket consists of administrative matters. In the few cases that have come before the Tenth Circuit, the cases have not implicated important administrative law doctrines such as the scope of an agency's discretion to issue guidance documents to set regulatory policy. The court's location in the nation's capital has also played a role in the lack of cases that involve the issue of agency discretion. federal or state prisoners, a number in line with the national average for the regional federal courts of appeals. The Tenth Circuit also hears a number of private civil litigation disputes, such as cases on labor, insurance, contract, and tort law. On the other hand, some seven percent of the federal prisoners in the Tenth Circuit are federal or state inmates, which is higher than the average for other federal appeals courts in the U.S. and around the world. The federal appeals court also hears private civil disputes such as those involving workers' compensation and insurance. The Tenth Circuit has a relatively routine caseload when compared to some of its sister circuits. More than forty percent of the cases that the Tenth Circuit hears are criminal law matters or petitions from law cases. Many major environmental statutes require parties challenging nationally applicable federal laws or administrative agency actions to file a petition in the D.C. Circuit. The territorial jurisdiction of the Tenth circuit does cover six western states and parts of Yellowstone National Park, which collectively contain millions of people. The Tenth Circuit is a federal appeals court based in Washington, DC. The Tucker Act vests the U.S. Court of Federal Claims (CFC) with jurisdiction over such claims when the plaintiff seeks more than $10,000 in compensation from the federal government. With limited exceptions, the CFC's jurisdiction overSuch claims is exclusive, with limited exceptions. The Tenth Circuit does not hear many takings claims because the Tucker Act does not allow for such claims to be heard by the Tenth Circuit. The CFC has jurisdiction over claims made against the government in which the plaintiff is seeking compensation of at least $5,000. of appeals are decided without dissent. The Tenth Circuit is no exception to this general trend, with the overwhelming majority of opinions issued by that court being unanimous. Judge Gorsuch's work on the Tenth Circuit may provide some insight into his general approach to unanimity where possible," he writes. The rate at which Judge Gorsuch dissented from Tenth Circuit decisions —1.6 percent of all cases in which he participated—places him in the middle of his colleagues dissent, he says. The relative infrequency with which fellow judges dissented or otherwise wrote separately from Judge Neil Gorsuch's majority opinions may suggest the nominee places a high value on reaching consensus in the opinions he writes, he adds. the report also identifies other votes in which he participated (e.g., votes as to whether the Tenth Circuit should grant en banc review of decisions of three-judge panels) The report analyzes majority, concurring, and dissenting opinions, including decisions that Judge Gorsuch participated in while serving by designation on another federal on which he wrote. This means that, at least early in Judge Gorsuch's career, he may not have been assigned to write the most challenging or controversial cases that tend to generate controversy. decade of service on the Tenth Circuit. A separate report, CRS Report R44772, Majority, Concurring, and Dissenting Opinions by Judge Neil M. Gorsuch, lists and briefly describes each opinion authored by Judge Gorsuch during his tenure on the federal bench. Other CRS products discuss the Supreme Court, the federal courts, and the federal legislative process in Washington, D.C., among other topics. For more information on CRS, visit the CRS website or go to www.crs.org. the Tenth Circuit in 2006, the nominee explicitly rejected the view that he had any particular "philosophy" toward judging. He noted that he "resist[ed]" being "pigeon-hole[d]" because "people do unexpected things and pigeon holes ignore gray areas in the law, of which there are many" In 2006, he said he had "no idea" what a judge's philosophy was, but that he wanted to be a "judge of the law" Judge Gorsuch dissented from the denial of a request for rehearing in a case where the panel had previously enjoined a display of the Ten Commandments. In his dissent, the nominee criticized the Tenth Circuit's formulation of government with endorsement. Contending that "like cases should be treated alike," Judge Gorsuch's dissent further argued that the county's "inclusive display" of the 10 Commandments was indistinguishable from the display at issue in Van Orden v. Perry. In that case, the Supreme Court had upheld a display. decalogue among other monuments and historic markers on the grounds of the Texas state capitol. Given these perceived parallels between Green and Van Orden , the nominee's dissent concluded by noting the "long" custom of displaying the Ten Commandments in public places and arguing that the Tenth Circuit should reevaluate the Tenth Court of Appeals' decision. The Tenth Circuit's decision on the case is expected to be announced in the coming days and could be appealed to the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of Texas. of private property rights afforded by the Takings Clause of the Fifth Amendment during his tenure on the Supreme Court. Judge Gorsuch has said little on the subject and does not appear to have significantly addressed the merits of a takings claim in a judicial opinion. This is unsurprising, as appeals from the CFC are heard by the Federal Circuit, not the Tenth Circuit. If Judge Gorsuch is elevated, he could very well hear takings issues on the Court's docket. However, there is currently an insufficient basis to evaluate his views regarding the scope of the Taking Clause. Judge Gorsuch has said little about some areas of law because of the nature of the Tenth Circuit's docket. It may be difficult to predict how he might rule on certain issues if he were elevated to the Supreme Court. The Supreme Court itself would likely not rule on any immediate questions respecting intervention in ongoing litigation, but its broader guidance on intervention could be influential to the lower courts. While the originalist judicial philosophy ascribed to Judge Gorsuch would arguably be arguably the most influential on the court, his jurisprudence offers comparatively little guidance. principles governing the division of power between the states and the national government. Judge Gorsuch's Gutierrez-Brizuela concurrence may suggest that if he is elevated to the High Court, he may embrace a more formalist approach to separation-of-powers questions. He may more closely scrutinize the boundaries the Constitution places on each branch. He has noted the dangers of '"unchecked disregard of the restrictions' imposed by the Constitution" on the Tenth Circuit. He authored or joined a host of key opinions delineating the limits of federal power. requirements of the Sixth Amendment's Confrontation Clause. Given that more than forty percent of the cases on the Tenth Circuit's docket involve criminal law matters or petitions from federal or state prisoners, Judge Gorsuch has heard many criminal cases during his tenure on that court. He participated in notable decisions, including one in which he ruled in favor of a prisoner's right to sue the federal government for unspecified damages. He also heard a case in which a federal judge ruled that a prisoner had a constitutional right to challenge the government's decision to imprison him. fell within the classes excepted by the statute," he wrote. The Tenth Circuit docket does not appear to have afforded Judge Gorsuch an opportunity to evaluate any rifts between the President and Congress involving the allocation of war powers or executive claims of exclusivity in the law. "The Tenth Circuit ... does not seem to have ... afforded Judge Scalia an opportunity" to evaluate rifts, the judge said in a statement. The statement was in response to a question from CNN's John Sutter, who asked if the Supreme Court should hear a case on the issue. for what the panel determined to have been ineffective assistance of counsel during plea negotiations in a criminal case. In his dissent, Judge Gorsuch asserted that the panel's "holding represents a significant new federal intrusion into state judicial functions and a revamping of the separation of powers" He added that the decision was "unsurprisingly" a defeat for the Supreme Court's ability to rule on criminal cases in the first place. The ruling is expected to be appealed to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit. panel of the Tenth Circuit in Lexington Insurance Co. v. Precision Drilling Co., L.P. Judge Gorsuch contrasted canons that he viewed as "finely honed and consistent with the judicial function" such as the presumption that statutes do not apply outside the United States unless Congress clearly indicates it intends to do so. He said such canons were "consistent" with the "judicial function" of the court, which is "to rule on the law as it is written" The nominee's dissent in a case on another often litigated issue in constitutional criminal law did not ultimately become the prevailing view at the High Court. In Williams v. Jones , Judge Gorsuch served on a panel reviewing the ineffective assistance years after Williams. The Supreme Court, in a pair of 5-4 decisions for which Justice Scalia wrote dissenting opinions, held that the Sixth Amendment right to adequate assistance of counsel extends to the negotiation and consideration of plea bargains. Judge Gorsuch generally brought the same textualist approach to the case. Supreme Court decisions about arbitration were closely split by 5-4 margins. Judge Gorsuch's views on this area of law could have a significant impact. In an area where the Court has generally viewed federal law as encouraging alternative dispute resolution, the nominee's few judicial opinions on contractual arbitration could have an impact on the court's decision-making on the issue. The Supreme Court is expected to make a decision on the nominee by the end of the year, according to a report by The Washington Post. not the least restrictive means of achieving these goals. On appeal to the Supreme Court, a five-Justice majority (including Justice Scalia) largely agreed with the Tenth Circuit's assessment and affirmed the lower court. Judge Gorsuch's concurring opinion in Hobby Lobby , while centrally focused on procedural matters tangential to the case, was a key part of his argument. The Supreme Court will hear arguments in the case on October 16 and 17. The case is expected to be decided by the end of the year. Justice Scalia's legacy previously appeared in several of Judge Gorsuch's opinions on the Tenth Circuit. In a number of cases, the nominee rejected more flexible approaches to interpreting the Constitution in favor of originalism. One such case is Cordova v. City of Albuquerque, wherein the Tenth circuit dismissed originalism as a viable alternative to a more flexible interpretation of the Constitution. The Supreme Court is expected to vote on the nominee in the coming days. For more, visit CNN.com/soulmatestories. on the Tenth Circuit, it could suggest certain differences between his textualist approach and that of Justice Scalia. The Supreme Court subsequently granted certiorari in the case. A majority of the High Court voted to affirm the Tenth Court's decision in Dolan. However, Justice Scalia joined a dissenting opinion. The decision was upheld by the Supreme Court on a vote of 8-1. The case was appealed to the US Court of Appeals for the Dolan Circuit. The Dolan case was settled in the US Supreme Court in 2007. President Donald J. Trump announced the nomination of Judge Neil M. Gorsuch of the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit (Tenth Circuit) to fill the vacancy on the Supreme Court of the United States created by the 2016 death of Justice Antonin Scalia. Judge Gorsuch was appointed to the Tenth circuit by President George W. Bush in 2006. Immediately prior to his appointment to the bench, the nominee served as the Principal Deputy to the Associate Attorney General, the third-ranking official at the Department of Justice. Judge Gorsuch began his legal career clerking for federal judges. He first served as a law clerk to Judge David B. Sentelle of the D.C. Circuit. Later, he served two Supreme Court Justices, newly retired Justice Byron White and Justice Anthony Kennedy, during the October 1993 term. This report provides an overview of Judge Gorsuch's jurisprudence and discusses how the Supreme Court will rule on his nomination in the future. It also discusses how his nomination will affect the federal judiciary. A section of this report titled Predicting Nominees' Future Decisions on the Court provides a broad context and framework for evaluating how determinative a judge's prior record may be in predicting future votes on the Supreme Court. Because Judge Gorsuch would succeed Justice Scalia on the High Court, this report the extent that the nominee's votes in particular cases arguably reflect broader trends and tendencies in his decision making. The report does not attempt to catalog every matter in which Judge Gorsuch has participated during his career. accordance with their ordinary meaning at the time of drafting, or resulted in too much ambiguity in the meaning of the law. Many commentators opined that Judge Gorsuch would, if confirmed, follow in Justice Scalia's footsteps as an originalist. This would be in keeping with the reported intentions of President Trump, who repeatedly noted during the 2016 presidential campaign his desire to nominate judges to the Court who are "very much in the mold of Justice Scalia" On the other hand, during Judge Gorsuch's confirmation hearings for his seat on. might be affected if he were to succeed Justice Scalia. However, it is difficult to predict accurately an individual's likely contributions to the Court based on their prior experience. that existed on the court when [Justice] Scalia died. For example, following President Trump's election, several studies by political scientists suggested that Judge Gorsuch would replicate Justice Scalia's judging style if he would be elevated to the Supreme Court. Such an outcome was echoed by academic studies following the election of Donald Trump as President of the United States. judging, the findings in Table 1 and Table 2 may be noteworthy. For example, Professor Michael McConnell of Stanford University described Judge Gorsuch as "unfailingly cordial and collegial" Professor McConnell served on the Tenth Circuit with Judge Gorsuch from 2006 until 2009. Judge Gorsuch aims to "find"] common ground" while being "scrupulously respectful," Professor McConnell said. He said Judge Gorsuch was "un failingly cordia and collegia" and "scrupulous" in his conduct. of the other side, in tone and in substance." Likewise, another former colleague, Robert Henry, now the President of Oklahoma City University, described Judge Gorsuch's "judicial temperament" as "superb" Judge Neil Gorsuch's approach to judging may also differ in substance from that of Justice Scalia. In contrast to the oft quoted quote, "I am not a judge by nature, but by temperament," Judge Neil Neil Gorsuch said in an interview with CNN. He added that he is not a "lawyer by nature," but a "judge by temperament" Like Justice Scalia, Judge Gorsuch has frequently been described as a talented writer. In particular, the nominee's judicial writings have for, at least, certain aspects of the majority's opinion. The differences in Justice Scalia's and Judge Gorsuch's writing styles may indicate broader contrasts between the two jurists. The nominee may be more focused on collegiality and consensus-building than the Justice he could replace. During his career on the High Court, the writings of a nominee to the Supreme Court—especially those authored before the nominee became a judge—may not fully represent the nominee’s current views. Justice Scalia frequently authored fairly broad and uncompromising opinions that did not garner the votes of a majority of the Court. In contrast, Judge Gorsuch's judicial record may reflect comments he made during his confirmation hearing for his Tenth Circuit appointment, wherein he noted the importance of "trying to reach the ability to persuade others to join his opinions" Judge Gorsuch has generally espoused a more minimalist role for courts. For example, he noted in a 2012 dissent that "[c]aution is always warranted when venturing down the road of the Supreme Court" to share many of Justice Scalia's views toward judging. For example, in a lecture delivered in April 2016 at Case Western Reserve University School of Law, Judge Gorsuch commended the late Justice's "vision" of what a "good and faithful judge" entails to be a "worthy one" Judge Scalia's "traditional view of the judicial function," in which a judge "strive[s] . . . to apply the law as it is," "looking to text, structure, and history to decide what a reasonable reader at the time" would think. time of the events in question would have understood the law to be. Rejecting the view of the judge as a "pragmatic social-welfare maximizer," Judge Gorsuch argued for a more limited role for judges in the American political system. The themes highlighted in his 2016 lecture on time on the bench, was viewed by scholars as a defender of Chevron deference. The doctrine, for Justice Scalia, operated as a clear background rule from which Congress could legislate. Judge Gorsuch's opinions, in contrast, can be read to suggest that he might favor eliminating the doctrine. Gorsuch appears to have cabined the circumstance in which these doctrines apply. In De Niz Robles, he rejected the retroactive application of an agency's adjudication that upset the via adjudication. As in Gutierrez-Brizuela, he grounded his decision in principles of separation of powers, due process, and equal protection, noting the presumptive prospective effect of legislation compared with the retroactively effect of a judicial decision. Judge Gorsuch reasoned that the more anagency's decision upset the judicial decision, the more likely it was to be overturned. Gorsuch joined have been the subject of a formal opinion by the Supreme Court. Of these five opinions, four were affirmed by the High Court. One opinion that Judge Gorsuch joined, Direct Marketing Ass'n v. Brohl , was reversed by the Court in a substantive opinion. As a result, Judge case based on the factual record before the court. While the other two judges voted to reverse the district court's grant of summary judgment to the defendant on the Title VII claim, Judge Gorsuch would have affirmed the lower court's decision. meet its burden of showing that over $5 million was "in controversy," as required by the statute. On appeal, Judge Gorsuch authored a unanimous opinion reversing the district court. Based on this construction, he found "federal jurisdiction here beyond doubt," thereby finding federal jurisdiction in the case. He described the statutory term "in controversies" as "a term heavily encrusted with meaning," which he used to support his ruling. The ruling is expected to be delivered by the end of the month. with the Court in more recent years. The two other judges on the panel would not have reached the questions regarding the absurdity doctrine, concluding instead that the plaintiff had waived the argument. Judge Gorsuch authored a dissent arguing that a state court's decision to exclude evidence in accordance with state evidentiary rules amounted to an adjudication on the merits, thereby requiring federal courts to apply AEDPA's deferential standard. A further example of his tendency to defer is that he has made limited resort to legislative history materials. few judicial access cases in which Judge Gorsuch wrote a separate opinion, he has tended to do so on the basis that the court lacked jurisdiction over the suit. For example, in Wilderness Society v. Kane County , a majority of the en banc panel held that the plaintiffs lacked jurisdiction. In the case, the court ruled in favor of the plaintiffs, and the case went to the appeals court for a rehearing. The case was eventually settled out of court by the Supreme Court, which said the plaintiffs had no case to answer. is Judge Gorsuch's seeming preference to have state courts decide certain novel matters of state law. In Pino v. United States , Judge Gorsuch laid out certain principles to guide the determination of when to issue a ruling. In that case, the Supreme Court ruled in favor of the state of Colorado in the case of Pino, but the case was later overturned by a federal appeals court. The Supreme Court is expected to rule on the case in the next few months, and the case is likely to be a key test for the court. should be decided when possible by state, not federal, courts. Judge Gorsuch's preference for leaving novel questions of state law to the state courts also informed a dissent he authored in a habeas case. In Wilson v. Workman , the nominee faulted the majority for "ventur[ing] a guess about the case" The nominee's dissent was written in response to a Supreme Court ruling in a case involving the state of Colorado. The case was decided in favor of the state, and the decision was upheld. him, Judge Gorsuch has articulated distinct views that may signal how he would approach administrative law matters if he were elevated to the Supreme Court. A central threshold issue in administrative law cases is whether a challenged agency action is suitable for judicial review in the first place. A key question is whether the challenged action is worthy of judicial review, and if so, whether it should be allowed to go forward with a judicial review of the agency's decision. If confirmed, he would be the first Supreme Court justice from the state of Colorado. including whether a court has jurisdiction over the case. While this inquiry is often dependent on the facts of a given case, a few trends can arguably be discerned from the various cases raising justiciability issues in which Judge Gorsuch presided. In cases both arising in the context of a case and in which the judge presided, there was a pattern of the judge ruling in favor of the defendant. In one case, the judge ruled that the defendant was not entitled to a hearing because he had not been charged with a crime. of cases considered by Judge Gorsuch in this area has been unremarkable. In short, if Judge Gorsuch has any distinctive leanings with respect to questions regarding the interpretation or enforceability of international law in U.S. courts, they are not apparent. If foreign law has any bearing on U.s. law, it is not apparent that Judge Gorsuch would find it of interest to the Supreme Court. If he does find it, it would be because he would have to decide whether foreign law is enforceable in the United States or not. opportunity to address certain topics, such as international law and foreign affairs, terrorism and national security. Many commentators have likened the nominee to Justice Scalia. With the Supreme Court often closely divided on various aspects of environmental law in recent years, Judge Gorsuch could serve as a critical vote on such matters if confirmed to the Court. The nominee may not have written extensively on environmental law, but he has authored or joined opinions in several cases challenging federal agency actions related to the management of federal public lands and natural resources. "judge who likes every result he reaches is very likely a bad judge," writes Neil Gorsuch. Judge has repeatedly declared that the proper role of a court is to interpret the law and not to "substitute" the court's "views of optimal policy" for Congress's judgment. A number of the nominee's opinions of law, his opinions at times evidence concern about judges "reshap[ing] the law as they wish it to be" by failing to "attach power to precedent" The substance of several of the nominee's opinions on federal antidiscrimination law is, at times, telling. The nominee's general views on adjudication may suggest that his approach will shape his approach to the law. For instance, in keeping with his preference for clear rules and his general critique of "needless" complexities in the law, Judge Gorsuch has written multiple opinions questioning the efficacy of a central—but complicated—doctrine. The judge is opposed to a general preference to reach a business or government friendly outcome. nominee once going so far as to diagram part of a sentence in a written opinion. Judge Gorsuch can be seen to resemble Justice Scalia in invoking the "rule of lenity" when construing language that is seen to be ambiguous in favor of criminal defendants. On the other hand, the nominee's recently expressed concerns about " Chevron deference" —judicial deference to the reasonable interpretations by executive branch agencies of ambiguous or silent statutes –distinguish him from Justice Scalia. These last two facets of Judge Gorsuch's jurisprudence are his approaches to of federal powers granted by the Constitution. expressed concerns over the costs of discovery and adequate representation. The nominee has suggested a number of attorney-initiated reforms aimed at making the civil justice system more accessible and affordable for both plaintiffs and defendants. Other concerns appear to be grounded in the nominee's views about the respective roles of the judicial and legislative branches, as previously noted. Much like Justice Scalia, Judge Gorsuch has opined that courts should interpret the law, not create it, as courts could not create the law in the first place. Justice Scalia generally viewed the use of legislative history materials as illegitimate even in support of text-based arguments. Judge Gorsuch has similarly expressed concerns, akin to those voiced by Justice Scalia, about invocations of alleged congressional or presidential intent. In particular, he has expressed skepticism about a jurist's ability to discern a single legislative "intent" beyond that embodied in the express terms of the bill. He has also expressed concerns about the use, in part, because such materials are not subject to the same bicameralism and presentment requirements as statutes. protections are clearly articulated in Supreme Court decisions. Nevertheless, Judge Gorsuch may be reluctant to engage in a broad reading of the Constitution and Supreme Court precedent that would expand the rights of such defendants beyond existing precedent. One area where Judge Gorsuch could be influential, were he to be elevated to the Supreme Court, is in the area of civil rights. Justice Scalia's views regarding the scope of constitutional and statutory civil rights protections were established in a number of judicial opinions, and he participated in several closely divided cases. how he might approach a legal controversy whose resolution is a matter of dispute and is not necessarily clearly addressed by prior case law. To particular legal issues, the bulk of the opinions that Judge Gorsuch has authored or joined may not be particularly insightful. Even in closely contested cases where whole, though, his opinions are seemingly shaped by his views regarding how legal texts, particularly the Constitution and statutes, are to be construed. He believes that the courts' role is to apply the law, rather than create it. underpinnings to conclude that the Amendment does not include a right against malicious prosecution. In several opinions, Judge Gorsuch voiced sentiments similar to those of Justice Scalia about the need for the "rule of law" to be "a law of rules" In that vein, insofar as Judge Gorsuch's decisions have found statutes to be unambiguous, his approach to such statutes may be generally consistent with Justice Scalia's views. Judge Scalia's opposition to the doctrine of Brand X on separation-of-powers grounds, on the other hand, finds harmony with his view on Brand X. described as consisting of "multifarious and incommensurable competing factors" that yielded "unpredictable results" and "left the law and litigants confused" Judge Gorsuch has argued more generally for simplification and clarity in the American legal system. Some commentators have criticized certain rulings by Judge Gorsuch. But it appears that his jurisprudence is largely a product of his preferences for textualism and rules based adjudication, as opposed to a preference to rule for a particular side. Gorsuch has an arguably high affirmance rate given that the Supreme Court in recent years has reversed the lower courts in roughly seventy percent of all cases it heard. As several commentators have noted, Judge Gorsuch can be seen to employ the same general approach to questions of statutory interpretation. Judge Gorsuch has generally cited to and applied specific interpretative canons without expressly involving himself in the broader debates about the merits of canons-based approaches to statutory interpretation, they say. However, in his 2016 opinion for a three-judge panel, he cited specific canons. a criminal statute—or the state of mind required for guilt—as "leapfrogging over the first statutorily specified element and touching down only at the second listed element" According to Judge Gorsuch, such a reading "defies grammatical gravity and linguistic logic." Judge Gorsuch's written opinions have also relied upon other interpretative practices possession of a firearm. However, in his dissent in Games-Perez , Judge Gorsuch opined that reading the mens rea element of a criminal statute as "leaps over thefirst statutorly specified element" "defy grammaticalgravity and linguistic Logic" In United States v. Manatau, Judge Gorsuch relied on the plain language of sentencing guidelines to reach a more lenient interpretation of the mens rea requirement. The government had argued that the court should construe rea requirements as associated with concerns about overcriminalization. Another aspect of Judge Gorsuch's approach to statutory criminal law issues is that he has criticized in much the same way Justice Scalia did, writes CNN's John Sutter. Things.things.things to know about Judge Neil Gorsuch. flag burning as an example of how his judicial philosophy could yield results that did not align with his own inclinations. Similarly, in a 2016 dissent, Judge Gorsuch emphasized that the role of the judge is to "apply, not rewrite, the law enacted by the people's representatives," noting that a judge's role is to apply the law, not to rewrite it. The Supreme Court is expected to vote on the case in the next few weeks. The case will be heard at the Supreme Court in Washington, DC. the statute to apply extraterritorially, with the so called "absurdity canon" This canon is generally said to allow judges to "override even unambiguous statutory texts" However, Judge Gorsuch expressed concern that broad application of this canon could have "putatively absurd consequences" in their application. The case is expected to be heard by the Supreme Court later this year, and the case is likely to be appealed to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit. interpretative canon calling for courts to construe statutes as "directory," rather than jurisdictional. If the statute prescribes a period for the performance of an official duty, but does not include language that bars performance after the specified period of time. Although Dolan was written relatively early in Judge Gorsuch's tenure, it was written early in Dolan's tenure. It was written late in the first term of the current Supreme Court term, the second term of which will begin in October 2015. However, in writing for the court, Judge Gorsuch took a contrary view. He held that the 90-day rule was a claims processing rule intended to promote speed and unconnected to the court's authority. In so doing, the nominee noted various factors, including the "statute's language and structure," as well as an "opportunity" for the Supreme Court to rule on the case. The case is expected to go before the court in the coming weeks, with the nominee expected to be confirmed soon. With Judge Gorsuch in particular, attention to the statutory text has often centered upon questions of grammar. Judge Gorsuch looked to the "language of the Act itself," the Act's structure, key canons of statutory construction, and the context in which the statute was enacted in adopting a more narrow reading of the phrase in question. The exact words of the statute often formed the starting point for Judge Gorsuch's discussion of questions of interpretation. He has generally accorded such words their customary meaning, as to which we may ascribe whatever meaning springs to mind. to judicial exposition," he wrote. The Supreme Court has twice revisited and cut back the scope of its initial decision, he said. If elevated to the Supreme Court, Judge Gorsuch could be expected to reject "functionalist" approaches, he says. His formalist approach seems to be more in line with the Framers' original intent, he writes. "How are we supposed to apply all these competing instructions? It's no easy task," he said, referring to the High Court. be said to do if they were to adopt a particular construction of a statute based on the court's abstract view of the statute's purpose. As a result, if Judge Gorsuch were to serve on the Supreme Court, his views would likely change the way the law is written. The Supreme Court is the highest court in the U.S. and has the power to overturn lower court decisions, as well as the president's vetoes of Supreme Court decisions. The high court is the seat of the president, who has the final say on all Supreme Court cases. statutory interpretation at odds with the court's prior reading. In De Niz Robles , however, the agency retroactively applied an interpretation at odds with the earlier Tenth Circuit opinion. Judge Gorsuch's opinion in De Nizz Robles rejected the interpretation in the Tenth Circuit decision. The agency's interpretation was applied against a party who had significant reliance interests on the prior contrary Tenth Circuit ruling. The court's decision in that case was appealed to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit. judicial decisions where statutory ambiguity is identified. In De Niz Robles v. Lynch , Judge Gorsuch established for the majority that there is a presumption of prospectivity to agency exercises of delegated legislative authority. Congress has clearly authorized retroactivity, especially when agency interpretation effectively overturns a prior judicial decision, the judge said in a dissent to the case. The case was decided in favor of the agency, and the decision was upheld by the Supreme Court on a 4-3 vote. The decision was appealed to the Court of Appeals, which will hear the case next. to agency interpretations would impede efforts by federal agencies to regulate activities that would negatively impact the environment. If applied consistently, this could also lead to a lack of deference to agency interpretations of environmental statutes that would lead to interpretative reversals. Judge Gorsuch did note potential statutory and constitutional concerns regarding agency action that would uproot nontentative interpretations of law. Another example of Judge Gorsuch's deference. to an agency's interpretation of its own environmental regulations occurred in a 2010 decision reviewing the BLM's. interpretation of their own prior regulations. deference to the agency's view, allowing regulated parties to rely on consistent agency interpretations while simultaneously allowing courts to operate properly within the Constitution's framework. On the one hand, Judge Gorsuch's views on judicial deference to agency legal interpretations contrast with those of Justice Scalia. Judge Gorsuch does not appear to have expressed strong objections to the mechanics of discretionary or factual review, a second major area of substantive administrative law wherein courts will "hold unlawful and set aside agency actions, findings, and conclusions found" opinion distinguished between the elected legislature's task of setting policy prospectively and the judiciary's duty of neutrally interpreting the law in retroactively adjudicating disputes. For Judge Gorsuch, this assignment of responsibilities ensures liberty by protecting parties who cannot alter their past conduct to the changes in majoritarian politics and bars unelected judges from setting policy for the nation. Judge Gorsuch's concurrence further noted that the Founders provided that "judicial judgments 'may not lawfully be revised, overturned or refused faith and credit by' the elected branches of government" views on the modern administrative state and the proper role of courts in interpreting the law. Judge Gorsuch has emphasized the principle of individual liberty in applying his formalist approach to a number of cases implicating the separation of powers. He has also taken exception to the executive branch engaging in activities he regards as judicial functions, even where Congress has delegated the authority. In a pair of cases, he has ruled in favor of the prosecution of a man accused of assaulting a woman in a hotel room, even though he had not been charged with a crime. appointees, he argued. "I would have thought powerful and centralized authorities like today's administrative agencies would have warranted less deference from other branches, not more," he said. Instead, Judge Gorsuch contended in Gutierrez-Brizuela that courts should examine the law's meaning de novo, or without appointees. He argued that the law should be examined "de novo," or without the appointment of an official to enforce it. "The law should ... be examined ... by the courts, not by the president," he added. legislative functions to the other branches. Judge Gorsuch has objected to what he views as Congress foisting legislative authority onto the judiciary. For example, he seems to view vagueness problems with criminal statutes at least partially through a separation-of-powers lens. Consequently it appears that a judicial test that would approve Congress's delegation of legislative responsibility to the executive branch so long as such delegation is accompanied by an "intelligible principle," would be insufficient for Judge Gorsuch in the case of criminal proscriptions. cross-cutting issues—the role of the judiciary and statutory interpretation. It then addresses fourteen separate areas of law, arranged in alphabetical order, from "administrative law" to "takings" Within each section, the report reviews whether and how Judge Gorsuch has addressed particular issues in opinions he authored or joined. In some instances, some of these issues have been addressed by the judge in his own opinions. In other instances, the judge has been criticized for his views on these issues. view the courts as being exclusively responsible for defining the playing field on which criminal suspects and the government interact in what he has described as the "constant competition between constable and quarry" Constitutional Rules of Criminal Procedure . One aspect of Judge Gorsuch's jurisprudence that could be seen to be seen as more conservative than his colleagues is his view of the role of the U.S. Supreme Court in criminal cases. He has described the Supreme Court as a "court of last resort" for the federal government. Gorsuch has questioned the size and power of the modern administrative state. He has said that the number of regulations issued by agencies has "grown so exuberantly it's hard to keep up" He has questioned how many more hundreds of hundreds of regulations will be issued in the future. The Supreme Court is expected to vote on the issue in the coming months. The case will be heard in front of a panel made up of judges from both chambers of the U.S. Congress. to determine how to apply the Sex Offender Registration and Notification Act (SORNA) to those whose offenses occurred prior to its enactment, had foisted too much of its authority on the executive branch. He explained his view that: By separating the lawmaking and law enforcement functions, the framers sought to create a more effective law enforcement system. He said the law should be applied to all sex offenders, not just those who have been convicted of a crime that occurred before SORNA was enacted. In Browder v. City of Albuquerque, Judge Gorsuch upheld a district court order that declined to dismiss the substantive due process claims brought against the officer by the victims of the crash. In Browder , Judge Gorsuch, writing on behalf of a unanimous three-judge panel, upheld aDistrict Court order that decline to dismissal the substantive Due Process claims brought by the victim of a police officer's speeding. The case involved a claim against an off-duty police officer who killed one person and injured another while speeding. City of Albuquerque , Judge Gorsuch wrote the majority opinion. This opinion, much like Strickland , engaged in a "thorough review of the record" The plaintiffs had provided sufficient evidence to proceed to trial on their claims of mistreatment, the opinion said. The city of Albuquerque, Judge Gorsuch said, had provided enough evidence to Proceed to Trial on Their Claims of mistreating Plaintiffs. The City of Albuquerque had said that the plaintiffs' claims were not supported by the evidence. The majority opinion said that this was not the case. of individual cases under the Graham factors. For instance, in Herrera v. Bernalillo County Board of County Commissioners , a case where three sheriff's deputies tackled a plaintiff who was not resisting arrest, resulting in injuries to his knee. Judge Gorsuch authored a unanimous opinion affirming the district court's holding in the case. The opinion was published in the online edition of The Federalist, on newsstands now and in print next week. For more, go to www.thefederalist.com. "physical intrusion" in Wilson was not clearly established to be excessive in light of the other Graham factors, including the arrestee actively resisting arrest. And in Fisher v. City of Las Cruces , where the majority found that a material factual dispute existed as to whether the plaintiff's injuries, which were caused by the arrest, were excessive, the majority said there was not enough evidence to support a claim of excessive force in that case. The majority said the evidence was not strong enough to support such a claim. that the deputies were not entitled to qualified immunity because the law at the time of the incident clearly established that the conduct alleged was constitutionally excessive. In reaching this conclusion, the nominee proceeded through an analysis of each of the Graham factors. Similarly, but resulting in a contrary outcome, the judge concluded that the deputies should be granted qualified immunity. The judge's decision was overturned on appeal by a federal appeals court. The case was heard in the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of New York. strict reliance on Graham in excessive force cases, faulted the majority for "tak[ing] a detour" Such an inquiry had previously been found to be required only in excessive use of force cases. "Mr. Fisher has also shown that he suffered a 'non- de minimis injury,'" the majority said. "This is a very important step in the right direction," the majority added. "It is a step that should be taken to ensure that Mr. Fisher is treated with the utmost dignity and respect" and the officer's interpretation [is] entirely reasonable," a totality of the circumstances test should counsel for not suppressing evidence seized because of a mistake of law. A year and a half after the Tenth Circuit's opinion in Nicholson , the Supreme Court effectively sided with Judge Gorsuch's more flexible view. The Supreme Court ruled in favor of the lower court in a case known as "Nicholson," a case that went to the appeals court for more than a year. The case is still pending, and the justices are expected to rule on it soon. Patrol troopers violated the Establishment Clause. Judge Gorsuch again raised concerns about the Tenth Circuit's interpretation of Justice O'Connor's test. He argued that "our observer continues to be biased, replete with foibles, and prone to mistake" In particular, the dissent criticized what the nominee viewed as a "biased observer" and a "bureaucratic, political, and ideological observer" in the Ninth Circuit's ruling on the case. The Tenth Circuit ruled that the troopers' actions were not Establishment Clause violations. through a red light. He wrote separately to explain his views on when federal courts should abstain, for reasons of federalism, from deciding cases where state courts are able to vindicate the police officer. In his majority opinion, he affirmed the district court's denial of qualified immunity for the officer. But he also wrote separately on the issue of when the federal courts shouldn't decide. He said the issue should be decided by state courts, not the federal court, for "federalism" reasons. a notable dissent in United States v. Nicholson . The issue in Nicholson was whether a police officer, who mistakenly thought the defendant had violated a local traffic ordinance, could seize evidence from the defendant's car during the resulting stop. Noting a New Mexico court ruling that had concluded that the officer's actions were justified, the dissent said that the court had been wrong in its decision. The dissent was written by Judge John Sutter, a former federal judge in New Mexico who served from 1987 to 1993. of the exclusionary rule, holding in a different case that a mistake of law can "give rise to the reasonable suspicion necessary to uphold" a traffic stop under the Fourth Amendment. While the approach taken by Judge Gorsuch in his dissent in Nicholson eventually found favor at the Supreme Court, he took a different approach in a separate case in which he said the law should not be applied to traffic stops in the first place. In that case, he said police should be able to use "reasonable suspicion" to make a stop. the ordinance relied on by the police officer did not provide a legal basis for the stop. The majority decision held that a failure to understand the law by the "very person charged with enforcing it" was objectively unreasonable and warranted suppression of the evidence seized. However, Judge Gorsuch in the case ruled in favor of the officer and ordered the evidence to be suppressed. The case was appealed to the US Supreme Court, which is expected to rule on the case in the next few days. The decision is not expected to be announced until after the appeal is heard. unreasonable searches and seizures is the prohibition against the use of excessive force in the course of making an arrest, investigatory stop, or other seizure. While Judge Gorsuch frequently relied on originalist principles in other areas of search and seizure law, Supreme Court precedent appears to be the exclusive focus in this case. In this case, the Supreme Court ruled in favor of the arresting officer's right to use excessive force. In the case of this arrest, the police officer used excessive force to make an arrest. an immediate threat to the safety of the officers or others, and [3] whether he is actively resisting arrest or attempting to evade arrest by flight.'" Application of this test has led Judge Gorsuch to find both excessive force and no excessive force, depending upon his analysis of the facts, according to CNN.com's John Sutter. Sutter: "Judge Gorsuch has the power to decide whether police use excessive force or not. He has the authority to issue a ruling on whether or not police used excessive force in this case" Judge Gorsuch authored the majority opinion in Wilson v. City of Lafayette. He found qualified immunity protected an officer who used a taser on an individual fleeing arrest, resulting in the suspect's death. In doing so, the nominee again recited and analyzed each of the Graham factors. Perhaps responding to the question, he said, "I think it's a good idea to look at all of the factors" and "try to find the one that you think is the most likely to result in a death" Gorsuch: "No one questions that the use of a taser, especially if one probe hits the head, amounts to a significant physical intrusion requiring a correspondingly significant justification" The nominee found the taser was a "significant physical intrusion" that needed a "comprehensive justification," he said. The panel's two other members concurring and dissenting opinions were also written by the judge. The full court is expected to vote on the issue in the coming weeks. The Supreme Court is scheduled to convene in early October. he sustained while being handcuffed after he had shot himself, were sufficient for an excessive force claim. Judge Gorsuch concurred with the majority's use of the Graham factors and its conclusion that the factors suggested the officers may not have acted reasonably. In so doing, however, he noted his own injuries, which he had sustained while handcuffed after shooting himself. He said the injuries were sufficient to support a claim of excessive force against the police officers for the use of deadly force. He noted that he had also suffered injuries while handcuffed. The nominee concluded that the rule "demands a certain cohesiveness among class members with respect to their injuries," as he found the rule did in Shook. Although he has few judicial opinions on the matter, Judge Gorsuch has also expressed clear opinions about the rule. "The absence of which can preclude certification," he found, "can preclude certification" in the case of Shook, he said. "In the absence of that ... certification ... can be denied," he said in the Shook case. cases involving allegations of overly tight handcuffing, and the nominee felt that it was an inappropriate departure from Graham in this case. On another matter of constitutional criminal procedure that has, at times, divided the Supreme Court in recent years—the application and scope of the exclusionary rule —Judge Gorsuch wrote that it is inappropriate for the court to rule on this issue. He also wrote that the court should not rule on the issue of the "exclusionary rule" in the first place. date have resulted in a variety of outcomes—some favorable to individual plaintiffs, some unfavorable. Based on these decisions, an argument could be made that Judge Gorsuch's views on statutory civil rights reflect his textualist approach to construing statutes, instead of a more results-driven judicial philosophy. And Orr is not the only case in which Judge Gorsuch has ruled in favor of the plaintiffs in a statutory civil Rights case, which could suggest that the ultimate outcomes of particular cases are driven by Judge Scalia's general judicial philosophy as well. also objected that the outcome under the majority's reading ran contrary to Congress's intent by "harm[ing] the interests of the children that IDEA was intended to protect" However, in perhaps a reflection on how his broader views on the role of the judge influence his civil rights jurisprudence, Judge Gorsuch's also objected to the ruling as a violation of the Constitution's guarantee of the rights of children to a fair hearing by a judge. The ruling was upheld on a 4-3 vote, with the dissenters joining the majority. affirmative action and issues related to sexual orientation. However, unlike Justice Scalia, Judge Gorsuch's views on constitutional civil rights questions are less well known because he has had relatively few occasions to address such questions directly in cases before the Tenth Circuit. He has not, for example, had occasion to address the issue of same-sex marriage in any of the cases before him. He also has not been a member of the Supreme Court since 2006. He was nominated by President George W. Bush. Gorsuch has shown a tendency to examine closely the federal statute or rule in question. In Hammond v. Stamps.com, Inc. , for example, the plaintiff claimed it was a class-action suit. In the case, the judge ruled that the plaintiff was not entitled to class action status because it was not a federal case. The case was settled on a technicality; the Supreme Court has yet to rule on the issue. The judge's decision is expected in the next few weeks. Defended." Other statutory civil rights cases can be seen to have been directly shaped by Judge Gorsuch's general approaches to statutory interpretation. For example, in Almond v. Unified School District #501 , the nominee employed a textualist approach in one of the first opinions interpreting the Lilly Ledbetter Fair Pay Act. The nominee's general approach to the law has been described as "textualist" and has been compared to that of Samuel Sotomayor, the founder of the American Civil Liberties Union. had failed to "put forward sufficient evidence demonstrating that [the school's actions were] motivated by her gender" This, in the panel's view, caused her claims to fail. More commonly, instead of assessing constitutional civil rights claims, Judge Gorsuch's opinions have addressed claims arising under one or more Statutory Civil Rights Claims. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. decision, A.F. ex rel. Christine B. v. Española Public Schools , Judge Gorsuch wrote for the majority in holding that a student who had previously settled a lawsuit involving alleged violations of the IDEA was barred from "seeking the same relief" under the ADA, the Rehabilitation Act, and 42 U.S.C. Judge Gorsuch said the student was not entitled to the "same relief" as someone who had settled a previous lawsuit. The decision was appealed to the Supreme Court, which will hear the case in October. Somehow, though, this case managed to survive the usually lethal gauntlet of pretrial proceedings and stagger its way to trial. Judge Gorsuch may be particularly receptive to curtailing the costly litigation process through strict readings of statutes that create private rights. By contrast, in Caplinger v. Medtronic, Inc. the plaintiff asserted a variety of state tort claims alleging the defendant had promoted an "off label" use of a product. The judge also looked to the "larger statutory structure" and the legislative history to buttress his conclusion. presided" on the Senate Judiciary Committee's "Questionnaire for Nominee to the Supreme Court" Two of the ten cases Judge Gorsuch selected were opinions that affirmed the dismissal of civil claims by the district court. Judge Gorsuch in this area, taking note of the outcomes in specific cases on the grounds that the discrimination claims of particular victims were "thrown . . . out of court" in favor of a corporate or government entity. While Judge Gorsuch has authored or joined some rulings that were medical device that resulted in the plaintiff's injuries, Judge Gorsuch authored an opinion for the majority. Caplinger affirmed the district court's dismissal of the complaint as preempted by federal law based on a reading of an express preemption clause within the Medical Device Amendments to the Federal Food, Drug, and Medical Devices Amendments. Judge Gorsuch wrote the majority opinion in the case, which was heard by the federal appeals court in Washington, D.C. and the Supreme Court in Richmond, Virginia. Some commentators suggest that Judge Gorsuch would limit the exposure of civil defendants, a tendency that may be perceived as business friendly. Judge Gorsuch has expressed an interest in issues related to civil liability, including what has been described as a unfavorable to such individuals. This fact may be of limited utility in ascertaining Judge Gorsuch's views about the scope of statutory civil rights protections, as plaintiffs raising federal antidiscrimination claims, especially in the context of employment disputes, rarely prevail before the federal appellate courts as a general matter. elevated to the Supreme Court, involves the procedural and substantive limits that federal law imposes on the exposure of defendants to monetary liability in civil cases. This is because Justice Scalia, whom Judge Gorsuch sue businesses that may have harmed them. In other cases, Justice Scalia cast important votes in cases that more narrowly interpreted the scope of federal law to limit corporate defendants' potential civil liability. Given Justice Scalia's decisions, commentators have considered how Judge Gorsuch might affect the Roberts Court's perceived "warmth" One broad theme that can be gleaned from Judge Gorsuch's judicial opinions related to civil liability is his distaste for the time and costs associated with protracted litigation. In Cook v. Rockwell Int ernationa l Corp. , for example, the nominee lamented: It took a titanic fifteen years for the case to go to trial. The nominee's views on civil liability are consistent with those of other Supreme Court justices, including Elena Kagan and Sonia Sotomayor, who are also on the bench. defamation claim to prove the underlying falsehood of the statement at issue. The Bustos decision held that the plaintiff had failed to show the History Channel's statement had a significant impact on his reputation. Likewise, Judge Gorsuch joined a panel opinion in Cory v. Allstate Insurance , which dismissed a defamation claim against the insurance company. The case was decided in favor of the plaintiff, Cory, who sued Allstate for $1.5 million in damages for false statements made about him in an insurance policy. defamation lawsuit on the ground that "minor inaccuracies will not preclude" the defense of substantial truthfulness. Similarly, in two other cases brought against television stations— Anderson v. Suiters and Alvarado v. KOB-TV, L.L.C. —Judge Gorsuch joined opinions that dismissed privacy tort claims on First Amendment grounds, reasoning that the underlying privacy tort claim was a First Amendment claim. The Supreme Court is expected to rule on the case in the next few months. Network , Judge Gorsuch wrote an opinion holding that a prisoner who "merely conspired with" the Aryan Brotherhood could not sustain a defamation lawsuit. Noting that the First Amendment requires a plaintiff pursuing a First Amendment lawsuit, the judge said a lawsuit could not be brought against the History Channel for a series describing the plaintiff as a member of that gang. The opinion was published in the online edition of The Federalist, on Thursday, August 2. For more, go to: http://www.federalist.com/news/features/2013/01/02/the-federal-court-ruled-that-a-prisoner-who conspired with the Aryan Brotherhood could not sustain a defamation lawsuit against the History Channel. the First Amendment precludes defamation actions aimed at parody, even when involving a private figure on a matter of private concern. Judge Gorsuch authored a concurring opinion that raised (without answering) the question of whether constitutionalizing the protections for such parodies was necessary or wise. In the context of this case, the court's ruling was a victory for the First Amendment, he says. The court's decision was a win for the free-speech rights of Americans, he adds, and for the right to parody. that information does not implicate rights to informational privacy, Judge Gorsuch dismissed the claim on qualified immunity grounds. The dissent, however, called the majority's conclusion on the privacy issue "dismaying" The dissent argued that it was "patently clear" that "individuals have a constitutional right to have their medical records kept private from law enforcement officers pursuing general investigative ends and acting in the absence of any authority to breach that privacy" Nonetheless, while acknowledging the dissent's eloquence, Judge Scalia said, "I don't think there's any reason to think that this case would go the other way" dismissed the substantive due process claims brought by a plaintiff who alleged that a county sheriff had violated the plaintiff's rights to informational privacy by asking for and obtaining his psychiatric records from a local hospital. Noting that the government's "mere collection of information" without any further public dissemination of it was a violation of due process, the judge said the government should not have collected the records without further public disclosure. The case was dismissed on a technicality, not on substantive grounds, the court said. may be gleaned from isolated cases. For example, in 2009 in Strickland v. United Parcel Service, Inc. , Judge Gorsuch agreed with two colleagues that the plaintiff should be able to proceed to trial on a FMLA retaliation claim. But he differed from his colleagues as to the plaintiff's Title VII claim, which he said should go to trial. The plaintiff's claim was that the U.S. Postal Service had retaliated against him for being a gay man. The case was decided in favor of the plaintiff. evidence. In particular, he construed two key depositions relied on by the plaintiff as simply showing that the plaintiff's supervisor "harassed male employees in very much the same manner he harassed Ms. Strickland" In another fact-intensive civil rights case resulting in a different outcome—a ruling for the plaintiffs— Orr v. Orr, the judge ruled in favor of the plaintiffs. In that case, he found that the plaintiffs had shown that the supervisor had harassed them in a similar way. The Federal Arbitration Act (FAA) might be read as favoring arbitration over litigation. In Howard v. Ferrellgas, Judge Gorsuch read the FAA to require a remand to the district court to determine whether the parties had opted for arbitration. In Ragab v. Howard, the nominee disagreed with the panel majority's conclusion that a collection of conflicting arbitration provisions in the parties' contracts was unenforceable. The Supreme Court has held that the FAA preempts state laws that single out arbitration clauses for disfavored treatment. a lawsuit alleging that attorneys for the city of Albuquerque had maliciously prosecuted the plaintiff in violation of the Fourth Amendment. In one of these decisions, Judge Gorsuch dissented from the majority's holding that federal agents did not abridge the defendant's Fourth Amendment rights when they approached the house where he was staying and knocked "for several minutes" The case, United States v. Carloss, was decided in 2016. The decision, written in originalism, was appealed to the Supreme Court, which ruled in favor of the defendant. signs around a home would not have conveyed to an objective officer that he could not knock on its door asking to speak with its residents. Judge Gorsuch disagreed. In so doing, he noted that, at the time when the Fourth Amendment was drafted, "the common law permitted government agents to knock on the doors of homes" and speak to residents. "The common law ... permitted government Agents to knock and talk to people in their homes," he said. "It was not a violation of the First Amendment," he added. entering without the homeowner's consent." In the second case involving the scope of the Fourth Amendment's protections against unreasonable searches and seizures, Judge Gorsuch wrote on behalf of a unanimous three-judge panel in holding that a government entity had conducted an impermissible search. In this case, the court ruled that the government had conducted a search that was impermissible under the Constitution's Fourth Amendment protections. The case is U.S. v. Ackerman, and the ruling is expected to be appealed. Amendment's Petition Clause, Judge Gorsuch, writing for a three-judge panel, reversed a district court's dismissal of a claim that several county officials had violated the plaintiff's First Amendment rights. In a particularly pointed passage in Van Deelan targeting adult bookstores, he dissented from the denial of a petition for en banc rehearing. In so doing, he contended that the underlying panel decision interpreted the First Amendment too broadly and "set[] a new and much much" nevertheless affirmed. After a panel of judges affirmed a conviction for failure to register as a sex offender, in United States v. Nichols, Judge Gorsuch dissented from the denial of a petition for rehearing en banc based on his view that Congress, in delegating to the Attorney General the authority to act, did not have the power to rehear the case. The case was decided in favor of the defendant, who was convicted of failing to register and sentenced to 20 years in prison. a voter initiative violated the Constitution's Guarantee Clause, the original three-judge panel rejected arguments that the court lacked jurisdiction over the case. Judge Gorsuch dissented from a subsequent denial of rehearing en banc, arguing that the Court lacked jurisdiction to hear the suit because it presented a nonjusticiable political question. He said the case was not justiciable because it was a political issue, not a legal one. The case is now before the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit. no actual agreement to arbitrate as there was no meeting of the minds as to how claims that implicated the numerous agreements would be arbitrated. Judge Gorsuch dissented, stating "I just don't see any doubt that the parties before us did intend to arbitrates. All six — yes six —of the parties' All six—yes six — of the parties were in favor of an arbitrator. That's what this case was all about. It was about an arbiter," he said. under a state contract to a specific individual, who sought a higher price than the company was willing to pay. Judge Gorsuch rejected this claim, in part, on the grounds that the state officials would have required a similar subcontracting agreement from any other contractor, making the state's case more palatable to the Supreme Court. The case is still pending, however, and could be heard by a lower court later this year. The decision is expected to be appealed to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit. on race or sex, but may be more skeptical of interpreting the Equal Protection Clause expansively to shield against previously unrecognized forms of discrimination. Judge Gorsuch also joined the unanimous decision by a panel of the Tenth Circuit in 2015 in Druley v. Patton. In 2009, in 2009, Judge Gorsuch joined a unanimous decision  in a case involving a transgendered prisoner in an all-male facility. In that case, the court ruled that the prisoner was not entitled to wear female undergarments because she was housed in a male facility. the women's restroom "until she could prove completion of sex reassignment surgery" In both cases, unanimous panels purported to rely on direct precedent in reaching their conclusions. For example, in Druley , the panel noted Tenth Circuit precedent holding that transsexuals are not members of a class for which heightened heightened security is needed. In Druley, the court said that transsexual women are not part of a group for which enhanced security is required. In the Druley case, the panel said that a woman could not use the women's bathroom until she had completed her surgery. Gorsuch has authored or otherwise participated in relatively few opinions addressing claims that a government enactment, policy, or practice has deprived persons of equal protection of the law in violation of the Fifth or Fourteenth Amendments to the U.S. Constitution. This language could suggest that Judge Gorsuch believes that the Constitution's equal protection principles play a crucial role in prohibiting certain government discrimination based on race, gender, or sexual orientation. He has called equal protection as "the law's keystone" and said that it is the law's duty to protect people from discrimination. race, gender, disability, and sexual orientation. There is one opinion, Secsys LLC v. Vigil , authored by Judge Gorsuch for a unanimous panel of the Tenth Circuit, that engages in an extended discussion of equal protection. This opinion characterizes equal protection as "the law's keystone"; explores the differences between intentional and unintentional discrimination. The opinion was written by Judge Neil Gorsuch, who is serving on a unanimous Tenth Circuit panel. It was published in the online edition of The Federalist, on sale now. an independent right of the people essential to the preservation of all other rights later enumerated in the Constitution and its amendments. Perhaps echoing Justice Scalia's quotation of poet Robert Frost, Judge Gorsuch wrote: [O]ur whole legal system is predicated on the notion that good borders make for good government, he said. He added that the U.S. is a nation of laws, not of borders, and that "good borders" make for "good government, not bad government" "Good borders" are "the basis of our legal system," he said, "and the reason we have a Constitution" Gorsuch reviewed extensively the Supreme Court's Eleventh Amendment jurisprudence. Ultimately, however, he found the case to be a victory for the state of Louisiana. The Supreme Court has "in recent years added a new gloss on Young 's gloss on Hans 's Gloss on theEleventh Amendment," he said. The case was decided by a vote of 7-2. The decision was the first in the case's history to be decided on the Eleventh amendment's grounds. could be decided on the sole question of whether the relief was prospective in nature. Having found that it was, Judge Gorsuch concluded that the case fell "within the scope of Ex parte Young and was not barred by the Eleventh Amendment" Of the various federalism cases interpreting the scope, this was the only one to fall within its scope. The case was decided by a three-judge panel, and the decision was upheld by a majority of the court's eight-member panel. concluded that it was inappropriate to resolve the "complex" Fourteenth Amendment "questions surrounding medical records," especially in the context of a qualified immunity challenge. The second opinion intimates at least some reluctance to adopting a more expansive reading of substantive due process rights in an unresolved area of law. It is perhaps the second opinion—perhaps the most significant—of the case. It was written by David Frum, a professor of law at the University of California, Los Angeles. He is the author of the book "The First Amendment: The Case for Due Process in the 21st Century" Judge Gorsuch has expressed clear views in support of abstention, the concept of a cooperative federalism, and the practice of federal courts certifying some questions of state laws to state courts. A related aspect of federalism is the doctrine of state sovereign immunity, which the Supreme Court has recognized underlies the Eleventh Amendment, and is a fundamental part of the U.S. Constitution. Judge Gorsuch's when appropriate, stating: "As a matter of comity and federalism,. . . we will usually hold our tongues" were unlawfully trying to displace tribal authority through such prosecutions. While Judge Gorsuch acknowledged that the federal Anti-Injunction Act "usually precludes federal courts from enjoining ongoing state court proceedings" "out of respect for comity and federalism," he relied upon "an important exception . . . [that] expressly authorizes federal courts" to intervene in state court cases, the judge said. The case is still pending in the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of New York. in a non-Article III bankruptcy court without the consent of the parties. Judge Gorsuch described the purpose of Article III of the Constitution as crafted by the Framers to be "the cure for their complaint [against the crown], promising there that the federal government will never be allowed to take [the crown] without the parties' consent" The Supreme Court ruled in favor of a challenge to the constitutionality of the Supreme Court's decision to strike down part of the Affordable Care Act in 2010. governing principle for determining the types of claims Article I courts (like bankruptcy courts) can hear. Judge Gorsuch has repeatedly stressed that he believes that the division of legislative and judicial powers is not a mere "formality dictated by the Constitution" Nor is it "just about ensuring that two institutions ... are not separate," he says. "It's about ensuring ... that they are not two separate institutions," he adds. "That's what the Constitution is all about. It's not a formality," the judge says. Displaces state causes of action, such as tort claims, has been an issue of considerable dispute on the High Court in recent years. In determining whether federal law preempts common law tort claims,. the Supreme Court could have an impact on the case. If he is elevated to the Court, the case could have a major impact on tort claims. If not, the issue could be decided by the next Supreme Court term in 2016. The case could also have a significant impact on other cases in the future. constitutional violation" in federal court and thus "make of the Fourteenth Amendment a font of tort law" needlessly superimposed on perfectly adequate existing state tort law systems. While abstention was not properly raised by the parties in Browder , Judge Gorsuch opined in his concurrence that "when the issue is issue is constitutional violation" it should be brought up in a federal court, not a state court. In Browder, the parties failed to raise the issue of constitutional violation in court. they were preempted by federal law. Judge Gorsuch disagreed. Examining the statute's text, the nominee wrote: "Where does any of this language—expressly—preempt and preclude all state law tort recoveries for plaintiffs who plead but do not prove nuclear incidents? We just don't see it" While finding the statute itself determinative, the judge found that the law was not "preempted" by the federal law in question. The Supreme Court is expected to vote on the nominee in the next few weeks. discussed below. However, the nominee's discussion of these concerns in Lexington Insurance is arguably notable for its relative length. This is because the sole legal authority cited by Judge Gorsuch as supporting purpose-based applications of the absurdity doctrine is an 1892 Supreme Court decision that has not enjoyed particular favor. The full transcript of the hearing is available at the bottom of this article. For confidential support, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. Inst itute v. Epel , where he described the doctrine as "another pocket of federal jurisprudence characterized by a long and evolving history of almost common-law-like judicial decision making" In recounting the development of dormant Commerce Clause jur isprudence, the nominee stated in a seemingly skeptical tone: Most everyone accepts that most everyone accepts the Commerce Clause is not a law of the United States, he said. "It's just a principle," he said, referring to the Supreme Court's decision in the case. In Kerr v. Hickenlooper, a suit brought by state legislators claiming that.prudential standing in a challenge brought against a local government entity under the Supremacy Clause. Judge Gorsuch, however, wrote a concurring opinion concluding the court lacked subject matter jurisdiction over the case in the first place. The case was settled in a mistrial, and the Supreme Court is expected to rule on the case again in the near future. The state of Colorado is seeking to overturn the decision. allowing major party candidates to accept twice as much in contributions per individual as independent and minor party candidates. Judge Gorsuch agreed with the majority that the Colorado law violated the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. He attempted to allay fears that the ruling "imperiled" any attempts to regulate campaign contributions, citing federal law as a nondiscriminatory model available to the State of Colorado. In so concluding, however, the concurrence broadly concluded that the law was unconstitutional. in campaign contributions, the Supreme Court "has yet to apply strict scrutiny to contribution limit challenges," he wrote. Judge Gorsuch's concurrence in Riddle does not go so far as to argue explicitly for subjecting contribution limits to strict scrutiny. But it does cite to Justices who have made such an argument in the past, prompting some commentators to conclude that the nominee may favor subjecting campaign finance restrictions to the most stringent standard of review. At the very least, the Riddle concurrence's language may signal that Judge Gorsuch disagrees with retired Justice John Paul Stevens's position. noted that the "act of contributing to political campaigns implicates a 'basic constitutional freedom," one lying 'at the foundation of a free society' and enjoying a significant relationship to the right to speak and associate. The nominee then observed that despite the First Amendment interests of the campaign contributors, he would vote against the GOP's health care reform bill. He then said he would not vote for President Barack Obama's health reform bill, which he called a "disaster" for the country. the First Amendment liberties and the promise of equal treatment essential to the continuity of our democratic enterprise. With this backdrop, the nominee rejected the county's argument that the plaintiff's tax assessment challenges did not amount to "constitutionally protected activity" Because they were not a matter of "public concern," concluded the nominee, concluding that the case was not "a matter of public concern" The case was settled on a confidential basis, and the judge ruled in favor of the plaintiff. The judge's decision was appealed to the Supreme Court. to the degree to which he will defer to the purported interests suggested by claimants seeking to rely upon such laws. The Supreme Court has issued a number of notable opinions over the past decade respecting the First Amendment and freedom of speech. Some legal scholars and practitioners have gone as far as to say that the Supreme Court should not be allowed to regulate free speech in the first place. The high court has ruled in favor of the right to free speech on several occasions in the last decade, including in two separate cases. position that could be seen as consistent with the originalist approach often ascribed to him. However, none of these cases purported to explore the scope of the Second Amendment's protections or the Supreme Court's decisions in D.C. v. Heller and McDonald v. City of Chicago , two challenges to gun rights. The Supreme Court has ruled in favor of gun owners in two of the three cases, but not in the other two, the court has said. The court has also said it will take up the issue of gun rights in a future case. The nominee has authored or joined a handful of opinions touching on free speech issues. If confirmed, he could have a significant influence on the future direction of free speech law. The nominee should not be viewed as a free speech absolutist, as a number of his opinions have recognized limits to the First Amendment's speech protections. For example, in Mink v. Knox, he concluded that in 2010 case that concluded that.public employee unions were protected by free speech. The Senate is expected to vote on whether to confirm the nominee on Tuesday. , Judge Gorsuch wrote broadly about the underlying dangers of suppression of speech by government officials. When public officials feel free to wield the powers of their office as weapons against those who question their decisions, they do damage not merely to the citizen in their sights but also to the public at large, he said. The Supreme Court's first black justice, Thurgood Marshall, was shot to death in 1968. He was the first African-American to serve in the U.S. House of Representatives. public employee speech, the nominee has authored several opinions limiting or dismissing First Amendment lawsuits brought by government employees against their employers. With regard to challenges to zoning ordinances, he has argued that the speech occurred pursuant to the employees' official duties and, therefore, could be regulated by the government. He has also argued that government employees should not be able to sue their employers to prevent them from using their official duties to speak out against the government's policies. The nominee's opinions have been published in The Federalist, The American Spectator, and The New York Times. Gorsuch has written or joined a number of opinions that view the First Amendment as an important restriction on government activity. He may align him with the majority of the Roberts Court that has rejected the argument that the first Amendment does not protect certain "low value" speech. In addition to Van Deelan , Judge Gorsuch has written a number. opinions that promote the rights of the press at the expense of plaintiffs in certain state tort actions. For example, in Bustos v. A&E Television, he said, "money . . . is not speech" First Amendment. Judge Gorsuch's work on the Tenth Circuit has broached the issue of campaign finance regulation and the First Amendment. A divided Supreme Court has invalidated a number of federal and state election laws —at the margins. For example, in the en banc ruling in Hobby LobbyEn banc case may have limited significance with respect to his broader views on the constitutionality of campaign Finance laws. Perhaps more insights as to Judge Gorsuch’s views onThe First Amendment and campaign finance Regulation come from Riddle v. Hickenlooper , a 2014 case that invalidated Colorado law. v. Sebelius , Judge Gorsuch joined the majority opinion that concluded that the "logic" of Citizens United v. FEC —the 2010 Supreme Court ruling that, in relevant part, stated that "First Amendment protection extends to Corporations" —compelled the conclusion that the First Amendment also protects a corporation's religious expressions. While Judge Scalia was a member of the Supreme Court, he was not on the panel that ruled in favor of the Citizens United ruling. He was on the Court of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit. disagreement between the members of the Court in Citizens United was more complex than whether the First Amendment protects a corporation's speech. The issue centered on whether the "asserted inclinations and advantages of corporations in corrupting officeholders" justified restricting corporate campaign expenditures. In other words, Judge Gorsuch's vote in the 2013 Citizens United case was not a clear-cut yes or no. It was a matter of principle, not a question of First Amendment rights. It's not clear whether he would have voted the same way in the Citizens United decision. furtherance of a cooperative federalism by deferring to the states when circumstances so warrant. A central constitutional issue respecting freedom of religion that Judge Gorsuch has considered concerns the reach of the First Amendment's prohibition on the establishment of a national religion. The High Court has, at times, read to bar certain government actions that endorse religion. In determining what constitutes an unconstitutional government action, the Supreme Court must decide what constitutes a "national religion," the judge has written or joined several notable opinions. religious tolerance," Judge Gorsuch's concurrence emphasized that courts should largely defer to the assertions about the nature of religious beliefs made by those who sincerely hold these beliefs. "The judiciary's limited competence to scrutinize the veracity of such beliefs," the concurrence said. "This is out of respect for religious liberty and because of the judiciary'slimited competence to scrutiny such beliefs" The Supreme Court is expected to rule on the case in the next few weeks, the Justice Department said. The case is expected in the fall. of the drug was central to the exercise of their newly created religion, which taught that "marijuana was a deity and sacrament" Judge Gorsuch is apt to interpret statutory free exercise laws, much like the Establishment Clause, to embrace the role of religion in society. But there are limits to the role religion can play in society, and there are constitutional limits to free exercise, too, he says. The Supreme Court is expected to rule on the case in the next few months, and the case is likely to be closely watched. Gorsuch's most notable writings on freedom of religion may arise in the context of statutory free exercise claims. In two cases subsequently reviewed by the Supreme Court, the nominee authored or joined opinions involving challenges under the Religious Freedom Restoration Act (RFRA) to the contraceptive coverage requirement in the Affordable Care Act. Outside of litigation over the ACA's contraceptive requirement, Judge Gorsuch has emphasized the importance of accommodating religious beliefs in other statutoryFreeExercise challenges, especially in prison litigation brought under RFRA. Judge Harris Hartz, joined by four other judges, dissented from the decision not to rehear a case dismissing a challenge to this government accommodation policy. Judge Hartz's opinion criticized the panel's refusal "to acknowledge that [the plaintiff's] religious belief" was a reason for the case's dismissal. He was joined by Judge Neil Gorsuch, who also dissented in the case dismissing the challenge to the government's accommodation policy, as well as Judge Alito and Judge Thomas, who did not. exercise law, (1) noting the "modest" task of the court in determining a claimant's sincerity; and (2) rejecting a conception of the compelling interest inquiry that would allow the government to rely on abstract interests to satisfy its burden under RLUIPA. Similarly, in Abdulhaseeb v. Calbone , Judge Gorsuch joined a unanimous opinion that said the government could not rely on an abstract interest to satisfy the burden of proof in a case like that one. can eat consistent with his . . . sincerely held religious beliefs," "effectively forcing him to choose between remaining pious or starving" That's a claim that "lies at [the] heart" of a statutory free exercise claim, the judge says. But he adds that he's not solicitous of religious accommodation, just religious accommodation for a person's right to eat as he pleases. "I don't think I've ever seen a case in which I've been able to say that," he says, "and I'm not sure why" Care Act (ACA) RFRA provides that federal laws that substantially burden a person's exercise of religion are permissible only if they are the least restrictive means of furthering a compelling governmental interest. In the Tenth Circuit's 2013 en banc decision in Hobby Lobby v. Sebelius , Judge Gorsuch joined the Court in striking down the Affordable Care Act (Care Act) in favor of the Hobby Lobby owners' right to practice their religion. The Supreme Court ruled that the law infringed on the rights of Hobby Lobby's owners. the Religious Land Use and Institutionalized Persons Act (RLUIPA), a statute that imposes the same burden RFRA imposes for the federal government on certain state entities, like prisons. For instance, in Yellowbear v. Lambert , Judge Gorsuch, writing on behalf of a three-judge panel, held that a Wyoming prison lacked a religious exemption from the RFRA's requirements to be open to the LGBT community. The case was heard in the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of Wyoming. also apparent in the concurring opinion Judge Gorsuch authored in Direct Marketing Association v. Brohl. In the case, a state law imposing a notice and reporting obligation on out-of-state retailers that are not required to collect sales tax did not discriminate against or unduly burden interstate commerce, the opinion said. The opinion said that the law did not "discriminate against ... interstate commerce" and therefore did not unduly burdens interstate commerce. The decision was upheld on appeal by the Supreme Court. higher burden for municipalities" that made it harder to regulate the secondary effects of adult businesses. In a case raising issues similar to those in a case presently before the Court, Judge Gorsuch, in Doe v. Shurtleff, joined an opinion holding that a Utah law requiring registered sex workers to be sterilized was unconstitutional. The Supreme Court is expected to rule on the case in the next few months. The case is Doe v Sh Turtleff, which is still pending before the Supreme Court. personal involvement in facilitating . . . [the destruction of] a fertilized human egg that their religious faith holds impermissible," a "matter of faith" that, in the nominee's view, the court "must respect" As a result, Judge Gorsuch's Hobby Lobby concurrence viewed RFRA as a "tie-breaker" that Congress designed to "tie the knot," he said. The Supreme Court should "respect" RFRA, he said, but not in a way that violates religious freedom. subterfuge to avoid laws they'd prefer to ignore. In one case, U.S. v. Quaintance, a unanimous panel rejected the argument that RFRA barred the prosecution of members of a marijuana distribution conspiracy who claimed that the use of "substfuge" was illegal. Judge Gorsuch wrote on behalf of the unanimous panel: " RFRA does not bar prosecution of those who use 'subst fuge' to avoid law they'd like to ignore" He added: "RFRA is not a bar to prosecution of marijuana distribution conspirators" Judge says RFRA and RLUIPA are "super statute[s]," "capable of mowing down inconsistent" laws. For a plaintiff "to win" under the law "takes no small effort," he says. Such laws do "not offer refuge to canny operators who seek through" the law, he adds. For more on this story, go to CNN.com/soulmatestories. Back to the page you came from.  http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/features/2013/01/26/gorsh-gorsk-says-RFRA-and-RLUIPa-are-super-statutes-capable-of-mowing-down inconsistent" Gorsuch: "Chevron and Brand X permit executive bureaucracies to swallow huge amounts of core judicial and legislative" He wrote that to do otherwise would raise due process and equal protection concerns. He also penned a solo concurrence to take note of the "elephant in the room": "The fact is Chevron and BrandX permit executive bureaucracy to swallowhuge amounts ofcore judicial, legislative, and administrative power" He added: "To do otherwise" would raise "due process andequal protection concerns" "override other legal mandates, including its own statutes, if and when they encroach on religious liberty," he wrote. Two years later, Judge Gorsuch joined an opinion in Little Sisters of the Poor v. Burwell that repeated many of the themes of his Hobby Lobby concurrence. The dissent argued that the panel decision had "reframe[d] and minimized the plaintiffs' religious objections. In so doing, the dissent can be seen to have repeated many the themes from Judge Gorsuch's Hobby Lobby Concurrence. Gorsuch emphasized that it made little difference that the burden on the plaintiffs in Hobby Lobby did not stem from the government affirmatively requiring their use of a "particular drug or device" This was because the plaintiffs had argued that the government imposed a religious burden by requiring their religious use of such a drug. A lower court's reliance on Supreme Court precedent may not necessarily signal agreement with that precedent, as noted by one of the concurring opinions in the Hobby Lobby case. The Hobby Lobby decision signals Judge Gorsuch's broader support for decisions like Citizens United. lead opinion of Judge Timothy Tymkovich and wrote a separate concurrence. In Hobby Lobby , two closely held corporations, whose owners chose to "run their business to reflect their religious values," challenged the contraceptive requirement. They argued that it violated their religious beliefs for their businesses to "facilitate any act that acts that violate their religious views" The decision was handed down in April by the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of New York, which covers New York City, Philadelphia and New Jersey. in American Atheists as merely replicating the errors from Green , stating: "[W]e will strike down laws other courts would uphold, and do so whenever a reasonably biased, impaired, and distracted viewer might confuse them for an endorsement of religion" More generally, Judge Gorsuch's dissent pointedly criticized the concept of Atheists. He expressed skepticism regarding interpretations of the First Amendment that discourage accommodation for religious views. Instead, he appears to favor an approach that is more restrained in using the power of judicial review in Establishment Clause cases. after Green , Judge Gorsuch similarly dissented from an order denying en banc rehearing in American Atheists, Inc. v. Davenport. In that case, the panel had relied on the reasonable observer test in holding that the display of twelve-foot high crosses on public lands to memorialize fallen Utah Highway was unconstitutional. In this sense, Judge Gorsuch viewed the panel decision in this case as the same as the decision in Green. The panel decision was based on the observer's "biased presumption that the Utah roadside crosses are unconstitutional" Gorsuch has criticized what he viewed as overly expansive interpretations of the reasonable observer test. He said these interpretations needlessly eliminate certain religious symbols and traditions from the public sphere. In Green v. Haskell County Board of Commissioners, he said the test could be used "to strike down laws and policies a conjured observer could mistakenly think respect an establishment of religion" He also wrote a dissent in American v. Heller, in which he argued that the test should not be used in the Establishment Clause context. whether the endorsement test even applies to the dispute. Judge Gorsuch's dissent is reminiscent of recent Supreme Court jurisprudence, where a majority of the Justices, including Justice Scalia, appeared to move to looking to historical practices and understandings to resolve Establishment Clause disputes. Nearly two years later, the Supreme Court is still grappling with the Establishment Clause's role in the Constitution. The court is expected to rule on the case in the next few weeks, possibly as early as next week. The case is expected in front of a panel that includes Justice Scalia and Justice Anthony Kennedy. endorsement of religion, the Court has in the recent past adopted Justice Sandra Day O'Connor's "reasonable observer test" The test looks to whether an "objective observer," acquainted with the background of the challenged government action, would perceive it as a government endorsement of religion. However, paralleling some of Justice Scalia's views, the court has also adopted a test for whether a government action would be seen as endorsing religion. The test is called the " reasonable observer test," and it can be applied to a variety of government actions. the reasonable observer test, describing the observer utilized by the panel decision as an " unreasonable one" who "gets things wrong" Judge Gorsuch's dissent noted a number of perceived errors made by the "unreasonable observer," which included confusing the donor's intent with the government's message and equating silence by the donor with silence by a government official. The dissent was published in the Federalist Society's online magazine, "The Federalist," on Thursday. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. whether a fundamental right has been infringed under the Due Process Clause. In addition to noting these limits on the doctrine in the majority opinion, Judge Gorsuch authored a separate opinion in Browder to discuss an argument forfeited by the defendant that would further limit substantive due process claims. There are, however, limits on what can be gleaned from Judge Gorsuch's book with respect to his broader views on unenumerated, or morality-based, right claims. The views in the 2006 book may question broader conceptions of the Due process Clause that are based on abstraction. While serving on the Tenth Circuit, Judge Gorsuch has authored or joined a few opinions that touch on the substantive due process of whom died and the other of whom suffered serious injuries. Describing the doctrine as having a "paradoxical name" and being a "murky area" of law, he noted the view that the doctrine either misplaces the source of fundamental rights to life without sufficient justification. As a result, the extensive concerns raised by Judge Gorsuch may signal the nominee's skepticism toward the application of the doctrine in cases presenting less egregious fact patterns. doctrine, and he has never squarely ruled on the right to an abortion or to marry. But two opinions do provide some insights into his views on substantive due process rights. In a 2011 case, Kerns v. Bader , Judge Gorsuch, writing on behalf of a divided panel, said that a woman's right to a trial by jury should not trump her right to be heard by a jury. He also said that the court should not be required to rule in favor of the defendant in such a case. justified by looking at past historical practices. In evaluating the historical test for substantive due process, he notes that the test is the subject of "considerable methodological disputes" The book itself does not expressly reject the historical Test for substantive Due Process. Instead, Judge Gorsuch, "seeking to apply the history test faithfully," examines the "historical record broadly in terms of time and at different times" He notes that there are questions about "what 'level' of historical abstraction" is needed, "whose history" should be evaluated. Gorsuch challenges the views of Justices O'Connor and Kennedy respecting the historical test and the level of abstraction needed to recognize a historically based fundamental right. He concludes that there is limited support for a historical right to assisted suicide. He also examines what he calls the "reasoned" test for determining which liberty interests are protected by the Due Process Clause. He appears to be somewhat skeptical of more expansive views of thehistorical test to determine what constitutes a fundamental right, he says. because of the open ended nature of substantive due process. In particular, relying on concurring opinions authored by Justices Kennedy and Scalia in a 1998 Supreme Court opinion, Judge Gorsuch then observed that "history and precedent" and the plaintiff's state of mind are critical guideposts to cabin the inquiry into the case. "History and precedent," he said, "are critical guidepost to Cabin the Inquiry into the Case" and "the Plaintiff's State of mind" is critical. "The plaintiff's State Of Mind," he added, "is critical" to Cabin The Case. judgment" approach whereby "moral reasoning" and "critical discourse"dictate what constitutes a fundamental right. In recent years, a divided Court appears to have moved toward such an approach. Judge Gorsuch neither endorses nor rejects the reasoned judgment approach, opting instead to ask open questions that "one might" ask. "One might" instead of "one has" is a common way of asking questions on the Supreme Court, especially when it comes to cases involving abortion and same-sex marriage. Judge Gorsuch's textualist approach is sometimes said to have led to "defendant-friendly" results. He dissenting from the denial of rehearing en banc in United States v. Games-Perez. This case centered on the question of whether federal statutes penalizing the possession of firearms by felons require as a felon a prior felony conviction. Judge Gorsuch's opinion, which primarily centered on a text-based interpretation of the statute, also suggested that his interpretation was consistent with constitutional requirements. Amendment, noting that "gun possession is often lawful and sometimes even protected as a matter of constitutional right" In particular, he viewed the fact that gun possession can be lawful and constitutionally protected as weighing in favor of requiring the government to prove that the defendant knew of his status to prohibit using, carrying, or possessing a gun per se. Judge Gorsuch's opinions could, in part, be seen to reflect or even expand on the precedent of the Supreme Court's decision in Heller , which the possession of firearms by felons and the mentally ill. on the possession of firearms by felons, in particular, in several decisions. Other opinions authored by Judge Gorsuch include similar language. In a few cases, such as Pope v. Pope, the issue was resolved on procedural grounds, he says. He says he has no plans to change his stance on the issue of felons possessing firearms. He is a member of the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit, which rules in cases such as United States v.Pope. opinion rejecting a necessity defense to a federal gun charge as a matter of law. In another case, he joined a unanimous opinion authored by another judge concluding that law enforcement did not violate the Fourth Amendment rights of a defendant carrying a concealed handgun when the officers subjected the defendant to a search and seizure of his gun. In a third case, another judge concluded that police did not violation a defendant's Fourth Amendment right when they searched a car he was riding in with a concealed gun in the trunk. his opinions have (although not universally) cited. Other opinions authored by Judge Gorsuch, though, suggest potential openness to at least certain restrictions on firearms possession, consistent with the widely cited dictum in Heller that "nothing in [the Supreme Court's] opinion should be taken to cast doubt on longstanding prohibitions on , the opinions cite to other judges who have taken a different view of Heller 's dictum. However, these citations may be intended to signal awareness of these judges' arguments, rather than agreement with them. in his judicial writings to date. Judge Gorsuch's references to the Second Amendment have generally appeared in cases concerned with how to construe federal criminal statutes. In one case, Judge Gorsuch authored a unanimous opinion in favor of the prosecution of a defendant in a federal criminal case. The most notable of these was arguably Judge. Gorsuch's dissent from the Tenth Circuit's Gorsuch's opinions arise in contexts that do not directly raise Second. Amendment claims, and the outcomes in these cases could be seen to reflect other factors beyond the nominee's views about gun possession and the scope of the Second. firearm during and in relation to crimes of violence more than the total number of times you have used a firearm. Judge Gorsuch had expressed similar concerns about reading the mens rea element of denial of en banc review in United States v. Games-Perez. At issue in that case was whether federal statutes penalizing the possession of firearms by felons require the government to prove that a defendant knew of both his own status as a felon and his possession of the firearm. The longstanding Tenth Circuit precedent is that the government need only prove knowing possession of a firearms. for a majority of the en banc Tenth Circuit in United States v. Rentz , Judge Gorsuch diagrammed a segment of a sentence in a criminal statute. The specific interpretative question in Rentz was whether multiple charges should be considered in one case. Figure 1 below shows how the diagram was used to address the underlying question in the case of Rentz, a federal criminal case that involved multiple charges in the same case. The question was whether a single charge could be considered to be more than one, or not. including his 2015 opinion for the majority of the en banc Tenth Circuit in United States v. Rentz. Like Games-Perez , the Rentz case was concerned with how to interpret a federal criminal statute related to firearms. Section 924(c) of Title 18 of the U.S. Code which imposes "heightened penalties" for breaking the law. The case was decided by a three-judge panel, with the majority ruling in favor of the defendant. The ruling was upheld on appeal by the Supreme Court. defendant to an investigative detention and weapons seizure. The law of the state in question exempted persons with valid licenses to carry concealed weapons, among others, from its general prohibition upon carrying loaded firearms in public. However, in the Tenth Circuit's view, the existence of this exemption did not negate law enforcement's reasonable suspicion, at the time when the defendant was detained, that the defendant's possession of the firearm was unlawful. Accordingly, law enforcement had "no affirmative obligation prior to seizing Defendant—at the risk of harm to [themselves] and others" the government to prove that a defendant knew of both his own status as a felon and his possession of a firearm, or whether the government needs to prove only that the defendant knowingly possessed a firearm. The longstanding Tenth Circuit precedent is that the government need only prove knowing knowing, the court says. The court says it will rule on the issue in the next few weeks, and the decision is likely to be appealed to the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of New York, where the case is based. may be brought under Section 924(c) of Title 18 of the United States Code against a defendant who fired a single shot that hit two separate victims. According to Judge Gorsuch's opinion for the majority, this diagram helped clarify that law. The diagram was created to help clarify the law, according to the majority's opinion. The opinion was written by Judge Neil M. Gorsuch, who wrote the majority opinion on behalf of the court's three-judge panel in the Supreme Court. the total number of charges lodged against a criminal defendant under the statute should never "exceed the number of uses, carries, or possessions" because: Just as you can't throw more touchdowns during the fourth quarter than the total amount of times you have thrown a touchdown, you cannot use a charge against you that exceeds the total number you have used, carries or possessions. Just like you cannot throw more touchdown passes than the amount of touchdown passes you have ever thrown in a game, you couldn't use a felony charge that exceeds your total touchdown throws in a season. better than that" and "the law demands more than that." In fact, much of the book has little to do with the law. At its heart, the book explores the various ethical arguments regarding assisted suicide and euthanasia. The book does not purport to provide a conclusive view of the author's understandings of the underlying constitutional issues. At times, at times, the author may be too literal in his analysis of the issues. It is not clear whether the book will be published in the United States. extensive writings on fundamental rights and substantive due process are found not in his court opinions, but in his outside work. In 2006 he wrote a book entitled The Future of Assisted Suicide and Euthanasia. In assessing the philosophical arguments related to assisted suicide and euthanasia, the nominee addressed key legal doctrines implicating the right to die. The legal discussion in Judge Gorsuch's book raises broader questions about the substantive due Process doctrine and how to assess when a fundamental right is protected by the clause. The report discusses numerous cases and votes involving Judge Gorsuch. It focuses particularly on cases in which the sitting panel was divided, as these cases arguably best showcase his work. Where relevant, the report also notes Judge Gorsuch's nonjudicial writings, many of which address assisted suicide and euthanasia. During his 2006 confirmation hearing, Judge Gorsuch largely dismissed the argument that his writings on euthanasia and assisted suicide would in any way influence his work as a judge. He said his "personal views" as expressed in his writings "have nothing to do with the case before me" Gorsuch argues that "the intentional taking of a human life by private persons is always wrong" His book does not address "publicly authorized forms of killing like capital punishment and war," nor does it address capital punishment or war. "Human life is fundamentally and inherently valuable," he writes. "The intentional taking" of a person's life is "always wrong," he adds. "This is not an argument for capital punishment," he says. "It's a call to justice" Gorsuch questions whether Justices O'Connor and Kennedy meant to suggest that a court may disregard Michael H. Michael's request for an abortion. He also questions whether the law on assisted suicide is more restrictive than that on suicide more generally. The Supreme Court is expected to rule on the issue by the end of the year or early next year, depending on the outcome of the Supreme Court's review of Michael's case. Click here for more on this story and more from CNN iReport. Gorsuch: Casey should be viewed as based on its "narrowest rationale," the stare decisis rationale. He took the view that the alternative of recognizing Roe.settled law—required upholding Roe . Relying on this second holding to respond to autonomy based arguments for a right to assisted suicide, he said. He said Roe should be seen as a case for the right to die, not a case to be tried for assisted suicide. He added that Roe is a case that should be looked at on a broader basis. v. Glucksberg and Vacco v. Quill, that collectively upheld state laws that outlawed assisted suicide against substantive due process and equal protection challenges. In recounting the litigation in the two cases, Judge Gorsuch devotes a chapter to questions related to determining whether a right to assisted suicide can be a right. The case will be heard by the Supreme Court on November 26 and 27 in New York and Washington, D.C. and on November 28 in New Jersey and New York City. The tie vote resulted in the denial of the inmate's application for a stay. It left in place a decision by the Eleventh Circuit that had rejected as untimely and unmeritorious the prisoner's Eighth Amendment challenge to the drug protocol that the State of New York had set up.prohibition against "cruel and unusual punishment" The tie vote was the first of its kind in the history of the federal appeals court. It was also the first in a case involving a prisoner's challenge to a drug protocol. the majority opinion holding that the use of the drug midazolam in executions by lethal injection was unlikely to violate the Eighth Amendment's prohibition against cruel and unusual punishment. The Supreme Court later affirmed that decision by a vote of 5-4, with Justice Scalia in the majority. Similarly, in Estate, the majority opinion held that the Use of the Drug in Executions by Lethal Injections was not likely to violate Eighth Amendment prohibition againstcruel and unusual punishments. The majority opinion was later affirmed by aVote of 4-3, and Justice Scalia was in the Majority. shown a reckless disregard for human life during the commission of the crime. The judge wrote that the Eighth Amendment phrase "cruel and unusual punishment" would likely bar such a concept of punishment. The Eighth Amendment was originally understood by people at the time of the founding and subsequently interpreted by the Supreme Court, the judge said in his ruling. The ruling was appealed to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit, which is expected to hear the case in the coming weeks. carry out the death penalty. In December 2016, the Supreme Court split 4-4 over whether to stay (i.e., suspend pending further review) the execution of an Alabama man. The man challenged the state's method of administering the death sentence on the grounds that it violates the Eighth Amendment's right to a life without parole. The Supreme Court is expected to make a decision on the case in the coming months. The case will be heard by a panel of four justices on Tuesday. Alabama used in its lethal injections. Judge Gorsuch's votes in support of two Tenth Circuit opinions rejecting similar challenges to the method in which a state carried out executions suggests that, if confirmed, he might provide a fifth vote against such challenges. In Warner v. Gross , Judge Gorsuch joined with the Tenth Circuit to reject a challenge to the state's lethal injection method. If confirmed, Judge Gorsuch would become the fifth member of the Supreme Court to vote against a state's Lethal Injections Act challenge. the Eighth Amendment even if it causes some pain to the inmate. State prisoners sentenced to death pursuant to a judgment of a state court may challenge their convictions and sentences in federal court. Such prisoners may file a petition seeking a writ of habeas corpus. The nominee's views on the death penalty may also find expression in opinions he has authored or joined reviewing federal district court decisions on ha beas corpus petitions, he says. He adds that he has no plans to run for president in 2016. is designed to avoid friction between the federal government and the states. It typically makes it difficult for an inmate to prevail in a federal habeas case. Like Justice Scalia, he rarely voted to grant petitioners' applications for federal ha beas relief in death penalty cases. Judge Gorsuch has authored or joined a number of cases involving the death penalty, including one involving an inmate who was sentenced to death for drug possession. He has also served on a federal appeals court and a federal federal appeals panel. joined opinions reviewing the manner in which states carry out executions, as well as opinions reviewing state court convictions and sentences in capital cases. These votes and opinions suggest that, while the nominee is not wholly opposed to scrutinizing a state's imposition of the death penalty, in line with his views he is not entirely opposed to scrutiny of capital cases in the U.S. The nominee is expected to be inaugurated on January 20, 2015. He will be accompanied by his wife, Maryanne, and their three children. general views on judicial restraint, he generally accords a large degree of deference to decisions by state legislators, judges, and executive branch officials on matters relating to the states' imposition and administration of capital punishment. One issue over which the Court has remained divided concerns the manner in which states' impose capital punishment, which the Supreme Court has been divided on for more than a decade. The Court has also remained divided on the issue of the death penalty, which has been a point of dispute since the 1970s. the prisoner should receive a new trial, new sentence, or be released. The Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act of 1996 (AEDPA) requires federal courts to accord a large degree of deference to state court decisions when reviewing a prisoner's conviction or sentence. This deferential standard of review, which is called a "new trial" or "new sentence," is a key part of the AEDPA's deference standard. It is also the basis for the Supreme Court's decision to uphold the death penalty in the first place. Gorsuch's concurrence in one capital case in which the majority denied the petition for habeas relief indicates that there are some circumstances in which he may question the state's imposition of the death penalty. In Williams v. Trammel , Judge Gorsuch agreed that the court should deny the petitioner's claim for relief but expressed concerns with the state court's apparent willingness to impose capital punishment on an accomplice who had not intended that a criminal activity result in the death of another person or had not otherwise. to the states on capital punishment issues is his opinion in Eizember v. Trammel. The court reviewed the convictions and death sentence of a man who had murdered a married couple and committed various other crimes. The prisoner argued that the state trial court should have excluded him from the death penalty. He was convicted and sentenced to death for the murder of the married couple. The case was decided in favor of the man, who was sentenced to die by lethal injection in a Texas prison. openly that the practice is unconstitutional in all its forms. With the Court remaining closely divided on many issues relating to capital punishment, Judge Gorsuch could be influential regarding the future of the death penalty. Although the nominee has not written extensively on capital punishment,. he has authored or accessory liability. The nominee has generally demonstrated a propensity to defer to the decisions of state legislators, judges, and executive branch officials in matters relating to. capital punishment. He appears willing to scrutinize state court decisions that appear to contravene existing constitutional protections for capital defendants. Gorsuch's views on capital punishment may be particularly important insofar as he would, if confirmed, be replacing Justice Scalia, who believed the death penalty was fully consistent with the Eighth Amendment. With two Justices currently on the Court who have argued in favor of capital punishment, his views on the issue could be crucial if he is confirmed to the Supreme Court. If confirmed, he would replace Justice Scalia on the High Court. He would be the third member of the Court to support capital punishment. Gorsuch joined the majority opinion affirming the dismissal of an Eighth Amendment claim brought by an executed prisoner's estate. The court, relying on recent guidance from the Supreme Court, held that an accidental and "isolated mishap" that occurs during an execution does not violate the Eighth Amendment. The case is Lockett v. Fallin, and the decision was appealed to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Eastern District of New York, which upheld the execution. The appeals court is expected to hear the case in the coming weeks. jurors because of their alleged bias in favor of capital punishment. Judge Gorsuch asserted that the Tenth Circuit owed "double deference" to the state criminal appeals court's decision that the state trial court did not improperly fail to exclude the jurors from sentencing proceedings. Although Judge Gorsuch's opinions in these cases suggest he supports capital punishment, he has not ruled on the issue in any other cases in which he has been asked to rule on the matter. The Tenth Circuit has declined to comment on these cases. panel on the question of whether the state court of appeals had neglected to apply controlling Supreme Court precedent properly in assessing the petitioner's claim of juror bias during sentencing. He argued that the court should defer to the state appeals court's statements in its opinion, which indicated that the state had not followed Supreme Court precedents. He said that the appeals court had been wrong to say that the jury was biased in favor of the petitioner. The case is still pending in the state of New Jersey. Claim of a criminal defendant who, after receiving a full and fair trial, was sentenced to a harsher sentence than he otherwise would have received under an offered plea bargain. The defendant argued that his trial counsel had unduly pressured him into rejecting the plea. A majority of the court agreed that the defendant had established that the trial counsel rendered deficient performance that prejudiced his client. Judge Gorsuch, however, dissented, arguing that there is no constitutionally protected entitlement to accept and enforce a pretrial plea offer. his sentence or conviction. For example, in Wilson v. Workman , the Oklahoma Court of Criminal Appeals had rejected two death row inmates' claims of ineffective assistance of counsel. The appeals court declined to consider additional evidence proffered by the inmates on an issue that was not part of the trial court's decision to reject the inmates' claim of ineffective counsel. It was the first time the appeals court had rejected a death row inmate's request for ineffective counsel in more than a decade. The case was heard in the Oklahoma Supreme Court.