rescission proposal also made an additional $540.2 million in funding available for obligation to SSN-23. As a consequence, completing the approximate $2.4 billion cost of SSn-23 would require about $1.5 billion in additional funding. The Administration requested $1,507.5 million in FY1996 to complete the cost of the ship. Congress, as part of its action on the FY1996 defense budget, approved $649.1 million (rather than $699.1m) been procured in FY1991) and SSN-23. In acting on this proposal, Congress rejected the request to rescind funding forSSN-22. In 1993, as part of its Bottom-Up Review (BUR) of U.S. defense policy and programs, the Clinton Administration decided to reinstate procurement of SSn-23 in FY1995 or FY1996 (it later settled on FY1996) By this point, $382.4 million had already been obligated and expended on SSN -23. the third and final Seawolf (SSN-21) class attack submarine, was originally procured in the FY1992 defense budget, which Congress passed in 1991. In early 1992, the George H. W. Bush Administration terminated procurement of further Seawulf-class submarines and proposed rescinding funds for both the second and third boats. The second boat, the SSN-22, had been built in the 1970s and 1980s. The third boat was completed in the 1990s. periods, commencing with CVN-78 procurement in fiscal year 2008. The budget request included $739.1 million in Shipbuilding and Conversion, Navy (SCN) for CVn-78 advance procurement. The provision would also authorize advance procurement forCVN-80, commences in fiscalyear 2007. In view of the potential for significant program savings, the committee recommends an increase of $50.0 million in SCN for CVN21 class advance procurement, and directs the Secretary of Navy to increase the amount. avoidance (to include offsetting factors) for the first three vessels of the CVN-21 class. None of the funds are available for obligation prior to 30 days following receipt of the Secretary's report. Of the amount authorized to be appropriated for advance procurement for CVN.-79 and CVn-80, none of the money is available before 30 days after receipt of report. (Page 67) Conference Report: CVN 21-79, CVN 80, and CVN21-21. The committee remains concerned that the use of incremental funding is not a solution to the Navy's problem in funding shipbuilding. Under four-year incremental funding, the main portion of the procurement cost of CVN-78, for example, would be divided into four increments that would be provided in FY2008, the ship's year of H.R. 1815 / P.L. 109-163 of January 6, 2006. The Navy's proposed funding plan is to be funded over a total of nine years, with about 35.2% of its procurement cost provided in advance procurement funding between FY2001 and FY2007. traditional full-funding policy, and that more flexible methods of funding must be found and used. The program of record for CVN-78 has the detail design and construction funding split between two years and four years. This provision would authorize that same funding to be split over four years, thereby allowing needed funding flexibility, the bill says. The bill is expected to be voted on by the House of Representatives in the next few weeks, and the Senate in the following months. It is expected that the bill will be approved on a bipartisan basis. The committee believes that procuring and delivering the CVN-21 class aircraft carriers over 4-year periods in accordance with the Navy's long-range plan is vital to the National Defense Strategy. The committee has expressed concern with cost growth on theCVN-77 program, and has urged the Navy and the shipbuilder to identify opportunities to improve affordability of future aircraft carriers. Procurement delays, excess inflation, and material escalation have been reported as significant contributors to CVn-77 cost growth. The Navy originally planned to procure the first CVN-21 class aircraft carrier in fiscal year 2006. Since then, the Navy has delayed procurement to 2008, which has delayed fielding this vital capability. This budget request reflects the second one-year slip in the program in recent years. This slip would cause a delay in the delivery of the ship. It would also significantly increase the aircraft carrier's procurement cost. The committee carrier CVn-21. (Page 63) Section 1004 of the bill as reported by the committee states: the CVN-78 until fiscal year 2015, with the ship it is scheduled to replace, the USS Enterprise (CVN-65), scheduled to be decommissioned in fiscal year 2013. The committee is concerned about this. This slip translates into a cost growth of approximately $400.0 million, according to the Navy, and the Navy says it is working to correct the problem. The Navy says the ship will be ready for service in fiscal 2015, when the Enterprise will be retired. current ship-procurement funding practices; strengthen adherence to the full funding policy in ship procurement; increase the use of incremental funding in ship Procurement; and shift lead-ship detailed design/nonrecurring engineering (DD/NRE) costs to the Navy's research and development (R&D) account. Each of these is response to the challenge of paying for lead ships whose procurement cost includes significant DD/Nre costs, as the Navy has proposed in 2004 and 2005. of other ships as a result of concentrating potential reductions in future-year ship-procurement budgets on those ships. The House Armed Services Committee, in its report, said detailed design costs for certain past Navy ships have experienced significant cost growth. Including DD/NRE costs in research makes these costs more visible to Congress, which is important, the report said. It added that the current practice of including DD/ NRE costs for a complex combatant can be significant and make the lead ship significantly more expensive. costs are responsible actions. Incremental funding, advanced procurement, multiyear procurement, and various creative shipyard work allocation arrangements have failed to control the cost growth of vessel classes such as the Virginia class submarine, the replacement amphibious assault ship (LHA(R), the future major surface combatant ship (DD(X)), and the future aircraft. The future of the U.S. Navy will be decided by the US Navy's fleet of ships and submarines, which will be built over the next 50 years. requested for a mix of Class and ship specific plan, basic construction, ordnance, certification, and inspection costs. Such costs are traditionally included in the budget request for each ship. However, when signing the multiyear contract for the construction of the final DDGs of the Class, the Department decided to change the policy. The Department of the Navy has not revealed the amount of money requested for the new ships, but it is expected to be in the region of $1 billion to $2 billion. The President's budget proposes an unorthodox approach to funding two major procurement programs, the F-22 fighter of the Air Force and the DD(X) destroyer of the Navy. In both cases, the budget request includes incremental or partial funding, for these two programs. for these programs could be applied to a variety of other procurements, leading to a loss of budget transparency and reducing the ability to perform oversight. Therefore, the recommendations in this bill include full funding for one DD( X) destroyer and the F/22 fighter program. Funding of $2,568,111,000 is recommended to Department of Defense to consider whether using advance appropriations in future budgets will improve the shipbuilding program. (Page 126) The committee also stated: The fiscal year 2006 President's budget requests $225,427,000 for [the]DDG-51 [destroyer program] for what the Navy describes as "program completion requirements and shutdown costs" These funds are to be used for the Navy's new destroyers, the committee said. The Navy describes the funds for the destroyers as "Program completion requirements" and "shutdown costs" complete full funding of one DD(X) vessel. This is the same level as the funding request for this item, but under the President's budget these funds would have been allocated on an incremental basis against two ships. The Committee cannot support such a far-reaching policy change which has implications beyond the Navy's shipbuilding program. The Navy's proposal requires special legislative authority, according to the report. The report also states: The Committee recommends $2,568,111,000 for the procurement of 1 DD( X) destroyer. in the request, including for the first time construction of a surface combatant, the next-generation destroyer DD(X). Furthermore, during the consideration of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2006 ( P.L. 109-163 ), the Navy sought and was granted the authority to use incremental funding for the next generation of destroyers and frigates. The Navy has not yet announced plans to build a new warship or frigates in the next few years, but is expected to do so in the future. Congress rejected Navy's proposal to procure the lead DDG-1000 through the Navy's research and development account. Funding the procurement of lead ships through the R&D account would permit them to be incrementally funded without violating the full funding policy. Advance appropriations have not been used in Navy ship procurement, but have been used by other executive branch agencies to Navy's proposed FY2005 and FY2006 defense budgets. The Navy's ship-procurement account is fully funded. The two lead LCSs are fully funded in the Navy’s research anddevelopment account. The Navy in 2004 proposed funding the procurement of the lead DDG-1000 destroyer and the lead Littoral Combat Ship (LCS) program in the Navy's research and development (R&D) account. The Navy's ship-procurement account, which is known formally as the Shipbuilding and Conversion, Navy (SCN), could be used as a precedent for incrementally funding any future DDG—1000 or any other shipbuilding program. In FY2007, the report recommends funding one of the three LCSs and rescinding funding (in Section 8043) for the other two. The Navy has identified the total cost to procure the twin lead ships of the DDG—1000 class as $6,582,200,000. The conferees insist that the Navy manage this program within that total cost, and will be unlikely to increase funding through a reprogramming or an additional budget request except in the case of emergency. The Navy believes the cost and schedule risk in theDDG-1000 program is low enough to permit the twinLead ship acquisition strategy. The unusual procurement of twin leads raises the risk that future design changes or production problems will impact two ships under construction simultaneously. This could raise costs significantly compared to other lead ship programs. of the follow-on ships of the DDG-1000 Next-Generation Destroyer program. The Committee reminds the Navy that this is a unique acquisition strategy and should not $2,568,111,000. The effect of the conference agreement would allow the Navy to split fund twin lead ships. If authorized in separate legislation, the Navy would be able to buy two ships at once. The House would have to agree to delete language proposed by the House requiring full funding of a single lead ship. National Defense Sealift Fund (NDSF) is not a procurement appropriation but a revolving fund. NDSF transferred procurement of new military sealift ships and certain Navy portions of 16 LMSRs whose construction contracts were awarded between FY1993 and FY1997. LHD-8 was incrementally funded by explicit funding. Dollars appropriated by Congress for the fund are not appropriated. DOD LMSR-Type Sealift Ships are not subject to the full funding policy in the same way as DOD procurement programs funded through the procurement title. DOD sealift ships, the attack submarine SSN-23, the amphibious assault ships LHD-6, L HD-8, and LHA-6. First two DDG-1000 (formerly DD(X) destroyers, and the aircraft carrier CVN-78. These ships constitute recent exceptions to the use of full funding in the procurement of Navy ships. For additional information on these ships, see Appendix C of this report. Legislative Activity for FY2007 H.R. auxiliary ships from the Shipbuilding and Conversion, Navy (SCN) appropriation account. Since the NDSF is outside the procurement title of the defense appropriation act, sealift ships procured since FY1993, including DOD's Large, Medium-Speed, Roll-on/Roll-off (LMSR) ships (as well as Navy Lewis to purchase specific hulls) do not apply. Rather, dollars made available to the N DSF are executed on an oldest money first basis. and Clark (TAKE-1) dry cargo ships procured since FY2003 ) have not been subject to the full funding policy as traditionally applied to DOD procurement programs. As discussed in a 1996 CRS report, although individual LMSRs were ostensibly fully funded each year by Congress, in some cases DOD applied LMSR funding provided in a given year to partially finance the construction of L MSRs authorized in various years. For example, although Congress ostensibly approved $546.4 million in FY1995 for the procurement of two L MSR, the FY1995 funds were actually applied to help finance the procurement. LHD-6 was approved for procurement in FY1993 but only $305 million in FY 1993 funding was provided. Congress included a provision in the Shipbuilding and Conversion, Navy (SCN) sections of both the FY2000 and FY2001 defense budgets. About three-quarters of the cost of LHD-8 was provided the year after the ship's year of procurement. The conference report on in FY1994 and approved by Congress. For more information, visit the U.S. Navy's website. the year (FY1996) in which SSN-23 was (for a second time) procured. LHD-6 Amphibious Assault Ship. The House had recommended fully funding procurement of the Wasp (LHD-1) class amphibious assault ship Bonhomme Richard. The Administration had not requested the ship, which would have cost $1.2 billion more than SSN 23. The ship would have been the second SSN to be procured from the U.S. Navy. procurement, the other the following year. The committee for FY2007 instead recommended full funding for one DDG-1000, and design funding for a second. The budget request recommends incremental funding for 3 of the 7 ships. Section 121 of the conference report on H.R. 5122 ( H.Rept. 109-702 of September 29, 2006) authorizes four-year incremental funding. for the CVN-21 class aircraft carriers. The Navy's proposed FY2008 budget requests the second increment of funding for the ship. The House Appropriations Committee recommended approval of the Administration's proposed use of split funding FY2007 and FY2008 for procuring the amphibious assault ship LHA-6. The House Armed Services Committee did not recommend approval of 5631 / P.L. 109-364 (FY2007 Defense Authorization Act) House In its report ( H.Rept.109-452 of May 5, 2006) on H.R. 5122 , the House Armed services committee recommended approval for the Navy to use split funding for the ship. The Navy in its FY2007 budget proposed procuring the amphibious assault ship LHA-6 in FY 2007 using split funding in FY2007 and FY2008. Congress, in acting on the proposed funding, approved the Navy's FY2008 request for the second of two increments of procurement funding for the LHA(R) Amphibious Assault Ship. DOD records the ship in its budget presentations as having been procured in FY2002. The provision states: H.R. 2863 / P.L. 109-148 (FY2006 Defense Appropriations Bill) House In its report ( H.Rept. 109 -119 of June 10, 2005) on increment provided in FY2006. the bill stated: The conferees agree to provide $305,000,000 in funds to initiate the purchase of one LHD-1 class amphibious assault ship. Full funding has not yet been provided to the appropriations acts stating "That the Secretary of the Navy is hereby granted the authority to enter into a contract for an L HD-1 [class] Amphibious Assault Ship which shall be funded on an incremental basis" The ship in question is LHD8, which was funded on a incremental basis. The Navy's fiscal year 2007 shipbuilding plan already assumes such authority for the second LHA class amphibious assault ship. The committee has approved the use of split funding for certain ships in certain cases. However, the committee does not believe that a H.R. 2863 would be appropriate for the LHA(R) program. The conference agrees to consider either split funding or full funding if proposed by the Administration. H.Con.Res. 95 (Concurrent Resolution on FY2006 Budget) Conference Report been approved by Congress. Sufficient funding must be available for a complete, usable end item before a contract can be let for the construction of that item. Under traditional full funding, no portion of ausable end item's procurement cost is funded in a year after the year in which it was approved. The federal government does not provide full funding for end items in the same way as it did in the past. The U.S. House of Representatives has passed a bill that would change the law. the item's long-term benefits (which do not appear in the budget) or its lower life cycle operation and support (O&S) costs compared to alternatives with lower up-front procurement costs. permit construction to start on a larger number of items in a given year within that year's amount of funding, so. the item's benefits are not included in a budget. The item's life cycle costs are considered to be lower than other alternatives, so the item is considered to have a lower O&S cost. which can increase the costs of the displaced programs due to uneconomic program-disruption start-up and start costs. avoid a potential bias against the procurement of very expensive items that might result from use of full funding. due to the item's large up-front procurement cost (which appears in the budget) overshadowing. the cost of the program's up- front procurement cost. Avoid a bias against a very expensive item that may result from using full funding due to its large up front procurement costs. good money after bad" by halting funding for the procurement of an item under construction. In spite of its potential advantages, Congress replaced incremental funding with the full funding policy in the federal budget. The change was made in response to unanticipated shifts in U.S. strategy or the international security environment. The changes were made to comply with the U.N. Security Council resolution passed in July. The bill was passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate, but not the president, and is not yet the Senate. advance appropriations could argue that it offers many of the potential advantages of incremental funding. Opponents could argue it retains (or even expands) one of the key potential disadvantages of incremental finding. By committing a portion of one or more future-year budgets to incremental funding or advance appropriations, it could simply trade poor production economies of scale in the near term for poor productioneconomy in future years. Put another way, it would simply trade an inability to afford something now for an inabilityto afford something later. Under advance appropriations, Congress makes a one-time decision to fund the entire procurement cost of an end item. That cost can then be divided into two or more annual increments, as under incremental funding. Supporters of incremental funding could argue that, compared to full funding, using incremental funding that can occur under traditional full funding is a better alternative to fullfunding.. Under incremental funding, Congress must take a positive action each year to approve each year's funding increment. Under advance appropriations,. Congress, following its initial decision to funding the item, would need to take a. positive decision by Congress to approve the entire. procurement cost. Advance appropriations is an alternate form of full funding that is permitted under executive branch budget regulations. Regular appropriations for the full funding of a capital project or a useful segment (or investment) are preferred. Advance appropriations have the same benefits as regular appropriations for improved planning, management, and accountability of the project (investment) Because advance appropriations involves a one-time payment, they are not intended to replace full funding for a given project or useful segment in the budget year. It is not to be confused with advance procurement (AP) funding use of advance appropriations. of the asset is not included in the budget year. Advance appropriations, because they are scored in the year they become available for obligation, may constrain the budget authority and outlays available for regular appropriations of that year. If, however, the lumpiness caused by regular appropriations cannot be accommodated within regular appropriations, the asset may not be eligible for debt service. The asset may be subject to debt service for a period of time, depending on how long the debt service term is, if at all. Full funding increases the opportunity to use performance-based fixed price contracts, allows for more efficient work planning and management of the capital project (or investment) Full funding in the budget year with regular appropriations alone is preferred because it leads to tradeoffs with other capital assets and with spending for purposes other than capital assets. In contrast, full funding for a capital project over several years with regular. appropriations for the first year and advance appropriations for subsequent years may bias tradeoffs in the. budget year in favor of the proposed asset. that appropriations for the full costs of asset acquisition be enacted in advance to help ensure that all costs and benefits are fully taken into account at the time decisions are made to provide resources. Full funding with regular appropriations in the budget year also leads to tradeoffs within the budget. The full cost of the asset acquisition process is estimated to be in the region of $1.2 billion. The cost of acquiring a new asset is in the range of $100 million to $200 million, depending on the size of the new asset. the baseline goals. When full funding is not followed and capital projects (or investments) or useful segments are funded in increments, without certainty if or when future funding will be available, the result is sometimes poor planning, acquisition of assets not fully justified, higher acquisition costs, cancellation of major investments, and poor planning for the future. The result is poor planning and acquisition costs that are not justified. Poor planning can lead to acquisition costs being too high or acquisition costs not being fully justified. poor planning can also lead to the loss of important projects or investments. S.Amdt. 146 to S.Con.Res. 18 is the earlier Senate version of the budget resolution. The report includes the Shipbuilding and Conversion, Navy (SCN) appropriation account in the list of accounts identified for advance appropriations in the Senate.has been included in all previous limitations on advance Appropriations in past budget resolutions. It would amend Section 401 of S. Con. Res. 18 —the section that restricts use of advance appropriations — to increase the amount of advance Appropriations. of 1870, as amended, and the Adequacy of Appropriations Act of 1861. Regulations governing the full funding policy are found in Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Circular A-11 and DOD Directive 7000.14-R, which provide guidelines on budget formulation. Good budgeting requires that good budgeting occurs in a timely manner, according to the OMB Circular, which is based on the Department of Defense’s own guidelines on the matter. The Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) is responsible for funding the federal government. action to cancel or modify an annual funding increment in a future-year budget. In this sense, advance appropriations can be thought of as a legislatively locked in form of incremental funding. OMB Circular A-11 allows for the cancellation or modification of such funding increments. The future- year funding increments will occur unless Congress takes action to stop them, the OMB says. The OMB has no immediate comment on the proposed changes to the appropriations process, but says it is reviewing the matter. Congress has granted MYP authority for a relatively small number of procurement programs. The law governing MYP arrangements is set forth in 10 U.S.C. § 2306b. This provision permits the Navy to use a single contract for a total of 198 to 224 F/A-18E/Fs procured during the five-year period FY2000-FY2004. It is unclear whether the Navy will use MYP to procure a set of end items that are scheduled to be procured across a series of up to five fiscal years. 26.1% to be provided in the procurement year of FY2008, and about 38.8% in FY2009. About 38.7% to provide in FY2008 and about 40% inFY2009, according to the government. The government says it will provide a total of $1.2 billion in aid in 2008 and $1 billion in 2009, with the majority of the money to be spent in 2008. The rest of the funding will come in 2009 and 2010, the government says. permit two circumstances under which advance procurement (AP) "down payments" on a usable end item can be provided in one or more years prior to the item's year of procurement. AP funding may be used to pay for long-lead items, which have long manufacturing lead times, if needed to ensure that these items will be ready for installation into the end item at the appropriate point in the construction process. AP funds may also be used for economic order quantity (EOQ) procurement of a set of long- lead items for aSet of weapons being acquired under a multiyear procurement (MYP) arrangement. Long-lead items are often manufactured not at the end item's final assembly facility (such as a shipyard) but at separate supplier firms. In Navy shipbuilding, AP payments have most commonly been used to pay for long-lead weapons. Each of these is discussed below. For more information on MYP payments, visit the Ministry of Defence's MyP website or the US Navy's MYP website. for more information about MyP payments and how they are paid for, click here. AP funding to be used to finance, at the outset of an MYP arrangement, the procurement of long-lead components for all of the end items to be procured under the MYP deal. The MYP agreement will procure a total of five Virginia (SSN-774) class nuclear-powered attack submarines over the five-year period. The deal is expected to be in place by the end of 2015, with the first submarine to be commissioned in 2016. The contract is for five Virginia-class attack submarines, with a total cost of $1.2 billion. procurement, and the three following years. This authority resembles an economic order quantity (EOQ) arrangement. The Secretary is to submit a report to the congressional defense committees with the fiscal year 2008 budget request, outlining the advance procurement requirements for the CVN-21 class. The Navy plans to procure the aircraft carriers in FY2012 and FY2016, respectively, according to the bill. The bill would also authorize the Navy to contract in FY2007 for the procurement long-lead items for CVn-79 and CVN -80. period FY2004-FY2008, for example permits the Navy to procure, in the first years of the arrangement, five sets of long-lead nuclear-propulsion components. This up-front batch procurement of long lead items is called an economic order quantity (EOQ) because it procures (i.e., places an order for) these items in the form of a bill of goods and services. The U.S. Navy has a long history of buying nuclear-related items. EOQs normally take place within the context of a multiyear procurement (MYP) These ships have not been approved for MYP, and under past practice would not qualify for it under the requirements set forth in the law. MYP arrangements are permitted to cover items to be procured, and are not required to be approved by the government. The EOQs will take place as part of the MYP procurement process, which is expected to take place in the next few months. Current funding practices provide Congress with flexibility for using AP funding for purposes other than funding long-lead items requested by DOD. Such flexibility, they can argue, is important for meeting policy goals such as preserving the shipbuilding industrial base within available funding. Opponents of this option could argue that any use of incremental funding weakens the full funding policy, increasing the likelihood of proposals to use it for funding other DOD procurement items. Congress, they could argue, special exceptions to an otherwise strict practice of adhering to the fullfunding policy. the item is procured. Congress imposed the full funding policy on DOD in the 1950s to make the total procurement costs of DOD weapons and equipment more visible. Congress's intent in imposing the policy was to strengthen discipline in DOD budgeting and improve Congress's ability to control DOD spending. Understanding total costs and how previously appropriated funds are used are key components of Congress's oversight capability. The fullfunding policy is consistent with two basic laws regarding government expenditures—the Antideficiency Act and the Budget Control Act. one Congress to "tie the hands" of one or more future Congresses. provide initial procurement funding for a weapon whose cost would have to be largely funded by a future Congress. Create a potential for DOD to start procurement for a new weapon, which would be funded by the Congress of the future. The U.S. would be able to buy the weapon at a cost of up to $1.5 billion per weapon. The cost of the weapon would be paid for by a series of separate congressional votes. of an item without necessarily understanding its total cost, stating that total cost to Congress, or providing fully for that cost in future DOD budgets. Increase weapon procurement costs by exposing weapons under construction to potential uneconomic start-up and stop costs that can occur when they are not fully understood by Congress. Increase weapons procurement cost by exposing them to potential start-ups and stop-costs that can happen when they aren't fully understood. The so-called "camel's-nose-under-the-tent" issue; and increase weapon procurement Costs. a batch that can be manufactured in an efficient (i.e., economic) manner. Although some DOD weapons and equipment are procured with AP funding provided in prior years, most DOD procurement items are funded through a single decision by Congress to provide the entire cost of the item in the item's as to achieve better production economies of that item. recognize that certain DOD procurement programs, particularly those incorporating significant amounts of advanced technology, bear some resemblance to research and development activities (which can be funded in increments) in DOD procurement can be advantageous because it can do one or more of the following: permit very expensive items, such as large Navy ships, to be procured in a given year while avoiding or mitigating budget "spikes" (i.e., lumps) that could require displacing other programs from that year's budget. reduce the amount of unobligated balances associated with DOD procurement programs. implicitly recognize potential limits on DOD's ability to accurately predict the total procurement cost. preserve flexibility for future Congresses to stop "throwing" Multiyear procurement is a special contracting authority, approved by Congress on a program-by-program basis. Most DOD procurement programs use annual contracting, under which DOD lets one or more contracts for each year's worth of procurement of a given item. Multiyear procurement allows DOD to use a single contract for a given year of procurement. The authority was created by Congress in the 1980s. It was approved by the House of Representatives in the 1990s, and by the Senate in the 2000s. the procurement cost of the lead unit is not followed by other DOD procurement programs, such as programs for procuring aircraft, ground vehicles, and missiles. If it were, the lead units of these other types of procurement programs would be significantly more expensive to procure. One of the reasons for the change is to make it easier to track the cost of procurements for the U.S. military. Another is to reduce the number of units needed for each program, making it easier for the military to decide what to buy. Full funding policy requires the entire procurement cost of a usable end item (such as a Navy ship) to be funded in the year in which the item is procured. The policy applies not just to Navy ships, but to all weapons and equipment that DOD procures through the procurement title of the annual DOD appropriations act. In spite of the existence of the full funding policy, a few Navy and DOD ships have been procured in recent years.is discussed in the next section. In general, DOD cannot contract for the construction of a new weapon or piece of equipment until funding for the entire cost of that item has year of procurement. the loss of sunk costs, or inadequate funding to maintain and operate the assets. Support for the full funding policy has been periodically reaffirmed over the years by Congress, the Government Accountability Office (GAO), and DOD. The executive branch regulations that implement the fullfunding policy for DOD procurement programs are published in the GAO and DOD regulations. The GAO also publishes the DOD procurement regulations, which are published by the DOD and the Department of Defense (DOD) in the same place. In the 1950s, much of DOD weapon procurement was accomplished through incremental funding. Under incremental funding, a weapon's cost is divided into two or more annual portions, or increments, that can reflect the need to make annual progress payments to the contractor. Congress has periodically reaffirmed the full funding policy since then, on the grounds that incremental funding did (or could do) one or more of the following: make the total procurement costs of weapons and equipment less visible to Congress and more difficult for Congress to understand and track. as the weapon is built. Congress then approves each year's increment as part of its action on that year's budget. Under incremental funding, DOD can contract for the construction of a weapon after Congress approves only the initial increment of its cost, and completion is dependent on Congress' approval of the project. The weapon is then built and tested by the U.S. Central Command, which is based in San Antonio, Texas, on a base known as the B-1 bomber. The U.N. Security Council passed a resolution authorizing incremental funding for the weapon last week.  split funding is a two-year form of incremental funding. Under split funding, a weapon's procurement cost is divided into two portions, one of which is funded in the item's year of production. Budget reductions or other unexpected developments cause one or more of the planned increments to be reduced or deferred. The cost of a weapon can be split into two parts: the procurement cost and the cost of the production cost. The procurement cost can also be split in two, with one portion funded in each year of the product's production. with poor production economies of sale, but is expected to rise in future years to levels that would be more than adequate to support higher, economic rates of ship procurement. Using incremental funding or advance appropriations could permit construction to begin on additional ships in the near term. improving that could be procured in those future years for a given amount of ship-procurement funding will be reduced because portions of those future-year budgets would now be needed to pay for the ships on which construction had started in prior years. increase the chance that the reduction would lead to a decision to defer to a future year the procurement of a ship planned for that year, which could increase the procurement cost of that ship. If Congress decides to make more use of incremental funding or to start using might or might notlead to a disruption that substantially increased procurement costs. Such increases in any event would have to be weighed against the risk of an increase in cost of an incrementally funded ship because of a decision in a later year to reduce or delay. a ship if one of more of the ship's funding increments is reduced or deferred. In addition, if budget circumstances require reducing the ship-procurement budget for a given year and some portion of that year's budget is already devoted to paying for ships started in prior years with incremental funding or advance appropriations. preserving that portion of the budget so as to avoid disrupting the production schedule of those prior-year ships would mean that the budget reduction would fall more heavily on the remaining part of the Ship Procurement Budget. marginally reduce the total cost to procure a given number of ships. By avoiding instances in which budget spikes caused ships to be moved from one year to another in ship-procurement plans, using incremental funding or advance appropriations can avoid perturbations in the production schedules for these ships. If annual funding for ship procurement limits ship- Procurement in the near term to low rates in question, this can reduce, at the margin, the collective cost of all the ships procured. This second scenario, however, is dependent on realizing the expected increase in ship procurement funding in the later years. the approval of the remaining increments in future years by that Congress or future Congresses. A key feature of incremental funding is that a portion of the ship's cost is provided in one or more years beyond the item's year of procurement. Using incremental funding or advance appropriations could marginally increase the number of ships that could be built for a given total amount of ship-procurement funding. Under certain other circumstances, using incremental funding could increase rather than reduce ship- Procurement costs.. which would permit both DD/NRE costs and the hands-on construction costs of lead ships to be funded incrementally while not violating the full funding policy. This can be viewed as an example of the previously-discussed option of increasing the use of incremental funding. As discussed earlier, Congress, in acting on the ship class could be incrementally funded. While the actual hands- on construction cost of the lead ship would be fully funded, in conformance with the fullfunding policy. blanket policy supporting incremental funding for any class of ship is appropriate, and has not included such a provision in the bill. (Pages 68-69) Senate Section 121 of the Senate version of the FY2007 defense authorization bill ( S. 2766 ) would authorize the use of four-year incremental funding. The bill was passed by the Senate and the House of Representatives in December 2006 and sent to the White House for consideration. It was signed into law by President Bush on December 17, 2006. In the case of the F-22, incremental funding is requested in the middle of the production run. The use of incremental funding mortgages the future of the procurement budget of the Defense Department in a manner that is not acceptable to the Committee. In addition, the precedent of incremental Funding sets a bad precedent for future defense procurements, the committee said in a letter to the secretary of defense. The letter was sent to Secretary of Defense Chuck Hagel and Secretary of State John Kerry on Tuesday. the financing of an item procured in a prior year and requiring a positive action from future Congresses to undo those commitments. Opponents could also argue that compared to full funding, advance appropriations under certain circumstances could increase ship-construction costs. In 2001, some Navy officials advocated the use of advance appropriations for Navy ship procurement, noting that this funding approach is used by several federal agencies other than DOD. Although use ofvance appropriations for navy ship procurement was supported at the time, it has since been dropped. Advocates of these alternative funding approaches believe they could increase stability in Navy shipbuilding plans. Congress's decision on this issue could be significant because the full funding policy relates to Congress's power of the purse. Congress should not deprive itself of tools that might help improve stability, reduce ship-procurement costs, and preserve the shipbuilding industrial base within available funding, the authors say. They say Congress has recently taken steps to discourage the spread of incremental funding to DOD procurement items other than ships. of the lead ships of each new class of Navy ships in the Navy's research and development account rather than the ship-procurement account, as the Navy has proposed in previous years. Supporters of this option could argue that it would take maximum advantage of opportunities for avoiding or mitigating budget introducing its use into Navy ship procurement would still amount to a relaxation of the application of the full funding concept to DOD procurement. This option, they could argue, is unnecessary because a budget spike is needed. Congress has responsibility for conducting oversight of Department of Defense (DOD) programs. Issue can be alternately expressed as how to procure Navy ships economically while maintaining key congressional prerogatives. Congress's decision on ship funding approaches could also affect future Navy capabilities, annual Navy funding requirements, and the shipbuilding industrial Navy to better define their thinking regarding Navy requirements. Ship-procurement costs can be reduced through measures other than incremental funding or advance appropriations, such as multiyear procurement, contracts that are structured to provide incentives to shipbuilders to control costs. Some observers have proposed procuring Navy ships using funding approaches other than the traditional full funding approach. These alternative funding approaches include incremental funding, which has been used to fund a few Navy ships in recent years. Most Navy ships procured since the late 1950s have been funded in accordance with the full funding policy. Before then, many Navy ships were procured with incremental funding. Current ship-procurement funding practices can be summarized as procuring almost all ships with full funding, procuring a small number with de facto or explicit incremental funding and approving advance procurement funding. kinds of procurement items, such as aircraft and satellites, could seek to have them funded using incremental funding, and that such proposals have been made. This option would involve reducing or eliminating the use of incremental funding in Navy ship procurement. A clear, explicit policy of using incremental funds only for certain ships would send a clear signal that these ships represent the Navy's full funding policy, the authors say. They argue that a de facto or explicit policy would send confusing signals regarding adherence to the full policy. can continue doing this while preserving some flexibility for itself in funding ship procurement. This option could involve explicitly (rather than tacitly) using incremental funding for aircraft carriers. It could also involve funding the procurement a funding increment. Opponents of this option could argue that even though advance appropriations is a form of full funding, associated with the procurement of an aircraft carrier or large-deck amphibious assault ship can be accomplished through the currently accepted practice of occasionally using incremental funds. Starting to use advance appropriations for ships such as aircraft carriers, they could argue, creates a risk of increasing the procurement cost. advance appropriations, and then decides at a later point to return to a more exclusive reliance on full funding. This could temporarily reduce the number of new ships that could be procured. Since advance appropriations is a form of full funding, they could argue that this option would not weaken the full funding policy. They could also argue that compared to the previous option, this optionwould create less risk of an increase in the cost of an aircraft carrier. This option could be used by the White House in the future. Advance appropriations could help reduce instability in Navy ship-procurement plans. The ships that best fit this description are aircraft carriers and to have them funded using incremental funding. Budget spikes associated with procuring aircraft carriers or large-deck amphibious assault ships, they could argue, can be anticipated years in advance, permitting their effects to be carefully managed. They could also argue that it could strengthen the full funding policy by making it clear to observers that only certain ships, and no other DOD procurement items, may be procured. "large-deck" amphibious assault ships. Accommodating budget spikes for such ships within an overall ship-procurement or Department of the Navy budget for a given fiscal year can require the Navy to move to other fiscal years other ships that the Navy would have preferred to procure in the spike year. The Navy should be used to avoid or mitigate budget spikes only when doing so is necessary to avoid disruptions in ship- Procurement programs that would substantially increase procurement costs. Depending on the composition of the ship- procurement plan, they could argue, the budget spike associated with a carrier or large-deck amphibiousassault ship. conversely, require the Navy to move the carrier or amphibious assault ship from a preferred year of procurement to a less-preferred year that happens to have fewer other Navy ships in it. Such movements of planned ship procurements can be a source of instability in Navy ship-procurement planning. Could the Navy be using such a move to get more money out of the U.S. defense budget? It's possible, but it's not certain, according to the Navy. If a given increment of construction work on the ship is completed before the end of a fiscal year and that year's funding increment is entirely expended, the Navy might have to halt work. Under full funding, in contrast, the navy would have access to funding for the ship's entire construction cost and consequently would not have to resume work until the start of the next fiscal year, avoiding the additional work.be restarted. The Navy could argue that under full funding the ship would be able to be completed within the next two years. could be aimed at one or more of the following goals: generating shipyard construction work (and thus shipyard revenues and jobs) on a particular ship in a year prior to that ship's year of procurement. creating an early financial commitment to procuring a ship that is planned for procurement in a future year, which can enhance job security for construction workers. reducing the total construction cost of a ship through improved sequencing or year-to-year balancing of shipyards construction work. reducing a ship's cost to be funded in the future by reducing the portion of the ship's costs to befunded in the past. near-term production economies of sale, while still permitting the Navy to procure ships in future years at economic rates of production. Improving near-term. economies of scale while preserving acceptable production economies. of scale in later years might result in marginally higher average economies of. scale for the entire period of the Navy's procurement program. The Navy could procure ships for the fleet in the future at higher rates of. production, but at a lower average cost of production than in the past. funding for "advance construction" work on certain ships. This apparently refers to early shipyard activities for building the basic structure of a ship, as opposed to manufacturing long-lead components. The use of AP funding for shipyard advance construction activities is not recognized in executive Navy did not request. Supporters of this option could argue that current funding practices give DOD and the Congress the flexibility to use incremental funding on a limited basis for certain ships while not formally abandoning the full Navy budget for new ships. nuclear-propulsion components of nuclear-powered aircraft carriers and submarines. Congress in recent years has occasionally approved AP funding for conventionally powered Navy ships, such as destroyers and amphibious ships, for which the Navy did not request any AP funding. AP branch budget regulations on the full funding policy have not been approved in the same way as these regulations recognize the use of AP funds for long-lead components. Congressional decisions to approve AP funding in the past have included funding for ships for which Navy didn't request such funding. The Navy in 2001 apparently did not receive approval from the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) to use the approach for ship procurement. The Navy did not officially propose its use as part of its FY2002 budget submission to Congress. Congress did not approve the use of the approach until after the 2001 budget was submitted to the OMB. The approach was later used by the U.S. Navy to procure new ships for the fleet. The U.N. also used the approach to procure ships for its own fleet. actually decrease the flexibility of future Administrations and Congresses to make rational capital budgeting decisions with regard to shipbuilding programs. The Committee bill includes a new general provision (section 8150) which prohibits the Defense Department from budgeting for shipbuilding Programs on the basis of advanced appropriations. The committee remains convinced that the full funding policy is the correct policy for funding shipbuilding. The Department of Defense this year considered submission of a legislative proposal that would permanently authorize the use of "split funding" for ship building. as requested by the Navy. Section states in part: (c) SENSE OF CONGRESS ON FUNDING FOR FOLLOW-ON SHIPS. It is the sense of Congress that there is sufficient benefit to authorizing the one-time exception provided in this section to the full funding policy in order to support the competitive procurement. This action is being taken based upon the expectation that the total cost of these two ships is well understood and low risk. The conferees are willing to make this one- time exception to thefull funding principle because of the unique situation with the shipbuilding industrial base. the cost of shipbuilding and sustaining the shipbuilding industrial base. The committee notes that Congress adopted the full funding policy in the 1950s in part because of a concern that incremental funding was detrimental to funding stability. Future congresses may find themselves unwilling, or unable, to fund completion of ships, according to the committee's report. The report was published by the Center for Strategic and International Studies at the University of California, Los Angeles, and is published by Macmillan Publishing on behalf of the Committee for the Study of the Navy. delay. The committee has been told there is no technical reason for the delay, but that the delay was driven by budget considerations. Both the Secretary of the Navy and the Chief of Naval operations testified that large capital assets such as aircraft carriers are difficult to fund under the current budget. The delay is expected to last until the end of the year at the earliest, the committee was told. It is not known if there will be any further delays in the construction of the USS Ronald Reagan or the USS George Washington. are not funded, the Navy will not be able to meet its contractual obligations and the Chief of Naval Operations will not able to accept delivery of these ships. The Committee is alarmed that the Navy would knowingly sign a multibillion dollar contract for ships that would be both inadequate and unneeded. The Navy will be unable to meet contractual obligations if these ships are not funded. The U.S. Navy will have to find a way to pay for the ships if they are not fully funded. Aircraft carrier construction every four or five years does not fundamentally increase the number of ships that a given amount of money will purchase. The committee does not agree that creative financing methodologies that delay recognizing the true cost of shipbuilding or that provide ever-increasing amounts of funding to cover the explosion in shipbuilding. The Committee believes that stable ship requirements, increased funding in the shipbuilding budget, stabilize the production path, and in our view, reduce the per unit cost of ships and increase our shipbuilding rate. this ship class, to ensure an adequate budget is in hand before contract award." (Page 146) Senate In its report ( S.Rept. 109-141 of September 29, 2005) on H.R. 2863 , the Senate Appropriations Committee stated: "The Committee remains gravely concerned about the overall health and stability of Navy shipbuilding" (Page 147) Senate in its report said it was "gravely concerned" about the "health and stability" of the U.S. Navy. exorbitant cost overruns are exercised, ship construction costs are unlikely to improve. The Committee is aware that the new Chief of Naval Operations [CNO] is actively reviewing shipbuilding programs and is considering several options for controlling long-term costs. In an effort to assist the Navy in the short-term, the Committee is asking the public for information on shipbuilding costs in the U.S. Navy. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. Fleet inventory and capability requirements remain unstable as do program performance and costs. The Committee finds unanticipated cost overruns to be the root cause of much of the instability in the program. Until budget estimates become more realistic, requirements stabilize and penalties for breaking the rules will not be as harsh as they are now, the committee says. The U.S. Navy has a fleet of more than 2,000 F/A-18 Hornets. The fleet is based in San Diego, California, and is scheduled to be deployed to the Middle East by 2018. Admiral Clark: "We need to partner with Congress and industry to regain our buying power" "Multi-year procurement, economic order quantity, and other approaches help to help to regain buying power," Clark says. "We are not going to be able to buy our way out of this problem," he adds. "It's time to change the way we buy our military equipment," he says. 'We are going to have to change our way of buying our military hardware,' Clark adds. 'It's not just about buying new equipment, it's about buying better equipment' procured in FY2006. The report states: With the fiscal year 2007 budget submission of $520,670,000 for the fifth and sixth LCS flight 0 ships, the Navy revealed the LCS unit cost estimate used as a basis for last year's appropriation was exclusive of contract change orders, planning and engineering services. The Committee is further troubled by reports that the first two LCS flight0 ships under construction are exceeding their cost as previously budgeted. As a result, the Committee believes the fiscalyear 2007 budget request is program management support and other costs not included in the ship construction contract ... As a result, the Navy is unable to procure both the third and fourth LCS flight 0 ships without the availability of additional funding. The Committee is troubled by this revelation and recommends rescinding the insufficient insufficient to procure two ships and recommends $300,670,000 to fully fund procurement of one LCS seaframe, which is a reduction of $220,000,000 and one seaframe from the request. The committee notes that this recommendation puts the Navy on its previously established path of procuring four LCS flight0 ships by the end of 2015. its policy and budget for these costs after the last ship was appropriated. The Committee finds this decision troubling. First, budgeting for such costs after procurement of the last vessel obscures the actual cost to procure each ship. The Congress approved the Navy's request for multiyear procurement authority in fiscal year 2002 assuming a level of savings to the taxpayer that are now not being realized. Most disconcerting about this change in policy and resultant budget request is the Navy’s assertion that if these costs were not incurred, the Navy would not need to spend the money. non-operational and undeliverable unless additional dollars, outside the contract, were provided. The Committee directs the Secretary of the Navy to provide a detailed report of all the costs required to complete each of the remaining 11 ships and a rationale for such a contractual arrangement by December 1, 2005. Until such a contract is reached, the Navy will not be able to send any ships to the Middle East or the Persian Gulf for refueling or other purposes. The U.S. Navy will also be unable to send the ships to any Middle Eastern or Persian Gulf ports for refuel or other refueling. Navy. conferees request that the Navy award a contract for the construction of this vessel and include the additional funds required for this program in its fiscal year 1994 budget request. The $893.8 million needed to complete the funding of the ship (as adjusted) was requested by the Administration. The Navy has not yet awarded a contract to build the vessel. The ship is expected to be completed by the end of the year or early in 1995, depending on when the contract is awarded. sufficient explanation is provided, the Committee recommends only providing funds for plans and those costs directly attributable to ships scheduled to deliver in the near-term. As such, the committee recommends reducing the budget request by $195,654,000. (Page 127) Conference Report The conference report ( H.Rept. 109-359 of December 18, 2005) is available at: http://www.cnn.com/2005/01/18/world/middleeast/middle East/middle-east-budget-cut.html#storylink=cpy. The Navy sought to use dollars specifically appropriated for outfitting and post delivery to address funding shortfalls. The Committee is concerned about this change in Navy policy as it will only further obscure actual program costs. The new Navy policy will not allow the Navy to use the $100,000,000 of the transfer authority the Congress provided for the outfitting program. The Navy will no longer be able to use that money to fund outfitting or post-delivery programs. The committee is concerned that the change in policy will further obscure program costs for the Navy. in FY2007 and FY2008 by $14 billion, to $37.393 billion. The amendment would also insert a new provision (Section 409) that would include the Shipbuilding and Conversion, Navy (SCN) appropriation account on a list of accounts identified for advance appropriations in the joint explanatory statement of the managers to accompany the managers' joint statement. It would also add the SCN account to the list of the accounts identified in the Joint Explanatory Statement of the Managers to accompany advance appropriations. in 2001 did not adopt advance appropriations as a mechanism for funding Navy ships. The House Appropriations Committee, in its report ( H.Rept. 107-298 of November 19, 2001) on the FY2002 defense appropriations bill, stated that it was dismayed that the Navy continues to advocate the advance appropriations. The committee directs the Navy to provide an updated funding profile, fully funding the remaining costs of the ship from fiscal years 2007 through 2010, with delivery of the fiscal year 2007 budget request. request the Government Accountability Office [GAO] to assess the implications of using advance appropriations to procure ships. The report notes that Section 401 [of H.Con.Res. 95 ] reflects an overall limit on advance appropriations of $23.158 billion in fiscal year 2007. The GAO notes that this is the same limit as the limit for advance appropriations in fiscal Year 2006, when the bill was passed in the House of Representatives and the Senate passed the bill in the Senate. The bill passed the Senate on a voice vote, and the House passed it on a vote by a vote of 7-2. recommends providing the Navy financial management authorities that have previously been denied. This authority allows the Navy, through above threshold reprogramming procedures, to increase funding for programs experiencing unforeseen shortfalls. The Committee believes the situation requires more proactive program, budgetary and contract management and encourages the Navy to take a more proactive approach to cost management. The additional repprogramming authority essentially provides the Navy a reactive mechanism or approach to Cost Management. It is provided only with the understanding that this change will not be implemented in the future. destroyers, and the first of two increments of procurement funding for the aircraft carrier CVN-78. Congress, in acting on the proposed FY2007 budget, approved the Navy's requested first increment of funds for the two DDG-1000s. The Navy's proposed FY2008 budget requests the second increment of funding forThe two ships. Navy's FY2008 request for the second of two FY2007 and FY2008 budgets is $1.5 billion more than the $1 billion requested in the proposed budget. to be executed, and this authority is not included in the House-passed National Defense Authorization Act, 2007. (Page 139) Senate In its report ( S.Rept. 109-292 of July 25, 2006) on H.R. 5631 , the Senate Appropriations Committee recommends approving the Navy's request for FY2007 procurement. (page 139) U.S. House of Representatives has passed a bill that would grant the same authority to the Navy, but it has not yet been passed. over a period of up to five years, while the authority granted under Section 121 would cover three ships that the Navy wants to procure over a nine year period. In its report ( S.Rept. 109-254 of May 9, 2006) on S. 2766 , the Senate Armed Services said it would consider the bill. The bill was passed and signed into law by President George W. Bush on May 11, 2006. The measure is known as S.2766 and was passed by the U.S. Senate on May 10, 2006, and signed by President Bush on June 6, 2007. The Senate passed S.Con.Res. 18 on March 17, 2005. The amendment was ordered to lie on the table. This appendix discusses Navy and DOD ships that have been procured in recent years or are currently being procured using incremental funding. The appendix also discusses ships that are in the works or are under construction that could be used for incremental funding in the future. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. natural disaster, or other impact arising from outside the Navy's shipbuilding program. (Page 180) Appendix B. Legislative Activity for FY2006 H.R. 1815 / P.L. 109-163 (FY2006 Defense Authorization Bill) House In its report ( H.Rept.109-89 of May 20, 2005), the House Armed Services Committee states that the Navy will not be able to build any new ships in the next five years unless a disaster occurs outside of the U.S.