dollar gain would be $102 million; $643 million would be the high end of the range (California) Twenty-seven states and the District of Columbia would receive less funding. Under the third alternative, all funds would be returned to the states, including funds for Interstate Construction and demonstration projects along with other program funding. (State-by-state details are provided in app. VII.) Columbia and Puerto Rico, would receive more funding. For these recipients, the average loss will be $73 million. were apportioned in fiscal year 1995, while the remaining states, along with the District of Columbia and Puerto Rico, would lose funds. Under the second alternative, the total certain funds are to be distributed by requiring that particular projects receive a specified amount of funding. Under this alternative, 24 states would gain an average of $86 million, while 26 states would lose $74 million. (State-by-state details are in table 3.3 and described below maintain this distribution of funding) Highway funds are distributed to the states based equally on total lane miles and total vehicle miles traveled. Under this approach, 10 percent of overall highway funds would be redistributed. Twenty-three states and Puerto Rico would receive more funds than they were apportioned in fiscal year 1995. The average dollar gain for 30 states would be $60 million; 20 states, along with the District of Columbia and Puerto Puerto Rico, would gain $73 million. Overall, 11 percent of highway funds will be redistributed under this approach. loss would be $417 million (Pennsylvania), and the smallest loss would is $5 million (Oklahoma) The second alternative assumes that 100 percent of the total highway funds are returned to the states based equally on total lane miles. For these recipients, the average loss would be about $82 million. In total, about 9 percent of highway funds would be redistributed. While many social objectives are probably best addressed through means, this is not the only way to address the problem of highway funding. The Minimum Allocation guarantees a state an amount such that its percentage of the total apportionments and prior-year allocations from certain highway funding categories is not less than 90 percent. The minimum allocation is set at 90 percent of a state's share of federal-aid highway funds. States that contribute more in highway user taxes than they receive in federal- aid highway funds are subject to the minimum allocation. The Minimum Allocated amount is based on the state's percentage of its share of the federal highway funding category, as well as prior year allocations. more states would gain funds than would lose funds, but this overall result would be of little comfort to the states whose relative position worsened. Some individual states such as Alaska and Hawaii could lose 50 percent or more of their highway funds under any of the scenarios derived from the study. The study was conducted by the Center for American Progress, a think tank based in Washington, D.C., and the National Institute of Standards and Technology, based in Boulder, Colorado. The report was published by the Institute for Policy Studies, a nonprofit that promotes free speech and freedom of expression. that the states ought to receive back a substantial portion of what they deposit into the Trust Fund. If the formula were restructured to encompass a pure return-to-origin approach, each state’s contribution would simply be returned to that state. This does not currently occur, according to the FHWA. The formula was created in the 1930s to help fund the U.S. military. The Trust Fund was set up in the wake of the Second World War to provide a source of funding for the military. The return could function as (1) a simple return of funds, in which states would be exempt from any or most federal oversight, or (2) a distribution of funds in which FHWA would oversee the programs for which the funds were returned. Under a return-to-origin approach, we would return the funds to the NHS. We would then distribute the funds back to the states for use in their own programs. The NHS would then be able to spend the funds on programs that it had previously funded. Funding is provided for eight programs, including the NHS and STP, and for five separate mechanisms to raise individual states’ funding levels to achieve certain goals for equity among the states. The calculations that determine the level of funding that each program receives are detailed in the next section of the report. Each state’s STP funding is determined by simply taking the difference between (1) the state's predetermined share of the total funding available for the four programs and the amount the state is actually scheduled to receive for the three independently calculated programs. carefully targeted formula factors. In contrast, a return-to-origin approach might be more appropriate for the STP. The STP already has characteristics that resemble those of a block grant program and which would thus lend itself well to an approach under which funds are returned to the states. For purposes of illustration, for purposes of. illustration, we have chosen a block-grant approach for this article. We are happy to clarify that this is not the case, and that a return to origin approach is more appropriate. and conserving energy. Finally, a share of funding could be set aside and used to protect the states’ historical funding shares. The formula objectives may be used singly or in combination. They may further be targeted to specific program categories, such as the NHS, that are deemed to merit special attention. While provided in app. VIII, the formula objectives can also be combined to create a more comprehensive plan for energy conservation. The NHS, for example, could receive special attention through the use of the formula. fourth objectives discussed in this chapter could be met through formula components. formula components would distribute funds set aside from the regular apportionment process. A portion of formula funding could be devoted to social goals by, for example, directing a portion of funding to selected purposes such as improving air quality. For more information on the formula component, visit: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/28/politics/federal-budget-formula-partnership/index.html. total funding.) The advantage of such a program is that it focuses funding on precisely those areas with the greatest needs. The disadvantage is that, as occurs with the needs-based formula factors discussed earlier in this chapter, directing funding to states with specific needs can foster a perverse incentive. In the U.S., the federal government spends about $1.2 trillion a year on health care, according to a report by the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services. The federal government spent about $2.1 billion in 2013 on healthcare, the report said. distributed to the states. Payments drawn from this set-aside could be used to provide bonuses to advance quality-of-life objectives. These and similar objectives are all laudable; however, constraint in selecting the to treat the funds as incentive payments. Incentive payments, as the name implies, do not redress shortcomings, but instead reward desired behaviors or accomplishments. For example, shared set-Aside funding could be. used to reward states that make notable and measurable improvements in the percentage of the state’s pavement condition rated. objectives may be warranted to prevent the dilution of funds that could result from attempting to meet numerous objectives. One approach to distributing the set-aside moneys would be to direct them to those states suffering from unique or concentrated needs in certain areas. A prime example of this approach would be in the state of New Hampshire, which has a population of more than one million people. The state has also been known to use set-Aside funds to help fund programs in the past. ensure that the states’ transportation plans are intermodal (that is, coordinate various modes of transportation), environmentally sound, and energy efficient. For example, the Congestion Mitigation and Air Quality Improvement Program (CMAQ) directs funds to transportation projects in clean air nonattainment areas. CMAQ is focused on investment in air quality improvements and provides funds to states with severe air quality problems. ISTEA provided CMAq with a $6 billion authorization— approximately $1 billion annually for 6 years. the case of the CMAQ program, questions have been raised about the wisdom of essentially rewarding states for their nonattainment status. A second approach to directing set-aside funding towards specific goals is to focus on specific goals, such as improving air quality. A state loses CMAZ funding if it makes “too much progress” in improving airquality. The program is funded by the federal government, but states can apply for it through their local governments or through a state-based program. construction, to the possible detriment of adequately preserving the existing network and of considering air quality. Several actions could be taken to counterbalance such tendencies. First, as part of the third component of the formula framework discussed later in this chapter, set-asides could be established to reward those states that are more environmentally friendly than the rest of the country. Second, the U.S. government could use its influence in the European Union to push back against countries that are not as environmentally friendly as they should be. for projects that expand or initiate transportation services that benefit air quality. It is directed to those states that are classified as nonattainment areas for ozone and carbon monoxide. Every state, regardless of its air quality status, is guaranteed an annual minimum apportionment of 0.5 percent of the program’s funds. The program is funded by a combination of federal, state and local funds. It was established in the 1970s to address air quality problems in the United States. It has since been expanded to cover more than 100 states. As we reported in March 1986, factors reflecting a system’s extent and use in isolation do not provide a complete picture on the states’ needs. Introducing neutral factors, such as population, into the formula as the states' different needs. Regardless of the factors chosen, some states will experience disadvantages that the construction of a formula may not be able to compensate for. Which states are negatively affected changes with the factors choosing and the percentage weights assigned to various factors. Moreover, as noted in further diversifies the mix of factors and alters the amounts the states receive. The analysis that follows focuses on two possible blends of proxies for need. Table 3.1 provides an outline of the factors to be considered in the two alternatives. The first alternative assumes that 100 percent of total costs are met by the federal government. The second assumes that only a small fraction of the total costs of the U.S. government are met through state and local sources, such as taxes, grants, and loans. meet certain preservation or maintenance goals. Second, greater use of performance measures geared to preserving the existing infrastructure would help FHWA ensure that the states do not neglect needed preservation and maintenance. As we noted in our July 1994 testimony before the Senate Committee on Environment and Public Works, performance measures can be used to ensure the states don’t neglect needed Preservation and Maintenance goals. For more information, go to the Federal Highway Administration’s website or call the National Transportation Safety Board at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.fhwa.gov/. by a variety of procedures. FHWA noted that from time to time the states have attempted to improve their estimation of this measure, thus invalidating comparisons with data from previous years. As a result, until the reliability of these data is improved, their use as an indicator for distributing will be limited until they are more reliable, the agency said. The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services said the data will not be used to determine how much money is spent on health care. percentage of deficient bridges on the NHS ranged from a low of 8 percent in North Dakota to a high of 64 percent in Massachusetts. The disadvantages of basing a formula on actual needs can be remedied through the use of proxies of need, such as those reflecting the extent of the problem, the report says. The report was published by the Royal Institute of Civil Engineers on behalf of the British Society for the Study of Structural Engineering (BISCE) and the Society for Civil Engineers (SCIE). A well-maintained system is the necessary foundation for pursuing the myriad goals for the system. These goals include economic development, enhanced mobility, and improved air quality. Without such a foundation, system enhancements such as alleviating alleviating poverty will not be possible, says the report. The report was published by the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. For confidential support on suicide matters call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. involving 2 years and two states. Both State A and State B experience shifts in their apportioned funding between fiscal years 1993 and 1994. State A loses funds for the Interstate Maintenance and Bridge programs, while State B gains funds in both of these categories. State B is locked into a 1.75-percent share in both years. Not only is the total funding for the four major programs fixed over the life of ISTEA, but the funding is also fixed for the two major programs. both states these shifts are rendered irrelevant because they are offset by a corresponding change in the states’ STP funding levels. As a result, State A has 1.9 percent of the total funding available for the four programs in both fiscal years. Despite its losses in funding for the Interstate, State B still has more than 1.5 percent of funding for all four programs, the report says. The report says State B has more funding than any other state in the country for the next two fiscal years, but not the last two. Federal-aid highway funds are apportioned among the states in 13 funding categories. Four programs account for 70 percent of the largest programs. The NHS and STP together accounting for 40 percent of all the funding in fiscal year 1995. The two alternatives outlined blend needs-based and return-to-origin approaches along the existing split between the STP and two other primary highway programs, the NHS and theSTP. The current funding level for the STp represents about 40 percent for these programs. Each state’s funding was to be based on the historical share of funds the state received from major programs before ISTEA was enacted. Locking in the status quo on the basis of historical funding averages has also been supported through two other programs. The NHS and STP remained the same, since each state was to receive its own share of the funding for each major program before the enactment of ISTEA. The two programs are the NHS and the STP, which are funded by a combination of federal and state sources. A state’s total share of funding for all four programs is fixed. The states’ funding levels for the other three programs are independently calculated on the basis of factors specific to each program. With a few minor adjustments, these fixed shares derive from the shares of funds that the states received, on average, during fiscal years 1987-91. The final program included in the four-part calculation, the STP,behaves as an adjuster for each of the four programs. This means that any annual increase or decrease in a state’s funding for the Interstate Maintenance Program, Bridge Program, or NHS must be offset by a corresponding, reciprocal change in the STP funds the state receives for that same year. Figure 2.2 illustrates this zero-sum game through a hypothetical example. It shows the impact of an increase or a decrease in state funding for each of the three programs on the state's funding for that year. It also shows the effect of a decrease or increase in state funds for the NHS for the same year on the NHS. ISTEA expanded the use of equity adjustments for the apportionment of federal-aid funds among the states. It also created “hold harmless’ funding, which establishes the state’s share of other funding avenues. ISTEA also provides for increased emphasis on mobility for the elderly, disabled, and economically disadvantaged. For example, it modified minimum allocation funding and created a “Hold Harmless’ equity adjustment category for the four largest programs in each state. It serves to raise the states’ ultimate level of annual funding to a predetermined percentage share. funds apportioned in fiscal year 1995. While each state’s share of funds is calculated annually for each of these separate programs, these separate calculations are essentially meaningless since the total funding for the four programs is fixed over the 6-year authorization period for ISTEA. As a result, the states’ funding shares for theFour major programs are divorced from current conditions, as the states' current and future shares of total funding must equal the adjusted historical shares. For example, this legislatively prescribed funding percentage is 1.74 for Alabama, 0.41 for Delaware,. 0.69 for Idaho, 3.72 for Alabama. only at 10-year intervals. This problem has been exacerbated under ISTEA, since the population data underlying the states’ historical shares for ISTEA’s major funding calculations are, in part, based on 1980 population data, not the more current 1990 data. In our March 1986 report, we also identified those factors previously, and identified those that had not been identified in the 1980s and 1990s. We also identify those factors in the current report, as well as those previously identified. a component designed to place a cap on the maximum percentage of loss that any individual state would be expected to bear as a result of the changes. For example, a maximum-loss cap of 20 percent might be established. Thus, if a new formula calculation caused a given state’s funding result in dramatic funding losses for certain states, ways could be considered to reduce the magnitude of the losses. The formula could be used to determine how much each state would have to pay in lost funding. Sudden and significant losses would likely play havoc with the states’ planning processes and programs. It is doubtful that the affected states would be prepared to cope with losses of this magnitude. In addition, the effect that a change in the approaches based on needs and return to origin would have on the state’s planning processes. The impact on the states would also have an effect on the national economy. The effects on the U.S. federal government would be far-ranging and far-reaching. adjustments in fiscal year 1995 would more than offset the states’ combined losses in that year under all of the scenarios discussed in this report. The scenario resulting in the greatest adverse impact on the states—alternative 1 of the needs proxy approach—produced a combined loss of $2.4 billion. Alternatively, other other scenarios could have a more positive effect on the state economies, such as a $1.2 billion reduction in the state’s share of the federal deficit. is brought up to the level of return for those states with the next highest level of returns. This process is repeated successively for each state until the funds authorized for this funding category in that fiscal year are exhausted. Finally, a fourth adjustment category, referred to as Hold Harmless, is added to the list of adjustment categories. This category is for states that have not received any federal aid in the past three fiscal years. It is designed to reduce the federal government's role in the state's budget. period of time during the transition to a new funding amount. If the existing, intricate equity adjustments were replaced with a single, simple cap, the funds devoted to these equity would not be as much as they are now. Finding the funds to shield the states from severe losses might not been as difficult as it would first appear. If you or a family member have been affected by this article, contact the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255. For confidential support on suicide matters call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. to fall by 50 percent from the level it would otherwise be, the cap would come into effect. Funding for the state in question would be reinstated to 80 percent of what the state would otherwise have received. The cap could be either permanent or established for a set of years or even longer than the current cap of $1.5 billion. The state would then have to find a way to pay for the money it has been cut from its budget by the amount it had been cut by the cap. certain states; these funding categories are legislatively designated as equity adjustments. Equity adjustments generally address the concerns of states that contribute a greater share of highway user taxes than they receive in federal-aid highway funds. The three equity adjustment categories described below—Minimum Allocation, 90 Percent of Payments Adjustment, and Donor State Bonus—address the three equityadjustment categories. The adjustments are designed to provide each state with the same relative share of overall funding that it received in the previous year. This was not the case, however, for weather-related variables or per capita income. The strong correlations between certain of these factors and major needs for repair diminished for federal-aid highways other than the Interstate. Equity adjustments were designed to address the concerns of the states that contribute a greater share of the nation's highway funding, the study found. The study was published in the Journal of the American Highway and Transportation Engineers. For more, visit the journal's website at: http://www.ajhort.org/. In fiscal year 1995, these equity adjustments represented 16 percent of the total funds apportioned. DOT has proposed changes to the existing equity adjustments and program the various funding categories occur in a strict sequence. All of the equity adjustments come into play late in the sequential calculation. These adjustments essentially increase the funding calculated for a state up to that point. For example, if a state is hypothetically entitled to a total apportionment of $1.5 billion, these adjustments would increase that amount by $100 million. for Illinois, and 4.36 for Massachusetts. These funding percentage shares can result in a state’s receiving an addition to the regular apportionments. As figure 2.1 showed, the calculations that determine the level of funding that each state receives for each state are based on the state's percentage share of the federal budget. For example, Illinois receives 4.37 per cent, while Massachusetts gets 4.38 per cent. For Illinois, this means that the state will receive 4.35 per cent of the U.S. federal budget, and Massachusetts will get 4.46. $500 million on the basis of the Hold Harmless provision, it will receive that amount regardless of whether all the calculations up to that point yielded a total of $200 million, $300 million, or $400 million. In fiscal year 1995, equity adjustments accounted for $2.8 billion (16 percent) of the bank's annual revenue. The bank will receive the $500 million regardless of if all of its calculations yield $200m, $400m or $500m. federal highway funds would be suspect and arbitrary. An alternative measure, the International Roughness Index, is a more objective measure of pavement condition (roughness) FHWA expects this data source to play a more prominent role in the future. In 1993, the most recent year for which data are available on pavement condition, 37 states used the Internationalroughness Index to measure pavement condition on Interstate highways. The remaining 13 states continued to rely on the Present Serviceability Index. For other major highways, the proportion of states using the International roughness Index dropped to about half the states. poor condition, as illustrated by table 3.4. FHWA explained that the data on the condition of the pavement were based on the use of an index, referred to as the Present Serviceability Index. This index, however, represents a subjective measure and can be arrived at by a number of different methods, such as using the pavement’s ride quality as a factor. The index can be used to arrive at a number for the pavement's ride quality, which is based on a range of different factors. Some states do not use the International Roughness Index because they do not have the money to purchase the necessary equipment. Another impediment is that the equipment must be operated at a speed of 35-55 miles per hour, thus making it difficult to use the index. FHWA official noted that some states don't use the international roughness index because they don't have enough money to buy the equipment to use it. The index is used to measure the roughness of roads and highways in the United States. We reviewed an FHWA publication, Financing Federal-Aid Highways, published in for assessing how much of their available resources the states or local areas devote to surface transportation. We also analyzed the effect of a series of hypothetical changes to the current formula. This analysis was based on comparing the actual fiscal year 1995 with the previous fiscal year. We concluded by looking at the ramifications of possible changes to current funding. We published a report in March 1986 on the current funding formula and its ramifications. The task of revising the formula for distributing highway funds will be difficult because needs vary across the country. For example, relief of congestion is more pressing in urban areas of the country, whereas connecting rural are distributed. Yet, as the Faucett study demonstrated, a low correlation exists between highway needs as reported by FHWA and climatic variables and per capita income. The Executive Director of the Surface Transportation Policy Project supports the use of population levels to distribute highway funds. He stated that FHWA's rewards could be further refined to focus on improvements in the condition of the NHS. One concern with providing incentives for improvements in highway conditions is that the data from the NHS could be misused. The NHS is considered to be “good” under FHWA’s classification system. It is one of the most heavily traveled highways in the U.S., with more than 100,000 vehicles per day. It also has the highest number of fatalities per year, according to the National Transportation Safety Board. in meeting their own needs, and geographic differences in the cost of maintaining existing highway networks. Although similar factors have been applied in other programs, they have not been applied to highway programs in the past. But FHWA did provide a report to the Congress in 1994 that addresses measures for assessing how much of their available resources the states or local areas devote to surface road resurfacing. The report was published by the Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) in 1994. It is available online at www.fhwa.org. be gained from the Faucett study performed for FHWA in 1986 and discussed in chapter 2. This study indicated a strong correlation, particularly for repairs of the Interstate, between highway needs and lane miles and vehicle miles traveled. The following sections discuss the advantages and disadvantages of certain proxies in the construction of the interstate highway system. The advantages of these proxies are discussed in the next section. The disadvantages of the proxies in this section are discussed later in the book. The final section of the book discusses the advantages of certain other proxies. states on the condition and performance of their roadways are not always reliable, making it more difficult to equitably distribute such incentive payments. In subcommittee hearings for the House Committee on Appropriations in fiscal year 1994, FHWA was questioned on significant swings in the percentage of Interstate pavement rated as good or poor. FHwa was questioned in subcommittee hearings in 1994 about swings in percentage of interstate pavement rated good or bad. The agency was also questioned in hearings in 1995 about the number of miles of pavement rated poor or poor by the U.S. Department of Transportation. the major focus for the federal-aid highway program into the 21st century. In a speech on December 9, 1993, the Administrator of FHWA noted that since the Interstate was begun in 1956, the nation’s population has grown and shifted, the economy has changed, and needs are different. To serve these needs, the U.S. Highway System will need to be expanded and modernized to meet the needs of today and tomorrow. The U. S. Highway system will need more money and resources to meet these needs. revenues from motor fuel taxes to the place they were earned, these officials questioned whether there was a need for a federal program. Second, state officials have questioned the wisdom of selecting a formula factor that is geared predominantly to fuel use. They argue that such an approach rewards greater use of the fuel tax system than it penalizes use of it, they say. The federal program is expected to be in place by the end of the year, officials say. It will be funded by a combination of federal, state and local sources. use of motor fuel and as such contradicts federal goals of improving air quality and conserving energy. This approach would not necessarily preclude congressional direction of the use of those funds. Legislation could still specify that the returned funds be used in certain proportions for certain programs, such as the National Highway System Safety Administration's (NHSSA) clean vehicles program. NHSSA's clean vehicle program is one of the largest in the U.S., with more than 100,000 vehicles on the nation's roadways. rewarding motor fuel consumption with more highway funding also conflicts with the goal of encouraging energy conservation. New Jersey transportation officials, for instance, noted that such factors reward energy consumption and air pollution and penalize those who successfully enact measures to reduce the use of single-occupant vehicles. Similarly, transportation officials said such factors punish those who try to reduce single- Occupant Vehicle use by reducing the number of cars on the road. They also say such factors penalize people who want to reduce air pollution. Congress has previously rejected the notion of giving vehicle miles traveled greater weight in apportioning funds, in part because of the strong environmental objections raised. As in the case of the factors related to the system’s extent, the disadvantages associated with measures of measures of vehicle miles travel are also significant, according to the report. The report was compiled by the Center for Automotive Research, a nonprofit that studies the impact of cars on the environment. It was published by Oxford University Press, a division of the University of Oxford. transportation organizations, including the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials and the Surface Transportation Policy Project. While we focused our review on existing, overarching highway objectives, new components could be added to recognize the states’ capacity to fund highway needs from state resources, the states' level of effort (LOE) in meeting their own needs, and geographic differences in the cost of maintaining existing highway networks. We focus in this report on the existing, overriding highway objectives; new components can be added for each state. on the basis of the states’ relative needs. The use of actual needs can foster a perverse incentive by potentially encouraging the states to permit their highway infrastructure to worsen in order to capture a greater share of federal highway funds. This approach would reward the states with the poorest highway and bridge conditions while penalizing the states that have maintained these structures. In addition, the condition of highways and bridges varies considerably among the states. For instance, as of December 1993 the U.S. had the lowest level of highway funding in the world. funds would be targeted to congested urban areas, the approach would do little to accommodate the needs of rural areas. And some state transportation officials from sparsely populated states believe the approach does not recognize that goods produced in sparsely populate areas ultimately must be transported to dense areas. The approach would not be available in time for the 2016 presidential election, which is scheduled to take place in the fall. It would also not be possible to implement the plan in time to meet the 2016 election's deadline. approach would not be universally attractive, as a number of states would lose funds. For instance, those states whose fuel usage is low relative to their land area and extent of highway network would be financially hurt. A prime argument made by officials from these states is that the national approach would be more cost-effective for them. The national approach is expected to be rolled out across the U.S. by the end of the year. The first phase of the project will begin in the spring of 2015. that much of the traffic that occurs in densely populated areas is local. Officials from these states maintain that the promotion of interstate commerce should be a principal objective of the federal-aid highway program. Federal funds should target the highways that tend to carry national, not local, traffic, they say. They argue that federal funds should be used to promote interstate commerce, rather than to fund local road improvements, as some have suggested. The U.S. Congress is expected to vote on the issue in the coming weeks. interest requires highways to span the wide expanses of large, sparsely populated states that are the source of goods for citizens in the population centers. Financial resources of those states are often insufficient to construct, maintain, and operate such networks. Two additional arguments are made against the return-to-origin plan, including that it would be expensive and time-consuming to build and maintain such a network. It would also lead to a loss of tax revenue, which is a major source of revenue for many states. or usage of a highway system, or more highway-neutral measures such as population. Such proxies have the advantage of being relatively objective and neutral. However, there is debate among the states and other transportation experts on what factors can appropriately serve as proxies for distributing highway funds. Some insight can be found in this article. For confidential support call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. For support in the UK, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch or click here. recommended because they were perceived as avoiding the perverse effects tied to a system’s extent and usage, and because the data are sound. Population data, however, also have limitations. As noted by the Executive Director of AASHTO, the link between population and the states’ highway needs is questionable. First, while population data is sound, it also has limitations. Second, while the data isSound, it is also limited by the fact that it is based on a population of less than 100,000. A system’s usage is typically gauged using factors such as vehicle miles traveled or consumption of motor fuel. The AASHTO Policy and motor fuel consumption correlate well with system usage, they do have some drawbacks. Both factors are largely at odds with air quality objectives, and the principle of air quality in general. The advantages and disadvantages of certain formula factors are addressed in ch. 3. Finally, we recognized that changing the extent of the system is distinct from changing the system. to the extent that the formula uses factors such as vehicle miles traveled, lane miles, and fuel consumption, it encourages behavior that runs counter to the objectives of reducing congestion and improving air quality. In his view, population and population density would be preferable alternatives as proxies. These proxies were used in a study of traffic patterns in New York City. The study was published in the journal of the American Council on Aeronautics and Astronautics (ACAA) on November 14, 2013. the close of the calendar year. Fuel consumption patterns may differ across states because of the urban-rural population mix. The amount of travel done under congested conditions, differences in physical terrain, and fuel purchases by transients in those states with lower fuel taxes, among other things. While vehicle miles traveled have increased, fuel consumption has remained the same in many states. The U.S. has the highest fuel consumption rate in the world, according to the American Fuel & Petrochemical Manufacturers. both rural and urban areas. The committee further noted that a measure of lane miles is probably the simplest and most efficient potential apportionment factor on which to obtain accurate information. Annual data are generally available within 6 to 9 months of the close of the calendar year, the committee said in its report. The report also noted that lane miles are probably the most efficient way to measure the number of lanes in a given area of the U.S. and that the most accurate way to calculate the number is to use lane miles per mile. Review Committee observed that data on vehicle miles traveled have been statistically designed for a high level of measurable accuracy. Vehicle miles traveled garnered one of the highest correlation values, 0.913, of the Faucett study. Also, in the F sinkett study, vehicle miles travel garnered one. of the lowest correlation values of 0.813. The study was published in the journal of the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, which is published by the Association of American Aeronauts. Some observers criticize the use of mileage for apportioning future highway funds because such usage could reward expansion of the system. This type of apportionment factor would tend to encourage more highway.Regardless of whether center-line miles or lane miles are used to indicate the extent of a system, some observers criticize it because it could encourage expansion of a highway system. For more information, visit the U.S. Department of Transportation's Highway Safety Information Center (HSIC) or the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) the system’s usage could be at least partially counteracted by building incentives into the formula or by creating appropriate performance standards. A host of other factors—such as population, climatic conditions (daily mean temperature, annual snowfall, and annual precipitation), and per capita income—could also be used to determine how highway funds are spent. The study was published in the journal of the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (ASHTO). It was published by ASHTO on behalf of the U.S. Department of Transportation. congestion and improving the efficient movement of goods may not be fully realized. While measures of a system’s extent provide part of the story on highway needs, the condition of the road is also an important element. Condition can be captured by measures of the use of the system, as well as the extent of the highway system in a given area. For more information, visit the U.S. Department of Transportation's Highway Safety Plan, or go to www. highwaysafetyplan.org. The primary measures of the extent of the federal-aid highway network are center-line miles and lane miles. Some states believe that center- line miles, not lane miles, are a more appropriate factor for distributing highway funds. For instance, transportation officials from Idaho, Montana, North Dakota, South Dakota, and Wyoming told us that to the extent that road mileage is considered in a formula, center-lines miles more accurately reflect interconnectivity on a national and regional basis. However, this measure does not capture any information on the various widths of highways. Lane miles are a good measure of the extent of the highway system (capital stock) to be preserved. Two-lane and eight-lane highways are considered equal under this measure. The width and length of highways is reflected in lane miles, and as we noted in our 1986 report, lane miles are an important measure of a highway system's extent. In the U.S., a two-lane highway is considered equal to an eight- lane highway, while a four-lane road is equal to a five-lane roadway. of vehicle miles traveled on the Interstate would also have a high requirement for repairs to the Interstate. States that contributed large amounts of revenue to the Highway Trust Fund, reflecting substantial use of motor fuels, were also shown to require more repairs. Motor fuel consumption reflects travel on all roads, not just the interstate. The correlation all the factors related to Interstate repair needs. That is, a state with a high number of vehicle miles traveling would also likely have high needs for repair of the Interstate, according to the study. High correlations exist for vehicle miles traveled and annual contributions to the Highway Trust Fund. Interstate lane mileage, contributions to Highway Trust fund over time, and total motor vehicle registrations also showed fairly strong correlations with the need to repair the Interstate. Reports: 0.900 correlation between vehicle miles and need to fix the Interstate, according to a study by the U.S. Department of Transportation (DOT) The study was based on a survey of more than 1,000 people who participated in the DOT’s survey. analysis was reported in terms of values between zero and one. The closer the value is to 1, the closer the correlation between the factor and the need for repairs to the Interstate. Table 2.1 shows the correlation. between selected apportionment factors and the states’ need for Interstate repairs, as well as the state’s share of the cost of the repairs. The correlation between selected factors and state needs for Interstate repair is shown in the table below. The number of miles the state needs to repair the Interstate is shown as the percentage of the state's share of its cost of repairs. Congress has used funding adjustments to improve equity among the states. Alternative factors, such as lane miles and annual contributions to the Highway Trust Fund, are more closely aligned with highway needs. In our March 1986 report and an FHWA-sponsored study, we noted that alternative factors were not closely related to the highway system’s needs. We are happy to clarify this in this year's edition of the Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) magazine. For more, go to: http://www.fhwa.org/. suggested to the Congress as consistent with basic federal highway programs and for which data were available. Using lane miles as a factor for apportioning highway funds was endorsed by a Policy Review Committee of the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) in fiscal year 1991. As the committee noted, lane miles are a direct measure of the extent of public roads in the U.S. and should be used to determine how much money should be spent on road maintenance. For major highway programs, the data underlying the distribution of highway funds to the states are generally outdated, unresponsive to changing conditions, and often not reflective. The figures were derived primarily from historical averages rather than current circumstances. The data underlying highway funds does not respond to changing condition in a state, such as increased highway use. The numbers do not reflect the extent or use of the nation's figures, which are spelled out in ISTEA and remain fixed for the act’s duration. March 1986 report, we found that the factors used to apportion certain highway funds were not closely related to the highway system. At the time of our report, the data on which these factors were based were already between 40 and 70 years old. Specifically, the report found that land area, postal mileage, and population were not related to highway funds. The report was based on data that was between 40-70 years old and was published in March 1986. It was published on the 30th anniversary of the publication of that report. Population figures for formula use were derived every 10 years from the census. As a result, changes in the states’ populations were accounted for. The distance traveled both on and off the federal-aid highway system is unrelated to either the extent of the highway network or its use. It is also unrelated to the amount of money spent on the highway system each year. The U.S. spends about $1.5 billion a year on the federal highway system. The federal highway network is used to transport people and goods. on the federal-aid system or on roads under a state’s jurisdiction. It would not be a precise measure for apportioning funds to specific groups of roads. These data are reported by states monthly and adjusted at year's end. Annual data are generally available within 6 to 9 months of the start of the fiscal year. It is not known how much money is being spent on road maintenance in the U.S. each year. The federal government spends about $1.2 billion a year on road repairs and maintenance. December 1993 an NHS network of about 159,000 miles. This network is about 17 percent of the approximately 950,000-mile federal-aid network. However, this system would handle about 40 percent of all vehicle miles traveled and accommodate about 30 million people. The NHS network includes only 4 percent of  the approximately 4 million miles of public roads. The network is expected to be fully operational by the end of the year. It would be the first of its kind in the U.S. of the nation’s highway system or its usage. Because the percentage share is fixed for the four largest programs, any updated data that are factored into the calculation for two of these programs are negated. On the basis of our analysis and discussions with federal and state officials, we have decided not to update the data that were factored in to the calculation of two of the largest programs. The decision was made on the basis that the data did not reflect the full extent of the U.S. highway system. report detailed the following problems with the factors. A state’s land area was originally included as a factor in the distribution formula in 1916. Land area was thought to provide a balance for the factor based on population and to reflect a state's future highway needs. However, this approach resulted in a state being given too much land and too little water. The state was given too little land and not enough water and too much water. This resulted in the state being awarded too much and too few water and water. in large but sparsely populated states receiving larger apportionments than they otherwise would have. Land area no longer bears a close relationship to future highway needs, namely the need for new construction, since the highway system is no longer growing rapidly throughout the country. Postal mileage was included in the apportionment of the U.S. House of Representatives to the state of New Hampshire. The Senate apportioned the House to the State of Rhode Island. The House apportionted the Senate to the States of New York, New Hampshire, and Pennsylvania. as a formula factor in 1916 to provide a constitutional justification for federal involvement in highways. By 1919, changes to the highway legislation had ended the need for this justification. In addition, since postal mileage is computed on the basis of postal mileage, postal mileage was used as a factor in postal mileage calculations for the first time in 1916. In 1918, the U.S. Congress passed a law allowing the federal government to establish post offices and post roads. In 1919, this law was changed to allow post offices to be established on highways. The changes were proposed in DOT’s fiscal year 1996 budget justification. State and local governments need to have greater authority and flexibility to decide which projects are most important, DOT says. DOT has stated that it will continue to work with Congress on the issue of transportation funding in the federal budget for the next fiscal year, which begins on October 1, 1996. For more information, visit www.dot.gov/transportation and www.cnn.com/1996/01/29/ transportation-budget-proposal.  chapter 2, DOT has proposed changes in the system for delivering grants. Congress will have to reach a consensus on the national objective(s) that are critical for the highway program to address; decide whether a change is needed. The Congress will also have to decide whether or not the proposed changes are adopted or other scenarios for delivering grant are developed. For more information, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/29/politics/congress/opa- highway-grants-reform.html. on future apportionment issues in meetings with state transportation officials from 34 states and the District of Columbia. In addition, we met with representatives from various state and local governments. We also held meetings withState transportation officials in our Washington, D.C., offices. We met with state and federal officials in Atlanta, Chicago, and Detroit, and in Washington, DC, as well as in New York and Los Angeles. We have also met with members of Congress from both parties on a range of issues. aid was apportioned to Interstate, primary, secondary, and urban highways. ISTEA created only two systems: the National Highway System (NHS) and the Interstate System. A review of the program’s objectives could be structured to recognize differences among highways and the federal role associated with important highways, such as those included in the NHS. The NHS is the centerpiece of ISTEA, and the system is expected to be the formula for distributing the funds. There are no perfect factors that embrace the breadth of the ISTEA’S diverse objectives as well. needs—to extend the benefits of the Interstate system to areas not served directly by it. The NHS was conceived as a way of focusing federal resources on the nation’s most important highways. DOT, working cooperatively with state and local officials as well as the private sector, proposed the NHS to the Congress in 2009. The proposal was approved by Congress in 2010 and is now under consideration by the White House and the Department of Transportation. It is expected to be implemented by the end of the decade. example, up to 100 percent of a state’s apportionment for the Interstate Maintenance and NHS programs can be transferred to the state”s surface transportation program. In addition, the flexible funding provisions have allowed decisionmakers at the state and regional level to decide for themselves, the agency says. The program is funded by a combination of federal, state, and regional sources, including the Federal Highway Administration and the U.S. Department of Transportation. For more information on the program, go to: http://www.ihta.gov/stfea. foundation for the nation to compete in the global economy, and move people and goods in an energy-efficient manner. Additionally, ISTEA’s emphasis is intermodal. The NHS is expected to reflect this emphasis. Section 1098 of the NHS Act provides that the NHS will provide links in a seamless inter-modal network that will enhance economic growth, international competitiveness, and national security.Section 1098.1: Intermodal links will be provided by the NHS in an efficient and cost-effective manner. The fund is divided into a highway account and a mass transit account. DOT forecasts that the income to the highway account will total $20.5 billion in fiscal year 1996. According to DOT’s preliminary data through the end of fiscal year 1995, $2,160.6 million in highway funds had been transferred to mass transit activities.or related activities. ISTEA provided for a potential $70 billion in such flexible funding for transit or highway projects over 6 years. The federal-aid systems were at the core of whether to allocate transportation funds. of ISTEA tasked us with reviewing the process for distributing highway funds to the states. The Congress provided $6.2 billion in funds for over 500 demonstration projects over the 6-year authorization period. The formula for apportioning federal-aid highway funds established in ISTEA is a complex arithmetic tool used by FHWA to determine each state’s share of the funds. In discussion with the congressional committees identified in section 1098, we agreed to address (1) the way the formula works and the relevancy of the data used for the formula. funding to sustain and enhance the nation’s surface transportation infrastructure. The act provided an unprecedented authorization of $122 billion for highways, bridges, and related activities for fiscal years 1992-97. Funding is funded primarily through federal highway user taxes such as those on motor fuels (gasoline, gasohol, and diesel), tires, and trucks. Funds from these sources are collected from users and credited to the Highway Trust Fund for highway and mass transit projects projects had been authorized 4 years earlier. The federal-aid highway program had focused on completing and preserving the Interstate Highway system. New programs, planning processes, and management systems are intended to help overall federal highway apportionments. These adjustments are generally used to increase the states’ return on their contributions to the Highway Trust Fund. ISTEA also embodied quality-of-life objectives, stating that the nation’s transportation system should be economically efficient and environmentally sound, provide the state transportation officials with the information they need to make decisions. over 70 percent of all commercial truck traffic. For other roads eligible for federal assistance, a program with the characteristics of a block grant, the Surface Transportation Program (STP), provides financial assistance. In addition, ISTEA continued authorizations for a separate Bridge Replacement and Rehabilitation Program, Interstate Maintenance Program and Interstate Bridge Replacement Program. For more information, go to: http://www.intensea.org/traffic/traffics/trailers/trucks-and-buses. The amount of federal funds authorized for demonstration projects has grown since 1982. ISTEA alone authorized over $6.2 billion over 6 years for 539 demonstration projects. While some demonstration projects address critical transportation problems and can be considered nationally significant, authorizing a large number of such projects could prove troublesome. For more information, go to: http://www.isstea.gov/demonstration-project-funding-federal-funds-increased-since- 1982. For confidential support on suicide matters call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. considered three different alternatives, which are summarized in table 3.2. Under the first alternative, $17.8 billion of the total $19.1 billion would be returned to the source. This amount would represent all the funds (including ISTEA’s funds for demonstration projects) distributed to the states in fiscal year 1995, except funds. The second alternative would return all of the funds to ISTEA, except for the demonstration projects. The third option would return the remaining funds to the federal government. As we noted in a 1991 report and testimony in 1993 and 1995 before the Subcommittee on Transportation, House Committee on Appropriations, demonstration projects often cost more than expected. In our 1991 report, we found that for 66 projects reviewed, the federal funding and state matching funds together accounted for with the states’ transportation priorities, can languish in the early stages of project development, or may never get started at all. For instance, for 22 of the 66 projects we reviewed, none of the authorized funds ($92 million) had been obligated. only 37 percent of the projects’ total anticipated costs. Future finances could be drained if extra federal funds are needed to cover the cost of completing the projects. Demonstration projects can also yield a low payoff for a variety of reasons, including the fact that they frequently are not aligned with other projects in the same area of the country. The U.S. Department of Energy says it has no immediate plans to cut the number of demonstration projects it is funding, but it is looking at ways to cut costs. Under this alternative, 24 states would receive more funds than they amount of funds ($18.1 billion) apportioned to the states in fiscal year 1995 would be returned. Funds for demonstration projects are excluded from this analysis because these funds are not distributed by formula. Rather, the Congress directs how the funds are distributed. These funds were excluded since the Interstate Construction program’s final apportionment was made at the beginning of fiscalyear 1995. Only 14 states and the District of Columbia received funds in the program”s last year. of the 13-step apportionment process, increase the total amount of funds for eligible states. In fiscal year 1995, the equity funding categories increased the amount of federal highway funds apportioned to 41 states and the District of Columbia. The amount of funding that the majority of states received through the the basis of the funding for the programs alone. For the other 41 states, the total Amount of Federal Highway Funding Apportioned in Fiscal Year 1995 was ultimately increased by equity adjustments. Funding for demonstration projects is distinct from apportionments to the states in that approximately $18 billion distributed to the states. Colorado, Connecticut, Hawaii, Maryland, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, South Carolina, Virginia, and Washington did not receive funding through equity adjustments in fiscal year 1995. Each of these jurisdictions met all of ISTEA’s stated equity criteria on highway apportionments for each of these states, according to a report by the Institute for State Transportation Engineers (ISTE) The report also found that only nine states, including Puerto Rico, met the equity criteria for equity adjustments. highway formula process was therefore ultimately increased by these equity adjustments. The Congress can further adjust the federal highway funds a state receives by authorizing specific projects, commonly referred to as demonstration projects. Funding for these demonstration projects is not distributed by formula. Rather, the Congress requires that particular projects the authorized funding for such projects are not distributed in a formula. The funding for these projects is authorized by the congressional committees with jurisdiction over highway appropriations and authorizations. The U.S. Congress directs how certain funds are to be distributed by requiring that certain projects receive a specified amount of funding. categories of funding, such as those supporting highway demonstration projects (currently commanding about $1 billion per year), could be redirected to provide safeguards against sudden losses. Reauthorization of the federal-aid highway program presents the Congress with the opportunity to review the objectives associated with providing federal highway funds and the objectives of the demonstration projects that use the funds. It could also provide a way for the federal government to protect the money it spends on demonstration projects from sudden losses, as well as for other uses of the money. In fiscal year 1995, 70 percent of the funding under the formula went to the four largest programs. Separate calculations determine each state’s share of funds for the Interstate construction and repair and related activities over 6 years. The formula emphasized quality-of-life and intermodal objectives, revamped major highway programs, and offered states and localities unprecedented opportunities to use federal highway and mass transit capital funds across modal lines. But the factors underlying the distribution of funding for two of the largest programs were not fully understood. The existing federal-aid highway formula is the vehicle for distributing billions of dollars annually for highway construction and repair and related activities to the 50 states, the District of Columbia, and Puerto Rico. Since the mid-1980s, a number of organizations (including GAO) have been involved in developing the formula. The formula was approved by Congress in 1986, and the formula has been in effect ever since. It is based on a formula developed by the U.S. Department of Highway and Transportation in the 1970s. Designation of a road as part of a federal-aid system does not mean the road is owned, operated, or maintained by the federal government. The designation is simply the first step in establishing the eligibility of selected state and local roads for federal assistance. Previously, federal aid was not required to be made on state or local roads. The federal aid program was established in the 1980s and has since been expanded to include more roads. It is the largest federal highway program in U.S. history, with more than 100,000 miles of roads. state receives for these various categories occur in a strict sequence, as illustrated in figure 2.1. During the first step of the calculation, for example, funding is provided to complete the construction of the Interstate Highway System. Funding for the other program categories is also based on separate calculations. However, the funding for each of these categories is based on a series of separate calculations, as shown in the figure 2, 2, and 2, respectively. For more information, or to see the full report, visit the state's website. Some state transportation officials could be expected to support this approach. It would guarantee that all or a substantial amount of the revenues collected in their states would be returned to them. An advantage of returning funds to their source is that contributions to the Highway Trust Fund tend to correlate highly with highway needs, particularly for major highways. However, the return-to-origin approach has advantages and disadvantages as well as fuel consumption does. It is a relatively simple and direct way of distributing these funds. It could be a good idea for the U.S. to return some of its highway funds to the states. The second component, calling for a return of funds to the state in which they were generated, supports a congressional objective of having the states receive a substantial return on the federal fuel and other tax receipts that they generate and contribute to the Highway Trust Fund. The third and as the gasoline and diesel tax, the states’ contributions to the Trust Fund tend to be quite closely linked with fuel consumption. As a potential formula factor, these contributions therefore offer the same kinds of benefits to the states. funding that the states received with what they would have received under the various alternatives. In 1993, federal highway apportionments as a percentage of the states’ contributions to the Highway Trust Fund’s highway account ranged from 83 percent for South Carolina to 707 percent for Hawaii. As a formula factor, these contributions have a special status because they align with two key objectives of the highway program. FHWA estimates the states' contributions. to the Trust Fund, which derive from various federal excise taxes. Federal highway funds are provided to the states through the Federal Highway Administration. The money is distributed to theStates through various formula calculations and, to a few minor deductions, such as those for federal administrative expenses. For more information, visit the U.S. Department of Transportation (DOT) website. for more information on how to apply for federal highway funds, or visit the FHWA website for more details. for a list of all the states that receive federal highway funding, click here. 1992, and discussed the formula with FHWA’s Office of Fiscal Services. We also solicited the states’ views on the current formula and asked for their opinions. We interviewed officials from the Legislation and Strategic Planning Division, Office of Highway Information Management, and Bridge Division. We asked for the states' opinions on the formula and solicited them for their views on it. The results were published in the June issue of the magazine, which is also available on Amazon.com and other sites. The Congress elected not to change the basic formula structure. In December 1986, Jack Faucett Associates, a consultant for FHWA, issued a report evaluating alternative apportionment formulas for highway funds that included correlation analysis. Using this tool, the report showed, for example, that a state with a large number of counties was more likely to get a large amount of highway funds. However, the Congress chose to keep the formula as it was in effect at the time. The U.S. House of Representatives voted in favor of keeping the formula in place. Review of the history of the federal-aid highway programs. Analysis intended to provide Congress with formula alternatives that reflect the key objectives governing the current federal-Aid highway formula. Many individual factors making up a formula are capable of supporting the principle of distributing funds to the states. ISTEA authorized objectives implicit in the formula and the implications of alternative formula factors for achieving these objectives. The analysis presented in this report is intended to give Congress alternatives to the current apportionment formula that reflect these key objectives. suggested fundamental changes in the formula for apportioning these federal-aid funds. Section 1098 of the Intermodal Surface Transportation Efficiency Act of 1991 (ISTEA) tasked GAO with reviewing the process for distributing highway funds. GAO: The formula relies, at least in part, on outdated data. The formula is based on a formula that has been in place since the 1950s, GAO says. The federal government has spent more than $1.5 billion on highway projects since the 1990s. approach. New York transportation officials noted that formulas based on returning contributions to the Trust Fund to the state where they are raised meet neither federal or state transportation goals nor national policy as set forth in ISTEA. If the primary goal of federal apportionment formulas is to return money to the trust fund, the formula is not working, officials say. The federal government should change the formula to return the money back to thetrust fund, New York officials say, rather than to the states where it was raised. other than the highway apportionment formula, a portion of highway funds might nonetheless be retained to advance specific objectives and/or to counterbalance some of the potential disadvantages of the principal formula factors. For instance, a certain percentage of funds—10 percent, for example—could be set aside before the remaining funds were formula is used. For those objectives that the formula can best address, determine the most representative factors and corresponding weight to be assigned to those factors. If an alternative formula is adopted for distributing highway funds in the future, this formula would be used. two objectives translate into formula components that are at the core of the distribution process. Addressing the states’ highway needs, such as the miles of highway in need of repair and the deterioration of the highway associated with traffic loads, is a primary objective in the distribution of highway funds. The goal of the formula is to find a formula that meets the needs of the states. The formula is based on a formula developed by the U.S. Department of Highway and Transportation (DHS) in the 1990s. provide an authorization proposal for such changes at an appropriate time. We suggested that to lessen these impacts, a transition period could be provided during which the full effect of the formulas would be gradually introduced. For some programs the dollar amount apportioned by formula has little practical meaning because the states have substantial flexibility to transfer funds from one program category to another. For the factors used in certain highway apportionment formulas would result in some states’ receiving more or less funds than they did under the then-current formulas. in infeasible for use on certain major highways in urban areas because of the presence of other traffic, traffic signals, and other disruptions. Altering the existing formula would undoubtedly cause shifts in the states’ relative shares of annual highway funding. Under a number of the scenarios presented in this chapter, the formula would have on any state would depend on the percentage of the state’s highway revenue provided by federal funds. To help temper the effects of changes in the formula, any new formula might include a “safety factor” in the funding formula.