DOD’s corrosion strategy, knowing the costs of corrosion is essential to adequately implementing the strategy. Having corrosion data helps the department learn what works so it can be more effective in reducing corrosion. The Defense Science Board in 2004 stated that “accurate and objective corrosion data collection collection of corrosion-related data and use these data to support additional corrosion prevention and mitigation efforts.” We also recommend that the Secretary of Defense direct the Under Secretary of defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics to specify the department's planned actions, milestones and resources for completing an Army feasibility study. work that DOD and the military services did not have an effective management approach to mitigate and prevent corrosion. We recommended that DOD develop a departmentwide strategic plan with clearly defined goals, measurable outcome-oriented objectives, and performance measures. DOD concurred and in December 2003 issued its corrosion strategy. According to corrosion prevention measures may reduce the amount of maintenance needed on equipment items, thereby extending the availability of equipment items over their life cycle. We met with DOD officials involved with developing DOD’s long-term strategy to prevent and control corrosion. We believe that funding and priorities should be aligned to the greatest extent possible to provide greater assurance that the department’s resources are being used prudently. As stated in our report, DOD can achieve long-term cost savings by investing in additional corrosion prevention and mitigation efforts. In addition, investments in investments in the Department of Defense should also be made, according to the report. The report was published by the Center for American Progress, a think tank based in Washington, D.C. maintenance costs and material condition. The metrics and related information systems needed to better collect, track, report, and manage efforts to prevent and mitigate corrosion. The related funding requirements to address this issue. We interviewed officials and obtained documentation at the following locations: Office of the Secretary of the Navy, the Department of Energy, and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. For more information, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/29/news/features/ corrosion-in-navy-spill-water/story.html. and new incentives to reward life-cycle cost reduction efforts must be implemented. The Army says such data are critical “not only to understand the depth of the problem, but to enable a quantitative corrosion mitigation strategy, which is founded on fact.” The Army said the data are “critical” to understand “the extent of the corrosion problem in the Army’s fleet” and “how to address it.’ The Army added that the data “are critical’ to “understand” the “depth of the problems” Army officials cited similar results after collecting corrosion data on Hellfire missile launchers. Army Missile Command’s tactical missile program executive office attributed a large portion of its $3.2 billion overall long-term life cycle savings to the Hellfire corrosion prevention measures. Collection of corrosion data for prepositioned equipment could better enable the Army and Marine Corps to make a return on investment, the Army said in a statement. The Army said the data could be used to improve the readiness of the Army, Marine Corps and other agencies. Estimates of corrosion costs DOD-wide have ranged from $10 billion to $20 billion annually. Army determined that about $8.7 million of the estimated $28 million spent to restore this equipment to serviceable condition was used to address corrosion-related problems. Marine Corps officials estimated that corrosion costs make up at least 50 percent of overall maintenance costs. As much as one-third of these costs could be reduced through more effective corrosion prevention and mitigation, the authors say. They say the military services have estimated that at least 25 percent of Overall Maintenance costs are corrosion related. percent of the $110,000 needed, on average, to repair motorized lighterage prepositioned equipment. The additional information that would be obtained through the collection of corrosion data could support the Army’s and Marine Corps’ efforts to more effectively prevent and mitigate corrosion and achieve long-term cost savings, which could be significant, the Army says. The Army says the data could be used to improve the effectiveness of the Army and Marines’ corrosion prevention and mitigation efforts. Corps have taken other measures intended to help reduce the impact of corrosion on prepositioned assets. Army and Marine Corps policies require that repaired equipment be restored to good condition before being placed in prepositioning status. Marine Corps officials stated that there is minimal incentive to capture and report corrosion costs forprepositioned equipment because maintenance costs are typically managed at more general levels, such as the costs to repair or replace a piece of equipment. Army maintenance regulations require prepositionedly maintained equipment to be maintained at “10/20” standards. highest standard the Army has for equipment maintenance. Army maintenance regulations also provide for the use of lubricants and preservatives, as well as regular inspections. Marine Corps policy indicates that all equipment generally will be in “Code A” condition at the time it is placed in storage. Code A means ‘In good condition’ or ‘Exemplary’ in the Marine Corps’ military slang for ‘exemplary equipment,’ which is used to refer to equipment that is in good condition. to address these problems. Without such data, the services may lack the incentive to support efforts to more effectively prevent and mitigate corrosion and achieve long-term cost savings. Until the Army and Marine Corps take additional actions to prevent corrosion, such as implementing use of temporary shelters to the greatest extent possible. Direct the Secretary of the Army to collect corrosion-related data, as required in existing Army regulations, and use these data to support additional corrosion prevention and mitigation efforts.direct the Commandant of the Marine Corps to require the Army regulations require units to collect corrosion-related data as part of their equipment maintenance and storage programs. The Marine Corps does not require the collection of corrosion information for all equipment, but believes it to be beneficial. According to Marine Corps officials, corrosion information has value but not enough to be included with more critical information, such as the amount of equipment in the inventory and in serviceable condition. Although the Army and Marine Corps are not collecting data about corrosion, they do not systematically collect it.  corrosion is routinely treated as part of the maintenance process for restoring equipment to meet standards. For equipment stored on the prepositioned ships, inspections are conducted on a periodic basis. For example, Army officials at Camp Carroll, South Korea, told us that corrosion was observed on the engine blocks in 5-ton trucks. Officials from both the Army and the Marine Corps said that corrosion-related data are not tracked separately. The Army is storing a significant amount of equipment at several locations around the world. collection of corrosion-related data. Corrosion-related survey of all divisions and separate combat brigades to be conducted at least every 4 years. In addition, Army policy on reporting equipment quality deficiencies includes a requirement to report to the Army’s Corrosions Prevention and Control Program. For more information, visit the Army's Corrosional Prevention & Control Program website at www.armycorrosioncontrolprogram.org. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. primarily because it has low priority. Army guidance for documenting equipment maintenance includes detailed instructions for reporting corrosion issues. Most of those responsible for documenting the maintenance action do not want to take the extra time to include corrosion information because they see it as having low priority, Army officials say. The Army has no immediate comment on the issue of reporting corrosion problems to the National Transportation Safety Board, which has authority over the agency's maintenance program. The NTSB has no comment on this issue, however, and has no plans to change its policy. Long-term deployments of U.S. troops in Southwest Asia are likely to magnify the effects of corrosion on military equipment. Higher rates of corrosion result in increased repairs and current operations in Southeast Asia. To assess the measures taken by the Army and Marine Corps to reduce the impact that corrosion has on prepositioned assets, we met with DOD and service command officials. We obtained their assessments and perspectives on corrosion prevention and prevention of corrosion in the military equipment that is deployed in the region. corrosion. Army officials from the 3rd Infantry Division have stated that with the exception of rubber seals on some vehicles, prepositioned equipment entering Southwest Asia was in good shape. These officials said they did not experience any corrosion that affected their ability to perform operations. Officials with the 1st and 2nd Marine Expeditionary Forces who used or observed the use of prepositioning equipment in Southwest Asia found it was in a high state of readiness and could not recall any instance where corrosion affected their operations. We examined information on the maintenance condition and repair actions for prepositioned equipment from the Army Maintenance Management System. We also asked the Army and Marine Corps for information regarding the impact of corrosion on maintenance costs, equipment deficiencies, inventory levels, and readiness rates. We obtained and analyzed various cost and maintenance reports on these assets, including inspection and maintenance logs, databases and assessments, and after-action reports. In particular, we discussed the barriers that exist to identifying and quantifying the impact on prepostioned assets’ and control programs in the Army and Marine Corps. We found that information about corrosion of prepositioned assets is generally lacking in both services. In almost every instance, this corrosion information was not available. The Army, at our request, conducted a limited review of maintenance records for about 2,000 pieces ofprepositioned equipment. We obtained and reviewed DOD and military service policies and procedures for collecting and reporting corrosion-related data. services generally have a limited amount of corrosion data related to cost estimates, readiness, and safety. The Army and Marine Corps consider collection of corrosion data on prepositioned assets to be a low priority and, consequently, do not systematically collect them. Corrosion data could be used to help identify underlying causes of maintenance problems and obtain a better understanding of the costs of corrosion and the extent it affects readiness. The Army has had previous success using corrosion data regarding non-prepositioning programs to support corrosion prevention support similar corrosion prevention and mitigation efforts in their prepositioning Programs. To reduce the impact of corrosion, the Army has taken measures extent feasible and collecting corrosion-related data. At the Army’s prepositioning facility in Goose Creek, South Carolina, equipment is stored outside during the time it is not undergoing maintenance because of a lack of storage facilities. The amount of time equipment is storage outside ranges, on average, from 1 month to more than 3. The U.S. Army is currently stationed in South Korea, Japan, Australia and New Zealand. For more information, visit www.army.gov.uk/army-prepositioning-facility-in-goose Creek. The Goose Creek facility primarily is a maintenance facility and is not meant for the storage of equipment, officials said. Although building new storage space is possible, officials say it would be difficult to justify. Army prepositioning afloat.and reconfiguration of U.S. Forces Korea facilities related to future force restructuring. The facility is located in Goose Creek, South Korea, near the Korean Demilitarized Zone (DMZ) and the border with North Korea. It was built in the 1950s. as happened in this case rarely occur, but that some period of outdoor storage is expected for equipment waiting upload. Army officials acknowledged having an immediate need for additional sheltering, preferably with humidity control capability, for prepositioned equipment located in South Korea, Kuwait, and South Carolina. Under current construction plans, additional storage facilities will not be available at all three sites until 2012 at the earliest. In South Korea and Kuwait, Army officials said that even with the additional planned storage facilities, substantial amounts of equipment will still be stored outdoors. define storage requirements and justify funding for construction of additional storage facilities. In South Korea, Army officials told us the lack of available land limits their ability to construct new, or expand existing, facilities. These officials also said that estimating storage needs is difficult because of uncertainties regarding the consolidation of storage facilities in South Korea. The U.S. Army says it is working with South Korea to find a solution to the storage problem in the South Korean Army's Yongjin Army Base, which is located on the border with the Republic of Korea. confirmed that the equipment continued to be in good operating condition. With the exception of minor hydraulic leaks and o-ring deterioration, the equipment was generally free of corrosion problems. Army officials said some of the equipment corroded faster and more severely because of being stored outside and, as a result, experienced many significant defects and readiness shortfalls, with corrosion being one of the primary problems. The primary measure to reduce facilities is to reduce the number of personnel required to maintain the equipment, officials said. At Camp Carroll in South Korea, about 30 percent of the Army’s Heavy Brigade Combat Team equipment is stored outdoors in an often damp and humid region. That equipment corrodes faster and will more quickly fall below required maintenance condition standards. The remaining equipment is storage in humidity-controlled areas. The U.S. Army says it has no plans to change the way it stores its equipment in the South Korean region of South Korea. It says the equipment is there to protect the troops from enemy attack. a result, the Army incurred additional maintenance costs. Army officials in South Korea noted that it costs more to maintain equipment that is stored outside in part because the equipment needs to be inspected three times more often than equipment in humidity-controlled storage. Large amounts of Army prepositioned equipment are stored outside because of the high humidity in the region. The Army says it has no plans to change the way the equipment is stored in the South Korean military's storage facilities for the time being. The U.S. military says it is working with South Korean officials to find a solution. months. In some cases, equipment is stored outside well over 3 months. For example, 44 M1A1 tanks and 10 fuel tankers sat outdoors for more than a year after undergoing maintenance and experienced a total of $1.2 million in corrosion-related damage. Army officials said that prolonged periods of outdoor storage can lead to corrosion and other problems in military equipment and facilities. For more information, visit the Army's website or call 1-800-273-8255 or go to http://www.army.mil/. would be repaired during maintenance performed on the entire engine and would not be noted in the maintenance logs. Instead, documentation of the maintenance actions would include a description of the equipment or component and why it was not functional. But it would not include the reason it was broken or cracked—such as being broken or cracking—but would not say why it wasn't functional. It would only be noted if it was being repaired on an entire engine, not on a single part of the engine, as is currently the case. The Army Cost and Economic Analysis Center says humidity-controlled storage provides a substantial return on investment. Army National Guard equipment can be stored in a humidity- controlled facility. The program includes combat vehicles, trailers, radar systems, and other equipment located at Guard facilities in 45 states and U.S. territories. According to Army storage and maintenance guidelines, storage of equipment in facilities without humidity control is not only dangerous, it is also dangerous to the environment. The Army says that while additional storage will require Army investment, the use of humidity- Controlled storage in general has been shown to provide a substantial returns on investment for the Army. The Army National Guard began the initial phase of a humidity-controlled storage program for its vehicles and equipment in 1994. Guard officials told us that they collected and analyzed an extensive amount of information on corrosion and its cost impacts.and mitigation efforts that achieved long-term cost savings. For more information, visit the National Guard's website or go to: http://www.armynationalguard.org/news/features/features-top-stories/2013/01/30/national-guard-news-features.html. on selected pieces of equipment and estimated that a significant amount of corrosion-related costs could be avoided by using humidity-controlled storage facilities. Program officials currently estimate that the sheltering and preservation effort will save a total of about $1.2 billion through fiscal year 2010, which reflects a 9 to 1 ratio. The effort is expected to be completed by the end of the year, according to the program's website. For more information, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2011/01/30/science/climate/climate-change/stories. humidity-controlled facilities and was reported to be in good operating condition and was not degraded by corrosion. Maintaining low humidity levels reduces corrosion because moisture is a primary cause of corrosion. Army equipment on prepositioning ships is stored below deck in humidity-controlled cargo space. Army stores some of its land-based prepositioned equipment in humidity.-controlled warehouses. Marine Corps policies indicate that equipment should be sheltered in climate- controlled facilities to the greatest extent possible. The Army is currently storing a substantial amount of equipment in such facilities because such storage is considered highly effective. assets are stored in humidity-controlled facilities either on ships or in caves in Norway. Humidity levels, particularly on ships, are required under Army and Marine Corps guidelines to stay within a specific range on a continuous basis and are closely monitored. The Army has stored prepositioned equipment in temporary shelters located in Livorno, Italy, and Camp Carroll, South Korea. The Marine Corps has also used temporary shelters in Florida to store some of itsprepositioned assets awaiting maintenance and upload to ships. invites greater and more rapid deterioration because of corrosion but requires increased surveillance, inspections, and maintenance. For example, whereas combat vehicles in humidity-controlled facilities need to be exercised and road tested every 30 months, vehicles stored without humidity control require exercising every 12 months. One of the benefits of humidity is that it reduces the need for maintenance on combat vehicles. For more information, visit the U.S. Department of Defense's website, or go to: http://www.defence.gov/. Temporary shelters may be a feasible option to address immediate storage needs. They can be acquired faster than permanent facilities, which may take several years to plan, fund, and build. The military services have made prior use of temporary shelters in several locations, for both prepositioned and non-prepositioned equipment. For example, in Iraq, Army and Marine Corps units in military operations in Iraq during 2003, it was reported to be in good working condition and was not degraded by control. efforts, we recommend that the Secretary of Defense take the following three actions. Direct the Secretary. of the Army to examine the feasibility of using temporary shelters, including humidity-controlled. facilities, to store land-based prepositioned assets currently stored outdoors. If such use is determined to be feasible, to take appropriate steps, we say. We recommend that. the Secretary of Defense take the following three actions: Direct the Secretary of Army to examine the feasibility of using temporary. shelters, including humidity- controlled facilities, to store land-based prepositioned assets currently stored outside. of sizes, materials, and features, including humidity control. For example, “K-SPAN” temporary shelters are steel structures constructed on-site and set over a concrete foundation. These shelters may be dismantled, packaged, and relocated. Army officials told us that temporary shelter are used primarily in situations where immediate storage is required but not immediately needed for long-term use. For more information, visit the U.S. Army’s “Temporary Shelters’’ website. on the use of temporary shelters to store land-based prepositioned assets and for collecting and using Army and Marine Corps corrosion-related data to support additional corrosion prevention and mitigation efforts. DOD concurred with our recommendations that the Army consider the feasibility of using temporary shelters, including humidity-controlled facilities. However, DOD did not provide specific information on planned actions, milestones, and resources for implementing the Army's temporary shelters plan. For more information on the Army’s temporary shelters program, visit Army.gov/temporaryshelters. amount of land-based prepositioned assets outdoors without adequate sheltering. At these locations, assets are left relatively unprotected from moisture, sand, and other elements that contribute to corrosion. Sheltering assets, especially sheltering in humidity-controlled facilities, has been shown to be a key anticorrosion practice. This practice is wasteful, and Army officials noted to reduce the impact of corrosion on prepositioning assets, there are immediate opportunities for taking additional action. The Army is taking steps to address the problem, but more action is needed. As of April 2006, the Army was storing outside nearly all of its prepositioned assets (numbering about 11,000 items) in equipment in Kuwait. Officials cited competing funding priorities as the primary reason for not providing indoor storage. Army officials also cited uncertainties regarding the number and type of equipment and length of time it is stored, which make it difficult to accurately estimate how long it will take to be fully stored. Also stored outside in Kuwait where, according to DOD and Army officials, the environment is highly corrosive because of the humid climate. The Army could increase its use of storage facilities for land-based assets. Prepositioned equipment drawn by Army and Marine Corps units for military operations in Iraq during 2003 had mostly been stored in humidity-controlled storage facilities. Under Army policy, the preferred method for storing prepositioned assets is to store them in humidity controlled facilities. The Army has taken some measures to reduce the impact of corrosion on prepositioning assets, but the Army could use more storage facilities to store land based assets. used equipment from two of its three prepositioned squadrons to support these operations. The Army used nearly all of its prepositioning ship stocks and land-based stocks in Kuwait and Qatar. Military equipment and infrastructure are often located in corrosive environments that increase the risk of a fire or explosion in the area. The U.S. used some equipment from Europe, as well as ship stocks from the Middle East and North Africa, to support the operations in Iraq and Afghanistan, the Army said. Prepositioned equipment and supplies are strategic assets, along with sealift and airlift, for projecting military power. These assets include combat equipment, spare parts, and sustainment supplies that are stored on ships and on land in locations around the world. The services’ prepositioning programs are briefly described in table 1. The Army’s program involves three primary categories of stocks: combat include bare base sets; vehicles; munitions; and a variety of consumable supplies, such as rations, fuel, support equipment. brigade sets, operational projects, and war reserve sustainment stocks stored at land sites and aboard prepositioning ships around the world. The Navy’s prepositioned war reserve stocks are used mainly to support the Marine Corps’ prepositioner program and deploying forces. The Air Force prepositions stocks of war reserve equipment and supplies to meet initial contingency requirements and to sustain early deploying forces in the event of an emergency. The Marine Corps also prepositioned supplies and equipment on land sites in Norway. Most of the military services store equipment and supplies in Southwest Asia, the Pacific theater, Europe, and aboard prepositioning ships. Figure 1 shows the major locations of prepositioned stocks.ships around the world. In addition to the contact named above, Thomas Gosling, Assistant Director; Larry Bridges; Renee Brown; Lisa Canini; and Larry Bridges are also involved in the program. For confidential support call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. DOD has made significant investments in its military prepositioning programs. The services have collectively used an average of over $1 billion each year to operate and maintain these assets. Prepositioned assets have been used extensively to support operations in Iraq and Afghanistan. The Army spent $386.1 million for storage and maintenance of prepositioned Assets in fiscal year 2005. The Marine Corps spent $76.5 million for assets in South Korea and $38.3 million for Assets in Southwest Asia. the Army and the Marine Corps. DOD’s comments are reprinted in appendix II. We focused our review on the prepositioned assets managed by the Army and Marine Corps because these two services have the majority of the military's prepositioning assets. These services provided most of the equipment used in the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan. The U.S. military has been in a state of war since September 11, 2001, because of the 9/11 attacks on the United States. The United States has been at the forefront of the fight against terrorism. of a minimum of $8 for every $1 invested. The Army National Guard also estimates that it will have achieved a total of over $1.2 billion in cost savings by fiscal year 2010. Most of the projected savings is based on having to perform less maintenance on equipment that is that is used in the National Guard. The U.S. Army is the largest military service in the world, followed by the Air Force, Navy and Marines, according to a report by the Center for Strategic and International Studies. no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staffs have any questions, please contact me at (202) 512- 8365. Contact points for our Offices of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of this report. For confidential support, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org. For support on suicide matters call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. Amy Sheller, Allen Westheimer, and Tim Wilson contributed to this report. For confidential support call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255. For support in the U.S., call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. For more information on suicide prevention, go to www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. For confidential help in the United States, call the national suicide prevention Lifeline on 1-877-788-7070. taken to further prevent and mitigate corrosion. In addition, we visited selected prepositioning locations and maintenance facilities. These included the Army’s facilities in Goose Creek, South Carolina, and Camp Carroll, South Korea. We also visited the Marine Corps Logistics Command in Albany, Georgia, and Blount Island Command in Jacksonville, Florida. To assess the effectiveness of these measures, we conducted a survey of more than 1,000 military personnel across the U.S. and abroad. the Secretary of Defense Corrosion Policy and Oversight Office Headquarters, Department of the Army U.S. Army Materiel Command, Fort Belvoir, Virginia Tank-Automotive and Armaments Command, Warren, Michigan, and Rock Island, Illinois U.s. Army Field Support Command, Rock Island,. Texas U. s. III Army Corps, Fort Hood, Texas. U.N. Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon is the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Corps Headquarters U.S. Marine Corps Forces, Pacific, Hawaii I Marine Expeditionary Force, Camp Pendleton, California II Marine expeditionary force, Camp Lejune, North Carolina III Marine ExpeditionARY Force, Okinawa, Japan Marine Corps Systems Command, Quantico, Virginia Marine Corps Logistics Command, Albany, Georgia Blount Island Command, Jacksonville, Florida Office of the Inspector, Jacksonville. Office of Marine Corps Inspector, Florida. Office for Marine Corps Training and Doctrine, Jacksonville,. Florida. General of the Marine Corps Bureau of Medicine and Surgery. Naval Facilities Engineering Command CNA Corporation, Alexandria, Virginia. U.S. Navy Inspector General Naval Air Systems Command, Office of the Inspector General, Naval Audit Service. Naval Medical Logistics Command, Fort Detrick, Maryland. Navy Expeditionary Medical Command, Cheatham Annex, Headquarters, Seventh Air Force, Washington, D.C. Navy Air Force Medical Support Command, San Diego, California. Navy Medical Logistic Command, New Jersey, Fort McHenry, California, and Fort Leavenworth, Kansas. Battalion Afloat, Goose Creek, South U.S. Forces Korea, Yongsan Garrison. Field Support Battalion Far East, Camp Carroll, Materiel Support Center Korea. 19th Theater Support Command, Camp Walker, Daegu, South Korea U.s. Army Pacific, Fort Shafter, Hawaii. Marine Corps Air Station, Camp Pendleton, California, Marine Corps Base, San Diego, California. Marine Amphibian Support Battalion, Camp San Antonio, Texas. Force, South Korea United States Pacific Command United States Forces Korea We conducted our work from May 2005 through February 2006 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. We reviewed available data for inconsistencies and discussed the data with DOD and service officials. We determined that the data used was accurate and that it did not cause any problems with the U.S. military operations in South Korea. We are happy to make clear that this was not the case in the case of U. S. Forces Korea. 3rd Marine Expeditionary Force said the equipment on the prepositioning ship USNS Lummus that was used in a 2004 training exercise in South Korea was generally in the same good operating condition it was when first uploaded about 2 years previously. These officials stated that subsequent maintenance in August 2005 resulted in the equipment being in a good condition. The equipment was removed from the ship in September 2005 and replaced with a new set of equipment that was in a better condition by the end of the year. for our review were sufficiently reliable for our purposes. We are sending copies of this report to the Secretary of Defense, the. Secretary of the Army, and the Commandant of the Marine Corps. We will also make copies available to others upon request. In addition, this report is available at In addition to this report, we will also be making copies of the report available at the following sites: www.cnn.com/2013/01/29/military/military-intelligence/militaryintelligence-report-2013/index.html. the recommendations. With respect to the Marine Corps, DOD. stated that collection of adequate data is not a matter of being a low priority but a funding issue. As noted in our report, we were told by Marine Corps officials that. collection of these data has been a lowpriority. We were told that collection. of thesedata has been an low priority. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org.