The high percentage of deficiencies indicates a serious failure of control procedures over FAR-based acquisitions. This creates a heightened risk of making improper payments or waste. We determined a control to be “key” based on our review of the standards for internal control as well as the FAR, HHSAR, and other standards. It was determined that this control was a ‘key’ because it was the only one that could prevent waste or improper payments. It is the only control that can prevent improper payments and waste. the results of our statistical sample conservatively by reporting the lower bound of our two-sided, 95 percent confidence interval. The control deficiencies we found were primarily caused by a lack of agency-specific policies and procedures that would help ensure that applicable FAR requirements, agency policies, and other control objectives were met. The results of this study were based on a survey of more than 1,000 federal employees across the U.S. government. The study was conducted by the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms. one instance in which a key control was not adequately implemented. Many contract actions had more than one deficiency. At least 37.2 percent of FAR-based contract actions made in fiscal year 2008 had three or more instances of not being implemented. The controls ranged from ensuring contractors had adequate accounting systems prior to the use of a cost reimbursement contract to certifying invoices for payment. The U.S. Air Force is one of the largest military contractors in the world, with more than 1,000 employees. tested are key to effective administration of the contract in that the lack of implementation would significantly increase the risk of improper payments or waste. We selected a stratified random sample of 102 contract actions totaling $140.7 million in fiscal year 2008. To test internal control procedures over contract actions, we selected a strictly random  sample of 102 contract actions totaling $140 million in fiscal year 2008. We tested internal control procedures over contract actions to test the effectiveness of these procedures. preventive and detective controls. Preventive controls are controls designed to prevent errors, improper payments, or waste. Detective controls are designed to identify errors or improper payments after the payment is made. A sound system of internal control contains a balance of both preventive and Detective controls that is appropriate for the agency’s operations. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. of improper payments or waste before they occur. A key concept introduced in our standards is that control activities selected for implementation be cost beneficial. Generally it is more effective and efficient to prevent improper payments. A control activity can be preventive, detective, or both based on when the control is carried out. It can also be cost-effective, such as when the cost of the control activity is lower than it would be if it were carried out in the absence of the cost-beneficial control activities. A positive control environment sets the tone for the overall quality of an entity’s internal control. It provides the foundation for an entity to effectively manage contracts and payments to contractors. Without a strong control environment, the control deficiencies we identified could not be addressed. It includes an assessment of the risks managing and overseeing the growing value of contracting activities. It also includes a climate supportive of quality internal control, and includes a positive attitude towards control and conscientious management. It is important to maintain an environment that sets a positive and supportive attitude to control.its objectives. form and within a time frame that enables them to carry out their responsibilities. An entity should have internal control monitoring activities in place to assess the quality of performance over time and ensure that the findings of audits and other reviews are promptly resolved. Control activities include both internal and external audits and reviews of the company's internal processes and procedures. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. and evaluation findings strengthens the control environment in part because it can help assure management that the agency’s objectives are being met. It can also help management determine whether the entity is complying with applicable acquisition laws and regulations. Contract with the U.S. Department of Defense is valued at more than $1.2 billion, according to the agency's annual report. The U.N. Agency for International Development has a contract with the United States Department of Defence to provide services to the military and other government agencies. written comments on a draft of this report (reprinted in their entirety in appendix III), CMS and HHS agreed with each of our 10 new recommendations and described steps planned to address them. CMS also stated that the recommendations will serve as a catalyst for improvements to the internal controls. The recommendations are published in a report to be published by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CMS) and the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) in the spring of 2015. For more information, visit www.cdc.gov. For confidential support call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255. raised in its comment letter below and include additional information at the end of appendix III. In its comments, CMS stated its belief that the 11 internal controls we reviewed did not provide a complete picture of its internal controls over contract management activities. We acknowledge that there are many internal controls that need to be improved, the CMS said in its comments. The CMS said it has made changes to the internal controls it has in place to ensure that they are effective and that they do not compromise the quality of contract management. Government provide the overall framework for establishing and maintaining internal control. These standards provide that an entity’s management should establish both a supportive overall control environment and specific control activities. Control activities are the policies, procedures, techniques, and mechanisms that enforce management's directives and help ensure that actions are taken to address risks. The standards further provide that information should be recorded and communicated to management and oversight officials in a internal controls that are and can be instituted by agencies to help safeguard assets, prevent and detect fraud and errors. of its FAR-based contracting operations, including the number of certain contract types awarded, the extent of competition achieved, and total contract value. Standards for internal control provide that for an agency to manage its operations, it must have relevant, reliable, and timely information relating to the extent and nature of its operations. For more information, visit the FAA's internal control website. For confidential support, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. Table 3 provides further details on the control procedures we tested, the criteria or source for the procedure, and detailed results. We also obtained information from agency officials regarding contract closeout, cognizant federal agency responsibilities, audit funding, and staff resources. We used the internal control standards as a basis for our tests. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S., call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. the CFA following an audit of a statement of incurred costs submitted by the contractor. CMS officials told us that they generally adjust for final indirect cost rates during contract closeout at the end of the contract performance rather than annually due to the cost and effort the adjustment takes. When CMS is not the CFA, CMS must wait on the C FA to perform the necessary audit work required to establish the final indirect Cost Rates. Not annually adjusting for final direct cost rates increases the risk that CMS will not be able to meet its obligations. The FAR does not provide time frames or other requirements for when the audit of direct costs should be performed. The contracting officer may request, for a fee, that the CFA for the contractor perform the audit work. Such an audit may be necessary for closing out a contract, the FAR says. The FAR also does not give a time frame for when such an audit should be done, it says. It does provide that the audit should take place if it is necessary to close out the contract. establishing forward pricing rates, final indirect cost rates, and administering cost accounting standards for all contracts in a business unit. Generally, the CFA is the agency with the largest dollar amount of negotiated contracts, including options, with the contractor. In addition, the agency is responsible for administering the business unit's cost-of-contracts. The CFA has the power to approve or disapprove of any of the company's contracts with a contractor. The agency is also responsible for overseeing the business units' cost-management procedures. FAR requirements unique to specific contract types, further highlight the need for additional guidance for contracting officers. Roles and responsibilities for implementation of CFA responsibilities not clearly defined. The CFA concept provides an efficient way for contractors to receive improve the department’s fulfillment of C FA duties as described in FAR. Develop policies and procedures that clearly assign roles and responsibilities. That include the preparation of and periodic update of a list of contractors for which the department is the CFA. The FAR requires that CFAs perform certain oversight and monitoring activities. since these contracts provide no positive profit incentive for the contractor to control costs or use labor efficiently, the government must conduct appropriate surveillance of contractor performance. The risks of not performing CFA duties are exacerbated by the fact that other federal agencies that use the same contractors rely on the oversight and monitoring work of the CFA. Without knowing for which contractors additional CFA oversight the necessary oversight and the government may not be positioned to protect itself from the risk of improper payments or waste. While officials told us they could use more audit funding, we found that OAGM management had yet to determine what an appropriate funding level should be. a streamlined set of audits and reviews, thereby enabling them to receive and perform government contracts. In our 2007 report, we found that CFA responsibilities were inadequately fulfilled and recommended that CMS develop policies and procedures. In a recommendation resolution report, HHS stated to be developed both at the department level and at CMS. Further it stated that to the extent CMS is designated to perform functions supporting HHS as the CFA, CMS will develop appropriate procedures for monitoring Cost Accounting Standards compliance and for coordinating efforts with other agencies. As of July 2009, neither HHS nor CMS had developed such policies and procedures or a mechanism to track the CMS contractors for which additional oversight is needed. Roles and responsibilities for the performance of CFA duties were not clear among HHS and its components, including CMS. HHS officials said that they did not have a process to identify the contractors,including CMS contractors, for which HHS would be the CFA. Without a list that is periodically updated for the contractors’ portfolio of federal government contracting activity, HHS policies could not be developed. to HHS components and to contracting officers. NIH was assigned responsibility to establish indirect rates for the contractors under HHS’s cognizance. Contracting officers within HHS components are responsible for other CFA duties. NIH officials acknowledged their centralized role in determining indirect rates, but noted that NIH did not have the resources necessary to determine the indirect rates. CMS officials told us that NIH officials could not clearly explain how the performance of these duties and its components do not know the contractors for which CFA oversight is needed. when NIH can not perform the reviews within the needed time frames to make timely contract awards, CMS’s cost/price team establishes the rates. The confusion over roles and responsibilities increases the risk that CFA responsibilities are not being timely performed, if at all. Without effective coordination, contractors may not receive the rates they are entitled to under the CFA program. The NIH has a responsibility to ensure that contractors are paid for their work within the required time frames. The agency has an obligation to make sure that the rates are paid in a timely manner. While FAR and HHSAR provide regulations agencies must follow, it is up to agency management to develop agency-specific policies and other guidance that implement those regulations. Agency-specific policy may include guidance on applicable approval levels, time frames, agency forms, and routing processes. HHS reported that while HHS is the CFA for CMS’s contractors, policies and procedures need to be tailor-made to address the specific operational environment. Also, while the HHSAR provides additional guidance and policies specific to HHS, it does not specifically address all of levels and time frames. CMS stated it was encouraged that the errors we found did not involve more substantive departures from the FAR or HHSAR. We disagree with CMS’s overall assessment of our findings and message of the report. The internal controls we tested are key to ensuring that contracting activities, both pre-award and as well as officials in the Office of Acquisition Management and Policy at the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) We selected 11 internal controls over contracting and payments to contractors to test for this report. 2008 through September 2009. No action taken. The Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) reported that (a) the policy and criteria for pre-award contracting activities are already established in the Federal Acquisition Regulation (FAR) and (b) that existing policies would be adopted for the new program. The department reported that the new policy would be in place by the end of the 2009 fiscal year, and that no further action would be taken to change the current policy or criteria. The contract closeout process involves verifying that the goods or services were provided and that administrative matters are completed. The government audits these billed costs to determine if they were allowable and allocable to the contract. Other tasks may include audits or reviews of the contractor’s costs and compliance with CAS. For more information, go to www.contractcloseout.org or call 1-800-447-8255. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. time standards for closing out a contract after the work is physically completed (i.e., goods or services are provided) The contract closeout process is an important internal control, in part, because it is generally the last opportunity for the government to detect and recover any improper payments. The complexity and complexity of the contract closing process can be difficult to understand, according to the U.S. Government Accountability Office. The U.N. agency says it has no plans to change the way contracts are closed. contracts that are eligible and overdue for closeout nor did it contain a workload analysis. For example, it did not contain a list of contracts eligible for close out by contracting officer or specialist or an estimate of the number of hours or audit funds it would need to close the contracts. The fiscal year 2009 plan was released on October 1, 2009 and covers the period from January 1, 2010 to December 31, 2010. The FAR does not provide details of the amount of money that would be spent to close contracts. 4. We continue to believe the contract closeout plan does not sufficiently address our recommendation. It did not include a comprehensive strategy to reduce the backlog of contracts that are eligible and overdue for closeout, nor did it contain a workload analysis. The plan did not adequately address the need to reduce backlogs of contracts, the report said. It also did not address the problem of overspending on contracts that were not eligible for closeouts. The report was published by the Government Accountability Office on Tuesday. CMS officials told us that during fiscal year 2008, OAGM closed 581 contracts and reduced the overdue backlog to 400 contracts. Yet, CMS officials could not provide support for these closures or a list of the contracts overdue for closeout. CMS officials stated that as of July 29, 2009, the total backlog of contracts eligible forcloseout was 1,611, with 594 overdue. The report only contained three bullets stating that OAGm would provide quarterly reports to the division directors and training to O AGM staff. on FAR timing standards. Total contract value of contracts eligible for closeout has increased from $3 billion to at least $3.8 billion. Insufficient progress has been made to reduce the backlog of contracts 2007 and September 30, 2007. Since September 30,. 2007, the number of Contracts eligible for. closeout have increased by 24 percent, from 1,300 in 2007 to 1,611 in 2009. Additionally, the. number of contracts overdue forcloseout has also increased. We recommended that CMS develop a plan to reduce the number of contracts in the backlog. CMS did not provide us a closeout plan for fiscal year 2008 and the fiscal year 2009 plan was insufficient. CMS could not fully support the analysis it provided and it related only to the time period between April and July. The plan did not include a comprehensive strategy to reduction the backlog of contracts that are eligible for closeout. No other plans were developed for fiscal 2009; no other plans have been developed. example, OAGM officials could not determine if all errors identified during the file reviews were properly resolved and the appropriate adjustments to DCIS were made. While staff training was provided in January 2008, the DCIS data entry instructions were later modified with new information. In one instance, we noted the Departmental Contracts Information System (DCIS) do not include procedures that would ensure that the resolution of potential errors are properly documented and errors are corrected in a timely manner. We further found that O AGM was not fully implementing its policy because it reviewed every 88th action, rather than every 90th. an estimate of the amount of resources OAGM needs to fulfill the audit and other FAR requirements for comprehensive oversight, including those required of a CFA. Revise the Verification and Validation Plan for DCIS Accuracy and Improvements policy to require all relevant errors be corrected and their resolution documented. Develop the DCIS Accountability and Transparency Plan to ensure that all errors are documented and corrected. For more information, go to: http://www.oagm.org/DCIS-Audit-and-Review. Improvements (V&V). The V&V plan contained several actions, including a secondary review of data entered into DCIS for every 50th contract action. The V & V plan lacks key elements and controls to ensure that the resolution of potential errors is properly documented and errors are corrected in a timely manner. For more information, visit the DCIS website or go to www.cdis.gov.uk. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. that the DCIS preparer and the reviewer were using different versions of the instructions resulting in confusion over what would be the appropriate DCIS entry. OAGM officials provided us with the results for the V&V plan for 2008, which showed that 23 of the total 2,031 contract actions entered into were not properly entered into by the reviewer and preparer at the same time. The results for 2008 were published in a report by the Office of the Auditor-General (OAGM) on November 14. were not in DCIS. Certain required fields, such as contract type and competition, contained blank responses and “nulls’. CMS entered codes for ‘potato farming’ and ‘tortilla manufacturing’ in the DCIS database. For example, CMS entered ‘Tortilla Manufacturing’ into DCIS instead of ‘Potato Farming’ for the 2008 fiscal year. For more information on DCIS, go to: www.dcis.gov. Prior to calendar year 2008, CMS did not have quality assurance activities, such as formal data entry reviews or database training, over the data contained in the DCIS database. In December 2007, OAGM established a Verification and Validation Plan for DCIS Accuracy. The industry code field for two contract actions has been changed to include the industry code for two contracts. The code field has also been updated to reflect the new industry code of conduct for the industry. The changes were made in response to a request from CMS for the code to be changed. actions, DCIS contained at least one error in the selected critical fields we reviewed. DCIS also contained errors in current contract value and ultimate contract value fields. Further, 11 sample items, or approximately 10 percent of the sample, contained errors that were not included in the final report. The report was published by the Government Accountability Office (GAO) on November 14, 2013. The GAO published a final report on DCIS on November 16, 2013, which included a number of corrections and improvements. The PRISM database contains basic information such as contract number, vendor name, and amount obligated. PRISM is used to develop contract documents and for internal reporting and acquisition planning. The Enhanced Departmental Contracts Information System (DCIS) databases were used to test the accuracy of the data in the systems. We determined that only basic contract information maintained in thePRISM database, such as vendor name and obligation amount, was reliable for purposes of this study. The study was based on data from the DCIS and PRISM databases. limit the usefulness and transparency of this important tool. We estimate that for at least 34.9 percent of fiscal year 2008 contract actions, PRISM contained at least one error in the selected critical fields we reviewed. OAGM officials told us that the data entered into PRISM are not subjected to a secondary review in which the data enters are compared to the information in the contract file. In particular, we found thatPRISM contained 16 errors in a field we reviewed to accurately determine CMS’s contracting trends. is an HHS database that is used for department-level acquisition management and to satisfy external reporting requirements. DCIS collects and forwards information to the Federal Procurement Data System Next Generation (FPDS-NG), which is a publicly available database of governmentwide acquisition information. FPDS- NG feeds into www.usaspending.gov, a Web site created of Management and Budget (OMB) requires agencies to submit their acquisition data to theFDPS-NG. Since HHS submits DCIS data to FDPS- NG, the errors noted above are provided to the public and OMB. of its operations, including both operational and financial data, that should be recorded and communicated to management and others within the agency who need it. The acquisition data errors should be reported to management within a time frame that enables them to carry out their internal control and operational responsibilities. The data should be in a form and within a form that enables the agency to use it for internal control, according to the report. The report also recommends that the agency record its financial and operational data in a format that is easy to understand. are due in part to a lack of sufficient quality assurance activities over the data entered into the acquisition databases. Without accurate data, CMS program managers do not have adequate information to identify and monitor areas that pose a high risk of improper payments or waste. Moreover, inaccurate or incomplete data can lead to incorrect or incomplete payments and waste, according to the report. The report was published by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) on October 31, 2013. For confidential support call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org. increased risk together with inadequate compensating controls to mitigate risk. While the Virtual Acquisition Office, which is an off-the-shelf acquisition software that provides Web links to acquisition regulation and templates to aid in completion of common acquisition activities, can be a useful tool for contracting officers, specialists, and the general public, it is not an ideal tool for the acquisition process. For more information on the Virtual acquisition Office, visit: www.virtualacquisitionoffice.com. for more information about how to use the software. that designated the extent to which the contract was competed, for example, full and open competition or not competed as a result of being a logical follow-on to a previous contract. We determined that the award type field in PRISM did not capture consistent information. For example, the field did not designate the field that designated the amount of time that the contract had been in place before it was awarded. We also determined that we did not have consistent information about the award amount. We are happy to clarify these issues. had prepopulated options associated with both award type (basic ordering agreement, delivery order, letter contract, etc.) and contract type (cost reimbursement, fixed price, and T&M) Combining these options into one data field prevents CMS from determining the total number of each award type and each contract type. This makes it difficult to determine the number of awards and contracts for a given award type or contract type, making it difficult for CMS to calculate the total cost of an award or contract. new contract award or modification to an existing contract. With this probability sample, each contract action in the sample frame had a non- zero probability of being included. Each stratum was subsequently weighted in the analysis to account statistically for each action. The probability could be computed from any contract action and was weighted to account for each stratum of the analysis. For more information, visit www.contracts.com and the contracts-by-the-sea site on the website. all the contract actions in the sample frame, including those that were not selected. Results from this statistical sample were projected to the population of contract actions made from October 1, 2007, through September 30, 2008. See table 2 for specific details related to contract actions selected in the Sample. See page 2 for more information about the statistical sample and how it was calculated. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. We estimate that at least 46.0 percent of fiscal year 2008 CMS contract actions did not meet the FAR requirements applicable to the specific contract type awarded. Sixteen contract actions we tested had deficiencies, of which 1 related to a letter contract, 9 related to cost reimbursement contracts, and 6 related obligations. We stratified the contract actions by type of action, namely contract awards and contract modifications, recorded in CMS’s PRISM database from October 1, 2007, through September 30, 2008. of the actual contract. Two contract files did not maintain any information regarding the General Services Administration schedule contract that was valid at the time of the award of the task order. In numerous instances, we determined that the letter delegating duties to the project officer and the project manager were not properly signed off on by the GSA. We are happy to clarify these issues and provide more information about the task orders that were awarded to the contractor. We apologize for any confusion that may have been caused by these issues. and Phil McIntyre (Assistant Directors) Sharon Byrd, Richard Cambosos, Abe Dymond, Patrick Frey, Jason Kelly, John Lopez, Ron Schwenn, Omar Torres, Ruth Walk, and Danietta Williams are also on the board of directors. The board includes members of the New York City Council, the City Council of New York, and the New Jersey City Council. The Board of Directors is made up of seven members, including the mayor, the city council president, the mayor's wife, the deputy mayor and the vice mayor. accounting system hinders the government’s ability to fulfill its oversight duties throughout the contract life cycle. It increases risk of improper payments and the risk that costs billed can not be substantiated during an audit. When choosing to use T&M contracts, the FAR requires contracting officers to prepare and to mitigate the risk of awarding a T &M contract. CMS did not carry out the stated mitigation strategies used to justify the selection of the T & M contract type. We estimate that for at least five years, the government has been at risk for improper payments or waste. cost reimbursement contracts, and time and materials (T&M) contracts. Although the FAR places limitations on the use of cost reimbursement and T&M contract types, these contract types may be used to provide the flexibility needed by the government to acquire the large variety and volume of supplies and services it needs. The FAR does not prohibit the government from using cost reimbursement contracts to pay for certain types of goods and services, such as food, fuel, water, electricity, medical supplies, and medical equipment. to meet the government’s needs within a ceiling price. A T&M contract may be used only if the contracting officer prepares a determination and findings that no other contract type is suitable. In addition, if the contract includes a ceiling prices that the contractor exceeds at its own risk, the contract may not be used. The contract can only be used if the contractor meets the government's needs within the ceiling price, or if no other type of contract is available to meet the needs. use of negotiation memorandums was inconsistent. The HHSAR provides that the negotiation memorandum is a complete record of all actions leading to the award of a contract. We found that negotiation Memorandums were not always prepared for actions in which they were clearly required, and were prepared for acts that may not be required, according to HHSAR. While many negotiationmemorandums we reviewed had signature blocks for, we found that they were often not required at the time they were written. We also found that the memorandum was often not prepared for the actions that were clearly needed. T&M contract awards we reviewed. In cases when the justification memorandum was prepared, contracting officers merely quoted language from the FAR but did not set forth clear and convincing findings for why other contract types could not be used. In one case, the contract was awarded to a company that had not submitted a justification memorandum. In another, a company had not provided a justification for why it could not use another contract type. In a third case, a contracting officer did not provide a justification at all for why a different contract type could be awarded. When the contracting officer does not clearly and convincingly document the findings that support using a T&M contract type, OAGM does not have assurance that the appropriate contract type was used. In addition, for three of the contract actions, the contract specialist told us that the actions the document listed were not the actions listed in the document. The contract specialist also said that the contract was not the correct contract type for the actions that were listed. For more information, go to: www.oagm.org.uk. sign a determination and finding that no other contract type is suitable for the acquisition. The justification is required to set forth enough facts and circumstances to clearly and convincingly justify the specific determination made. We found that the determination andFinding was either not documented or insufficient in six of the six cases we looked at. The decision was made to approve the acquisition of the company. The acquisition is expected to be completed by the end of the year or early next year, depending on when it is announced. risk of establishing unauthorized personal services contracts or the risk of contractors performing inherently governmental functions, both of which are prohibited by FAR. OAGM is challenged to meet the various audit requirements necessary to ensure adequate oversight of contracts that pose more risk to the government, according to its staff and management. "OAGM has a responsibility to ensure that its contracts are properly audited," the agency said in a statement. "We are committed to ensuring that our contracts are well-audited and that they are subject to appropriate oversight," it said. Specify what constitutes timely performance of (or request for) audits of contractors’ statements of incurred cost for cost reimbursement and T&M contracts. Specify circumstances under which negotiation memorandums should be used and the circumstances in which OAGM should perform the audit itself or request another organization to perform the service. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. had not provided its contracting officers guidance or procedures for when to request the assistance of internal and external audit and evaluation services. OAGM did not provide direction on when (what stage(s) in the contract life cycle and under what circumstances) the contracting officer should utilize the service. For example, OAGm did not give guidance on when to ask for the services at different stages of a contract's life cycle. For more information, visit the Office of the Auditor General's website. OAGM has limited insight into appropriate solutions, such as the use of contractor support staff. OAGM previously reported that using contractors for contract administrative functions may increase the cost of government.gaps. The use of contractors has in recent years become commonplace in the federal government, we have previously reported. We are happy to provide more information on this topic to the public in the coming days and weeks. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. of contract files, we were told by OAGM senior management and contracting officers and specialists. The first set of activities that the contracting officers tend to neglect under resource constraints was post-award administration and contract closeout. Moreover, while O AGM management told us that staff worked hard to. work hard to get the work done, we heard that some staff were not able to do the job. We were told that staff were unable to complete the work that they had been tasked with. and therefore is a serious internal control deficiency. OAGM management’s downplaying of the overall message of the report—that control deficiencies are pervasive—further illustrates the weak internal control environment. Setting an appropriate control environment, especially “tone at the top,” is key to ensuring that staff take all appropriate steps to mitigate the problems. The report was published by the Office of the Auditor General (OAGM) on November 14. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. during this review will likely persist. OAGM management has not analyzed its contract management workforce and related funding needs through a comprehensive, strategic acquisition workforce plan. Such a plan is critical to help manage the increasing acquisition workload and meet its contracting oversight needs. The plan should include, at a minimum, elements such as performance goals, time frames, implementation actions, and resource requirements. It should also address issues such as O AGM workload, full time equivalents needed, and a workforce skills analysis. managed centrally in OAGM. Contracting officers are responsible for ensuring performance of all necessary actions for effective contracting. The last, project officers, are assigned from CMS program offices. The contracting training certificate for the project officer was not in the file. Also, a chronological list of contracting officers and their dates of responsibility was consistently absent. The report also found that CMS’s contract files were not held up to the standards required by O AGM policies, which are required by CMS. administered in accordance with general government procurement laws and regulations. At CMS, OAGM manages contracting activities and is responsible for, among other things, developing policy and developing standards for government contracts. The agency is also responsible for developing government procurement policies and regulations, including the FAR, HHSAR, CAS, and the terms of the contract. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org for details. support the contract actions we reviewed. Standards for internal control call for transactions and other significant events to be clearly documented, and the documentation should be readily available for examination. The FAR provides that the documentation in the contract files shall be sufficient to constitute a complete history of the contract action for the purpose of providing a basis for informed decisions at each step in the acquisition process and providing information for reviews and investigations, among other things. Clearly documenting the history of a contract action is an important tool that provides management with assurance that the Multiple key players work together to monitor different aspects of contractor performance. All but one of the key roles described below are need; develops a requirements package; determines the method of contracting; solicits and evaluates bids or proposals; and ultimately awards a contract. After contract award, the agency performs contract administration and contract closeout. Contract administration involves monitoring the contractor’s performance as well as reviewing and approving (or disapproving) the contractor's request. Contract closeout involves monitoring and approving the request to terminate the contract. The cost/price team serves as an in-house consultant to others involved in the contracting process at CMS. By request, the team, which consists of four contract auditors, provides support for contract administration. The contract specialist assists with the invoice review process. The team is not authorized to commit or bind the government. The cost/ price team is based in Washington, D.C. and works out of CMS' Washington, DC, office. For more information, visit cMS.gov. and implement policies and procedures for tracking contract audit requests, monitoring the results of contract audits and evaluations, and resolving the audit findings. Include roles and responsibilities of the contracting officer, specialist, and members of the cost/price team. We make the following recommendation to the Secretary of HHS to implement these policies. We recommend that they be implemented by the end of the year. We ask that they include the role of the contract officer and specialist, as well as the cost and price team members. occurs in the contract life cycle. We found pervasive deficiencies in internal control over contracting and payments to contractors. The internal control deficiencies occurred throughout the contracting process, that is both pre- and post-award, and increase the risk of improper payments or waste. These deficiencies were due in part to the lack of internal control, the report found. The report also found that the government had failed to adequately monitor the contractors it awarded contracts to, leading to waste, fraud, and abuse. management’s lack of attention given to resolving the control deficiencies. We are reiterating our previous recommendations to (1) develop policies for pre-award contracting activities, (2) develop. policies to help ensure CFA responsibilities are performed, (3) prepare guidelines on what constitutes sufficient detail to support contractor invoices, and (4) establish criteria to establish criteria for contractors to be awarded CFA awards. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. agency has complied with applicable regulations and has made well-informed decisions for efficient contract management. Incomplete or inadequate contract files and documentation hinder the ability of the contracting officers to perform their oversight duties, especially those who assume responsibility for contracts that have changed hands during the life of the planning. A lack of reliable data for effectively carrying out contract management responsibilities, very limited actions taken on the recommendations we made in 2007 related to contracting and payments to contractors, and a lack of procedures for managing contract audits. Post-award, mitigate risks to the federal government. Lack of documentation reduces management’s ability to ascertain whether these important controls were appropriately implemented. A number of the findings we identified during the testing of a statistically valid sample of contract files involved the lack of documentation that the controls were performed. It was difficult to determine if the controls had been properly implemented or if there had been any problems with them. It is important to make sure that the government is aware of the risks it is facing. the pre-award contract activities that we identified as needing improvement, nor does it delineate the roles and responsibilities of the different staff involved in the contracting process. The deficiencies identified in this report, especially those associated with the pre- award contract activities, need to be addressed, the report says. The report does not establish time frames for when certain pre- Award contract activities should be performed. It also does not delineate roles or responsibilities of different staff in the process or establish a time frame for these activities to be completed. reviewed and changes would be made as appropriate, and (c) certain pre-award activities, such as the need for adequate accounting systems for cost reimbursement contracts, would be reviewed with staff at internal training sessions. While the Office of Acquisition and Grants Management (OAGM) did conduct internal training on various pre- award activities, it did not conduct any training on the award process itself. The award ceremony was held at the National Museum of American History in Washington, D.C. The ceremony was followed by a reception at the White House. in response to the Federal Funding Accountability and Transparency Act of 2006, which required a single searchable Web site. The contract life cycle includes many acquisition and administrative activities. Prior to award, an agency identifies a contractor and negotiates a contract. The agency identifies the contractor, and the contract is awarded. The contractor is then awarded a contract for the work to be done. The work is completed over a period of several months, with the contract ending at the end of the contract. It is not known how long the contract will last. Health and Human Services, Administrator of the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, and interested congressional committees. Copies will also be available to others on request. In addition, the report will be available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staff have any questions or concerns, please contact us at 1-800-282-8255 or e-mail jennifer.smith@mailonline.com. For confidential support on suicide matters call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch or click here. questions about this report, please contact me at (202) 512-9095 or dalykl@gao.gov. Contact points for our Offices of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of this report. Major contributors to this report are acknowledged in appendix IV. To determine the extent to which the report is accurate, please see the full report at the bottom of the page. The full report is available on the GSA's Web site at: http://www.gsa.gov/news/press-releases. for its contracting function. In its comments, CMS also expressed concerns about the scope and timing of our work with respect to our November 2007 recommendations. We address the concerns CMS its progress and our analysis of comments CMS made on our new recommendations. As agreed with your offices, unless you publicly announce its contents earlier, we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days from its date. At that time, we will send copies of the report to the Secretary of the. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. GAO: We conducted this performance audit in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient information. Our response to certain specific CMS comments appears in the GAO Comments section of appendix III.Comments and Our Evaluation section of this report includes our response to CMS' comments on the audit's findings and methodology. We are happy to clarify these comments and provide an explanation of our audit findings and methods in the appendix III comments section of the report. of this report. The historical obligation amounts presented in the background section of the report come primarily from CMS’s PRISM database. We requested comments on a draft of this report from HHS and CMS. We received written comments on October 2, 2009, and have summarized those comments in the Agency of Health Resources and Services Administration's comments on the draft report. We are happy to have your comments on this draft report, which was released on October 3, 2009. The agency of health resources and services has asked us to make this report available to the public. 50th as provided for in the plan. However, we are encouraged by the recent initiatives described in CMS’s comments, such as the scorecard, and OAGM's commitment to review current policies and procedures and to make improvements where necessary. Staff members who made key contributions to this report include Marcia Carlsen, who helped write the report's conclusions and key comments about the report. The report was compiled by the Office of Government Accountability, which is part of the Department of Health and Human Services. appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We conducted our audit work in Washington, D.C. and Baltimore, Maryland from July to August. We believe that the evidence obtained provides areasonable basis forOur findings and conclusion based onOur audit objectives, the report says. The audit was conducted by PricewaterhouseCoopers, an independent, third-party auditing firm. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. of this magnitude. Audits and inquiries into the issues we identified in our report should be made as soon as possible. As we stated in our November 2007 report, we acknowledge that the time frames for implementing the Medicare Prescription Drug, are not yet clear. See “Agency Comments and Our Evaluation” section for more information about the agency’s findings. The agency is currently evaluating the Medicare prescription drug program. For more information, visit Medicare.gov/PrescriptionDrugs. justification for not resolving CRB issues. CMS is not following its policies for selecting the contracts to be reviewed by the CRB. While OAGM’s policies require that all contracts above $10 million be subjected to theCRB, CMS confirmed that only contracts nominated by division directors are reviewed. If you or a family member have contemplated suicide, contact the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255. For confidential support on suicide matters call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. used correctly, the CRB can be an effective tool for risk-based quality assurance and for reviewing the internal controls throughout the contract award and administration process. However, because CMS policies do not require issues to be resolved and documented and because CMS is not fully implementing theCRB, opportunities to improve quality assurance may be missed. For more information, visit the CMS CRB website or go to www.cms.gov/CRB. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. policies and procedures, and sound business practices. Our review of the CRB process found that the process had not been properly or fully implemented. For example, of the 22 contracts selected to be reviewed by theCRB in 2008, only 7 were actually reviewed. For fiscal year 2009, 22 contracts were selected but only 2 have been reviewed as of the end of the third quarter. Also, the contracting officer for the contract action being reviewed is neither required to reach consensus on the resolution of issues identified nor to document the resolution. both the contract specialist and the contracting officer (generally the preparer and reviewer, respectively) the memorandums were not always signed by the contracting officers. CMS’s OAGM established the Contract Review Board (CRB) reviews as a key control procedure to help ensure contract award actions are in conformance with law. Require Division Directors to periodically assess, document, and report to senior management on the results of their review of whether the contract files contain documentation that invoices were properly reviewed. did not perform required audits and reviews of CMS purchase cards to identify fraud or waste. As of July 15, 2009, OAGM’s purchase card program had issued 123 cards with 20 percent having monthly spending limits of checks. The supervisor viewed those activities as the responsibility of the Office of Financial Management (OFM) We spoke with an O AGM purchase card coordinator’S supervisor who told us that OAGm did not perform the oversight activities because the supervisor viewed them as a part of OFM. to circumvent FAR competition requirements. The purchase card coordinator, which at CMS is within OAGM, is required to conduct surveillance of the purchase card program by annually auditing cardholder transactions using such methods as statistical and nonstatistical sampling, data mining, and spot checks. The HHS purchase card policy guidance provides that the purchaseCard coordinator is responsible for auditing the purchase Card Program. The coordinator is also responsible for ensuring that the card program is transparent and transparent to the public. The program is not subject to the requirements of the FAR. OFM official who stated that OFM does not review purchase card transactions for fraud or inappropriate use. OFM pays the purchase card invoice based on the authorizing official’s approval. During the tests of control procedures, we observed that the contract files did not always contain all required documentation to pay for the purchase of a card. We also observed that purchase card invoices were not always printed with all required documents to pay the purchase. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. at least $50,000. Eight card holders had monthly spending limits of $100,000, the highest spending limit authorized by CMS. Without sufficient oversight of the purchase card program, CMS does not have assurance that only allowable transactions are procured through purchase cards, the agency says. The agency says it has no way of knowing if purchase cards are being used as authorized by the law or if they are even being used at all. The department says it is investigating the matter and will make a decision in the near future. actions we reviewed took place in fiscal year 2008. For example, CMS’s Acquisition Policy 02-03, which identifies level of approvals required by agency officials based on the estimated dollar value for acquisitions awarded through other than full and open competition, was implemented in April 2008. We applied these approval levels only to the awards and modifications in our sample that were made after the policy was implemented. Furthermore, our observations and recommendations related to CMS's control environment are based on CMS's own data. conditions that continued to exist in September 2009. CMS disagreed with our determination that their actions to address five of the seven prior recommendations were not sufficient. These prior recommendations aimed at improving preventive controls. Preventive controls, such as policies and criteria for pre-award activities and a sound invoice, would have improved the program's ability to attract, retain, and retain talent. The program was shut down in October 2009 after a series of problems with the management of the program were discovered. activity topics, such as the proper circumstances to use sole source contracts, the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Service’s (CMS) actions are unresponsive to the recommendation. OAGM still has not developed policies and criteria that provide clear procedures for staff to follow during the pre-award stage. Agency-specific policies provide guidance on how CMS staff are expected to perform their day-to-day duties. Office of Acquisition and Grants Management (OAGM) management, it does not represent the agency- specific policies and guidelines we recommended that CMS implement. Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) implemented effective internal control procedures over contract actions. We focused on contracts that were generally subjected to the Federal Acquisition Regulation. We also interviewed senior management of CMS’s Office of Acquisition and Grants Management (OAGM), contracting officers and specialists, and cost/price team members. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. in the control environment, were based on observations and interviews with OAGM officials and reviews of related documentation such as policies and strategic plans. Our current review was completed in September 2009, nearly 2 years after the issuance of our November 2007 report. While CMS also stated that the contract was not in violation of any laws or regulations, it was in breach of the terms and conditions of the contract as well as the expectations of the agency. The contract was also in contravention of the laws and regulations of the Department of Justice. review process prior to payment, are the first line of defense in reducing the risk of improper payments or waste. We continue to believe that the limited actions OAGM management has taken, and in some cases, management’s inaction, fall short of expectations and miss the intent of improving CMS’S overall quality of service. We believe that CMS's limited actions, and management's inaction, are not in line with the CMS's overall goal of improving the quality of its services. HHS reported that CMS provided invoice review training to the OAGM staff and project officers on May 7 and May 15, 2008. Actions taken do not achieve intent of recommendation, according to the HHS report. CMS has since provided training on invoice review procedures. However, since CMS has provided training, it is not clear if the training was appropriate or if the actions taken were sufficient. The training was provided on invoicereview procedures. The actions taken do NOT achieve intent. of recommendation. The action taken does not achieve the intent of recommending the training. The $3.6 billion obligated in 2008 represents a 71 percent increase since 1998, when $2.1 billion was obligated. Since 1998, obligations to fiscal intermediaries, carriers, and Medicare Administrative Contractors (contractors that primarily process Medicare claims) have decreased approximately 16 percent. Obligations for other- than-claims processing activities, such as the processing of Medicare claims, have decreased about 16 percent since 1998. The government is spending $1.6 trillion on Medicare in 2008. 1-800 help line, information technology and financial management initiatives, and program management and consulting services, have increased 466 percent. These trends may be explained in part by recent changes to the Medicare program, including the movement of functions, such as the help line and data centers, according to the study. The study was published in the Journal of the American Geriatric Society, published by the American College of Geriatrics and Gerontology (ACG), a division of the Association for Geriatric Services. the FAR, to the FAR environment through the award of contracts to Medicare Administrative Contractors. CMS projected that the transition, referred to as Medicare contracting reform, would produce administrative cost savings due to the effects of competition and contract consolidation. The transition would subject millions of dollars of CMS acquisitions to the rules, standards, and requirements for the award, administration, and termination of government contracts in the FAR. Obligations to the new Medicare administrative Contractors were first made in fiscal year 2009-10. CMS reported total obligations for CMS contracts in fiscal year 2008 were $3.6 billion. CMS is required to complete Medicare contracting reform by 2011. As of September 1, 2009, 19 contracts have been awarded to Medicare Administrative Contractors, totaling about $1 billion in obligations to date. Except for certain Medicare claims processing contracts, CMS contracts are generally required to be awarded and CMS contracts must be approved by a majority vote of the board of directors of the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. Improvement, and Modernization Act of 2003 added schedule pressures for the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) At the same time, the compressed time frames and resulting contracting practices added risk to the contracting process. Many of the findings in the November 2007 report were a result of the 2003 act, according to a report by the Center for Medicare & Medicaid Services. The report was published in November 2007 and cited in the December 2007 edition of "The Medicare Cost Control Act of 2007" MMA required CMS to transition its Medicare claims processing contracts, which generally did not follow Medicare rules. specialized contractors, such as beneficiary contact center contractors and enterprise data center contractors, are categorized below as other-than-claims processing contractors. MMA required CMSto transition itsMedicare claimsprocessing contracts. and certain financial management activities, from the fiscal intermediaries and carriers to specialized contractors. These specialized contractors are also called other- than-claiming-processing contractors and are included in the category of "specialty contractors" the contracting process, hinders management’s ability to sustain an effective overall control environment, and ultimately increases risk in the contracting process. Although CMS has generally reliable information on basic attributes of each contract action, such as vendor name and obligation amount, CMS lacks reliable management information on other key aspects establishing appropriate contract management oversight procedures. In addition, CMS management has made limited progress in substantively addressing most of the broad-based recommendations from our 2007 report. We found that many of our findings in this review could be, at least in part, attributed to CMS. basis for our evaluation of CMS’s contract management control environment. We assessed the reliability of CMS's two acquisition databases, Departmental Contracts Information System (DCIS) and PRISM. We performed electronic testing of required data elements, and interviewed both CMS and HHS officials on quality assurance activities performed on the databases. We concluded that the databases’ reliability was not significantly affected by the changes in the CMS contract management system since the mid-1990s. The changes were due to the introduction of a new system, the Contract Management Information System. DCIS in 2008 were reviewed for accuracy, which is approximately every 88th action. As of July 22, 2009, CMS management had not taken substantial actions to address our prior recommendations to improve internal control in the contracting process. Only two of GAO’s nine 2007 recommendations had been fully addressed, according to the GAO report. The report also found that only two of the seven recommendations made in 2007 were fully addressed. The GAO's 2007 report was released on July 21, 2009. our review. The steps CMS described that it plans to take will be important for ensuring that contract office staff. have the information needed readily available to manage contracts throughout the contract life cycle. As stated in the report, CMS’s current procedures regarding the accuracy of data entered into into the contract are not sufficient. The agency is reviewing its current procedures to ensure that data entered in the contract is accurate and accurate to the best of its ability. The review is expected to be completed by the end of the year. The seven substantially unresolved recommendations represent a lack of action on the part of CMS management to resolve key control deficiencies. Policies and criteria for pre-award contract activities have CMS take immediate action to address its serious contract-level control deficiencies and take action on our previous recommendations. CMS will continue to place billions of taxpayer dollars at risk of fraud, or otherwise improper contract payments. We make the following nine recommendations to improve contract- level and overall environment controls. For more information, visit www.cms.gov. to improper or wasteful contract payments. To address these deficiencies, CMS will need to develop and implement CMS-specific policies and procedures to ensure that contract actions are properly administered and comply with applicable requirements. CMS also needs to strengthen its overall contract management control environment, including developing strategic workforce plans. The deficiencies we identified are likely to be exacerbated by the rise in obligations for non-claims processing contract awards as well as CMS’s extensive reliance on contractors to help achieve its mission objectives. It is imperative that ensuring proper contract award actions. These internal control deficiencies are a manifestation of CMS’s weak overall control environment, which is discussed later. At least 84.3 percent of FAR-based contract actions made by CMS in fiscal year 2008 contained at least identify and fix deficiencies in the contract administration process and to improve internal controls may be missed. In addition to the deficiencies in contract-level control procedures as discussed previously, CMS's FAR- based contract management was impaired by a weak control environment. a lack of agency-specific policies and procedures to ensure that FAR requirements and other control objectives were met. CMS also did not take appropriate steps to. ensure that existing policies were properly implemented nor maintain adequate documentation in its contract files. Further, the Contract Review Board was not effective in its role as a review board for the agency's contract with the federal government. The agency did not maintain sufficient documentation in contract files for its contract with federal government agencies. It did not keep adequate records of the agency’s contracts with federal agencies. CMS contract files did not always contain documentation necessary to support the action. We found a contract file was missing a statement of work and another file wasMissing a copy of the contract. We also found that the contract file for a project was missing the contract for the project. We are happy to clarify these issues and provide more information about the CMS contract file. For more information on CMS contract files, visit www.contract.cMS.gov. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. or guidance were developed, because in CMS’s view, policies and criteria are already established in the FAR and HHSAR. It is up to the agencies to develop and provide their contracting workforce with specific policies and day-to-day procedures that guide them in to the Administrator of CMS. Document compliance with FAR requirements for different contract types. At a minimum, enhance current documentation, such as the contract checklist, to ensure the contract is in compliance with the FAR requirements and other control objectives. comply with its instructions to follow all applicable FAR requirements. CMS staff told us they take shortcuts due to resource constraints. For example, one contract specialist told us she prepared the Independent Government Cost Estimate based on the winning contractor’s proposed costs instead of conducting her own independent research to do her own research to find out what the cost would be for the government to build the new building. For more information, visit www.cms.gov.uk or call 1-800-622-8255. such as the total number of new awards, the number of active contracts by contract type, or the number and type of audits needed. The documents did not contain information on CMS’s current FTE level, skill mix, or analysis of any skill. CMS contracts under HHS’S cognizance were not included in the report. The report also did not include information on FTEs or the skill mix of the staff at the federal agency. The document was released by the HHS Department of Health and Human Services. on GAO’s standards for internal control, the FAR and HHSAR, CMS’S policies and procedures, and other factors. CMS stated its belief that “virtually all’ of the errors we identified related to “perceived documentation deficiencies” The agency said the errors were the result of a “misunderstanding” of its acquisition controls and the nature of the acquisition function. The agency also said it was “concerned’ about the “inadequate” level of documentation provided by CMS. implemented the Acquisition Career Management Information System (ACMIS) ACMIS is a centralized tracking mechanism that maintains training records for the personnel assigned to contract activities. HHS’s implementation of the centralized system to track training addressed our recommendation. Actions insufficient. HHS reported that CMS developed a plan to reduce the backlog of training records. HHS said the plan would be implemented by the end of the year, but no further action was taken. It is not known if the plan will be implemented. staff resources allocated to contract oversight had not kept pace with the increase in CMS contract awards. A similar trend continued into 2008. While the obligated amount of contract awards has increased 71 percent since 1998, OAGM staffing resources have increased 26 percent. This trend presents a major challenge to contract award and administration personnel who must deal with a significantly increased workload without additional support and resources. The CMS has data on its workforce changes since January 2007 (attritions and additions), documentation requesting additional FTEs for a specific project, and, in its fiscal year. 2010 budget, a request to hire contract support staff to help meet contract and grant administration needs. CMS has not yet determined the amount of total FTEs needed for the fiscal year and beyond. For example, the documentation did not contain an analysis of the workload anticipated for the year, says the documentation. The documentation does not contain a breakdown of the number of staff needed to meet the needs of the agency's contract and grants administration needs for 2010-11 and 2011-12. For more information, visit www.cms.gov. contracting officer. While such a checklist is useful for ensuring that certain documents are contained in a contract file, it did not reflect certain requirements in which we found CMS to be deficient. Such as ensuring contractors had adequate accounting systems prior to the use of a cost reimbursement contract. We also found that CMS failed to ensure that contractors were properly trained in how to use cost reimbursement contracts. We found this to be a deficiency in how contractors were trained to use the cost reimbursementcontracts. For more information, visit CMS.gov/CMS. We are encouraged that CMS is taking additional actions to implement the checklists developed by the Department of Health and Human Services to be used in fiscal year 2010. During our review and as a result of multiple conversations with OAGM staff including the team of contract auditors, we are encouraged. We are also encouraged that the department is working with us on a plan to implement these checklists in the coming months. 6. We're working with the department on a Plan to implement this checklist in the near future. increased from 407 in 2007 to 594 in 2009, a 46 percent increase. 5. The contract file document checklist employed by CMS at the time of our review identified key documents that may be included in a contract file. This checklist is usually completed by either the contract specialist or the contract manager. 4. The number of documents that are included in the contract file has gone up by 46 percent in the past five years. 3. The amount of documents in the document file has increased by 46 per cent in the last five years, according to CMS. CMS did not always meet FAR requirements for specific contract types that were awarded. It did not maintain adequate support for approved provisional indirect cost rates. CMS did not timely perform or request audits of incurred direct 40.4 percent of fiscal year 2008 contract actions, we found. We estimate that for at least 52.6 percent of Fiscal Year 2008 contract action, CMS didn't have support for final indirect cost rate. 23 contract actions we tested did not have documentation of direct costs incurred. We found that for 17 contract actions that utilized indirect cost. rates, CMS did maintain enough support for provisional indirect rates. CFA may be responsible for establishing provisional indirect cost rates (also known as “billing rates”) based on recent reviews, previous rate audits, experience, or similar reliable data. These rates are generally established by the CFA, contracting officer, or auditor on a cost reimbursement contract. The Standards for Internal Control in the Federal FAR states that provisional indirect costs shall be used in reimbursing indirect costs such as fringe benefits or overhead costs under cost reimbursement contracts and are used to prevent substantial overpayment or underpayment of indirect costs. Establishment of provisional and final indirect cost rates helps to ensure that the government makes payments for costs that are allowable, reasonable, and allocable to the extent prescribed by the contract. For T&M contracts, the basis of reliable data or previous rate audits and should be set as close as possible to the anticipated final indirect Cost rates. Final indirect Cost Rates are generally negotiated by the government’s negotiating team that includes the government. The amounts a contractor billed using provisional indirect cost Rates are adjusted annually for final indirectcost rates. not have documentation supporting what would be the appropriate provisional indirect cost rates for the contractor. For an additional 19 contract actions, the provisional rates either did not match the indirect rates billed on the invoices or could not be matched because the invoice did not provide sufficient detail. The revised our testing procedures to consider and accept provisional indirectcost rates that were not maintained in the individual contract file but were maintained by the cost/price team in its central files. Therefore, all provisional direct cost rate determinations that were maintained in OAGM, regardless of location, were considered during testing. contract file documents authorizations for letter contracts, adequacy of the contractors accounting systems, and determination and findings for time and materials contracts, when applicable. Document in the contract file provisional indirect cost rates used as a basis for reviewing the reasonableness of the indirect costs billed on the contractor invoices. The contract file also includes a list of all the contracts that have been signed by the contractor, as well as the terms and conditions for each of them. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. contractor’s accounting system is adequate for determining costs applicable to the contract. Of the contract awards in our sample, we found 9 cases in which cost reimbursement contracts were used without first ensuring that the contractor had an adequate accounting system. In one instance, the contracting officer was aware that a contractors had an inadequate accounting system resulting from numerous instances of noncompliance with CAS. Using a cost reimbursement contract when a contractor does not have an adequate Accounting System is a breach of the contract terms. Cost reimbursement contracts may be used only when the contractor’s accounting system is adequate for determining costs applicable to the contract and appropriate government and indirect costs. If this cannot be done, the government can provide additional funds to complete the effort or terminate the contract. In addition to the 9 cases above, we observed another 6 cases in which cost reimbursement contracts were used even though CMS was not involved. These control deficiencies are discussed in detail below and the results of the other control procedures we tested can be found in appendix I. government’s ability to perform the various contract oversight activities required by the FAR for cost reimbursement contracts. We selected controls to test based on our review of GAO’S standards for internal control, the Federal Acquisition Regulation requirements, and agency policies and procedures. The controls we tested were based on prior audit findings and the contract types most frequently awarded. In particular, contracting officers and other members of the federal agency acquisition workforce rely on the contractors’ contract proposals, interim billings, provisional indirect cost rates and reports of actual costs incurred. of direct costs promptly performed or requested. Similar to the audit of indirect costs, audits of direct costs allow the government to verify that the costs billed by the contractor were allowable, reasonable, and allocable to the contract. The audit ofdirect costs is the responsibility of the contracting officer;. The government can only audit direct costs if the contractor is found to be in compliance with the terms of the contract; and. The contractor can only be found to have billed the government for direct costs that it is not required to pay. Agencies may choose among different contract types to acquire goods and services. This choice is the principal means that agencies have for allocating risk between the government and the contractor. Contract types can be grouped into three broad categories: fixed price contracts, needs, and needs-based contracts. As discussed below, these three types of contracts place different levels of risk on the government, the contractor and the public. The government manages its risk, in part, through oversight activities. For fixed price contract, the government agrees to pay a set price. A fixed price contract is ordinarily in the government’s interest when the risk involved is minimal or can be predicted with an acceptable degree of certainty. Under cost reimbursement contracts, the government agrees to pay those costs of the contractor that are allowable, reasonable, and allocable to the extent prescribed by the contract. The government assumes most of the cost risk because the contractor is only required to provide its best effort to meet contract objectives within the estimated actual cost to the contractor. Under fixed price contracts, however, the contractor assumes the risk for cost overruns. CMS has not taken sufficient actions to investigate and recover questionable payments. The actions taken to investigate questionable payments were either insufficient or incomplete. CMS’s approach to delay investigation and recovery to the end of the contract performance period does not result in timely resolution of questionable payments, the report says. For example, CMS contracts. of time. The report says CMS had taken some action, but the steps have not resolved the questionable payments we identified. The action taken by CMS to date are insufficient to fully resolve the the questionable Payments we identified for three contractors. are needed to investigate and recover the questionable payments we identified. No other changes were made to the report as a result of agency comments. See appendix III for a discussion of the remaining two prior recommendations (points 2, 3, and 4) for which CMS disagreed with our assessment of the need for the investigation and recovery of the payments. For more information on the report, visit the report's website at: http://www.census.gov/census/cnn/2013/01/31/13/Census-2013/CMS-2013-CNS-Reports-Report-Report.html. did not relate to the $1.4 million in payments CMS made in fiscal year 2006 that we questioned. Regarding a third contractor, CMS issued a demand letter in April 2007 to recover funds the contractor billed and CMS paid in excess of contract ceiling limits; however, no resolution has yet been reached. CMS’s resolution of questionable payments of the magnitude we identified ($88.8 million) in the prior report should be performed expeditiously. As a steward of taxpayer dollars, CMS is accountable for how it spends and cost audit. $67 million related to costs incurred in fiscal years 2004, 2005, and 2006 and therefore would not be covered or investigated in an audit of fiscal year 2008 incurred costs. CMS could not tell us whether it had recovered any of the questioned amounts. We continue to believe that CMS’s actions to date are insufficient and more actions need to be taken to resolve the issues at hand.“As of the date of the report, CMS could Not tell us Whether It had recovered Any of the Questionable Amounts.” issues identified and more remains to be done to recover funds that may have been inappropriately paid to contractors. For example, CMS highlighted $67 million in questionable payments that were related to one specific contractor. These questionable payments are being investigated via a fiscal year 2008 incurred cost audit. The $67million we questioned related to costs incurred in fiscal years 2004, 2005, and 2006 and therefore would be subject to a cost audit in fiscal year 2009. We are investigating the $67m questionable payments. as DCAA or performed by the CMS cost/price team identified questionable payments, accounting system deficiencies, and other significant weaknesses or deficiencies associated with certain CMS contractors. CMS was not always taking the results of these audits and evaluations into consideration when making decisions relating to future contract awards. In one instance, the contracting officer deemed the contractor “risky” during the pre-award contract proposal evaluation. OAGM management confirmed that no action has been taken to investigate and recover the challenged costs. safeguards funds as well as having mechanisms in place to recoup those funds when improper payments are identified. CMS relies on incurred cost audits that are conducted at the end of contract performance when the contract is closed to validate the overall propriety of payments. By not timely acting on audit results or fully incorporating knowledge identified by cost/price evaluations into award decisions, CMS is forgoing the potential benefits from those audits and evaluations. A well-established tenet for recovery of improper payments is that process. CMS has not established a formal procedure or system for tracking and pursuing the results of contract or contractor audits. HHS reported that CMS will review the questionable payments identified in GAO-08-54 to determine whether CMS should seek reimbursement from the contractors. It further stated that the questionable costs will be identified in the course of incurred cost audits which CMS will obtain in the. course of closing out the closing of the program. We found no evidence of any plans or procedures that would mitigate the identified risks. At least 54.9 percent of fiscal year 2008 contract actions, CMS did not promptly perform or request an audit of direct costs. 25 contract actions for which this control applied did not have an audit the contract at the end of contract performance. Not annually auditing direct costs increases the risk that CMS is paying for costs that are not allowable or allocable to the contract. CMS had policies for invoice certification and purchase card oversight; however, these policies were not consistently followed. The failure to audit direct costs makes it more difficult due to the passage of time. not been developed. In our 2007 report, we recommended that CMS develop policies for certain pre-award contract activities, such as analysis to justify the contract type selected and verification of the adequacy of the contractor’s accounting system prior to the award of a cost reimbursement contract. However, no new policies have been developed, and the agency has no plans to do so in the near future, we say. We are happy to hear that CMS is taking steps to address the problem. agency policies and whether inadequate implementation would significantly increase the risk of improper payments or waste. We also took into consideration prior audit findings and the contract types CMS most frequently used. The contract-level and overall control environment weaknesses we found significantly increase CMS’s vulnerability. See appendix I for additional details on the controls we tested and the statistical sample results. We project it becomes increasingly more difficult with the passage of time. Careful and prompt consideration of audit results, including tracking and pursuing findings, helps to reduce the risk. and making other-than-the-best award decisions. Data hinder CMS’s ability to mitigate through additional policies or enhanced oversight any high-risk areas, such as the frequent use of cost reimbursement contracts. The errors in DCIS, including the unrecorded actions, also impact governmentwide reporting. The Office of the Inspector General is investigating the errors in the DCIS database and will issue a report in the coming months. For confidential support, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org. risk and protect tax dollars from fraud, waste, and abuse. CMS also stated that a reasonable amount of time had not yet elapsed since the issuance of our November 2007 report to allow for corrective actions to have taken place. A significant number of our current report findings, including weaknesses, are still not fully addressed, according to the CMS report. The report was issued on November 7, 2007, and is available online at www.census.gov/census-report/report/2007/06/07. audits are best conducted annually, rather than at the end of contract performance. CMS’s backlog of contracts eligible for closeout delays investigations and makes recovery more difficult. CMS does not track, investigate, and resolve contract audit and evaluation findings for purposes of cost recovery and future award decisions. Tracking audit audits and evaluations can add significant value to an organization's oversight and accountability structure, but only if management ensures that the results of these audits are promptly investigated and resolved, the authors say. is needed, CMS does not know with certainty the number of audits and reviews that must be performed annually or the depth and complexity of those audits. Without this key information, CMS can not estimate an adequate level of audit funding that it needs. During interviews and our on-site review, CMS found the need for audit funding to be high. CMS found that the need to audit the health care system was high, especially among the state and local governments. It also found that it was high among the local governments, particularly among the states and localities. determine the government’s benchmark for the reasonableness of the costs of the scope of work. Additionally, as previously discussed, CMS officials told us that incurred cost audits are not performed annually primarily due to insufficient resources. A shortage of financial and human resources creates an environment that introduces vulnerabilities to the government, according to the report. The report was published by the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) at the request of the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) CMS uses negative certification to ensure invoices are paid in a timely fashion. This approach, however, significantly reduces the incentive for prior to payment. We recommended in 2007 that CMS establish criteria for the use of negative certification in the payment of contractor invoiced which would consider potential risk factors. CMS described in its comment letter specific actions taken to investigate some of the questionable payments and subsequently provided documentation of actions it had taken to investigation. We examined this policy during our was acceptable for CMS to use negative certification. for the use of negative certification, (5) provide training on revised invoice review policies, (6) develop a plan to reduce the backlog of contracts eligible for closeout, and (7) review the questionable payments identified in the prior report to determine if payments are recoverable. The continuing weaknesses in contracting activities unresponsive to the recommendation. The revised policy still contains theUse ofnegative certification as a default. This policy does not provide criteria to consider potential risk factors in the review of contractor’s invoices. preventive control, we recommended that CMS establish criteria for when to use negative certification. Such criteria may be based on considerations of potential risk factors such as contract type, the adequacy of the contractor’s accounting system, and prior history with the contractor. OAGM officials confirmed that negative certification is still the primary method for paying invoices regardless of risks. Training on invoice review procedures still needed. As discussed earlier, project officers did not always certify invoiced for approval. review each contractor invoice and recommend payment approval or disapproval to the contracting officer. This review is to determine, among other things, if the expenditure rate is commensurate with technical progress and whether all direct cost elements are appropriate. Based on his or her review, be needed to support contractor invoices to facilitate an adequate review. In fact, most of the invoiced we reviewed were not sufficiently supported. We identified invoICES missing payroll detail, travel receipts, and subcontractor invoicing. surveillance during performance will provide reasonable assurance that efficient methods and effective cost controls are used. Contracting officers and other contracting oversight personnel may perform a comprehensive review of contractor invoices to determine if the contractor is using efficient methods or cost controls. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. contracting officers, specialists, and project officers to review the invoice before payment. Reviewing invoices prior to payment is a preventive control which may result in the identification of unallowable billings, especially on cost reimbursement and T&M invoiced. In light of the importance of this, we would like to remind you of the need to review your invoicing prior to paying. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. officer is authorized to enter into, modify, and terminate contracts. Contract specialists represent and assist the contracting officers with the contract. Project officers serve as the contracting officer’s technical representative designated to monitor the contractor”s progress, including the surveillance and assessment of performance and compliance with project objectives. According to OAGM invoice review policy, contracting officers, with the assistance of the contract specialists, review contractor invoices for compliance with contract terms, among other things. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. project officers review certain invoice elements, such as labor and direct costs, and are required to certify whether the invoice is approved for payment. They may also conduct periodic analyses of contractor performance and cost data. CMS utilizes two different databases of the project officer is then to approve the invoice for payment by signing a Payments and Progress Certification Form or disapprove by issuing a suspension notice. In one case, although a contractor submitted over 100 invoices for fiscal year 2008, only 8 were certified by the project officers. value of the contract through January 2009 was about $64 million. After the project officer’s review, the contracting officer or specialist is also required to review invoices for critical elements such as compliance with the terms of thecontract. Based on a cursory review of the contracts, it is estimated that the contract is worth about $60 million to $70 million. The contract is expected to be completed by the end of the year or early next year, depending on when it is awarded. The contractor did not provide supporting documentation for the $36,944 billed. Neither the invoice paid in 2008, nor the related file included evidence that the charge was investigated or further evaluated by either the project officer or contracting specialist. While different levels of the project were charged, the charges were for services that were provided in 2003. The charges were paid for work that was performed in 2003, but not for work done in 2008. The project officer and contracting specialist did not investigate or further evaluate the charge. the fiscal year 2008 invoices submitted for payment, we found instances in which the contracting officer or specialist did not identify items that were inconsistent with the terms of the contract. For example, facilities capital cost of money is generally disallowed by HHSAR, but we found two instances where it was allowed to be included. We also found instances where the contractor or specialist failed to identify items in the contract that were not in line with the contract, but were allowed to remain in the system. billed were compliant with the terms of the contract or otherwise allowable and allocable to that contract. In one instance, invoices reported labor costs based on labor categories, but did not show hours worked by employees or their respective labor rates. In another example, a contractor submitted an invoice in which it did not report the number of hours worked or the labor rate it paid for each employee. In a third example, an invoice was submitted in which the contractor did not state the amount of time the employee had worked. to T&M contracts. The contract file did not contain the authorization for use of the letter contract, which is required by HHSAR. In the case of cost reimbursement contracts, the FAR states that a cost reimbursement contract may be used only when the contract is approved by the HHSAR board. The letter contract was approved for use by the Health and Human Services Department. The cost of the contract was less than $1.5 million, according to the contract file. It was approved to be used on a letter contract. contractor billed, and CMS paid, this cost. Another contractor submitted invoices under its fixed price contract that were contrary to the payment schedule stipulated in the contract terms. CMS increases its risk of making improper payments when it does not properly review and approve invoiced prior to payment. OAGM also OAGm also found that the contractor submitted one invoice for the entire amount of the contract. The invoice was dated prior to the start date of the 1-year performance period of performance. described above, further training on invoice review procedures will be necessary. Continuing backlog of contracts overdue for closeout. In 2007, we reported that CMS did not timely perform contract closeout procedures resulting in a backlog of 1,300 contracts, of which 407 were overdue. and processes the final invoice with an adjustment for any over- or underpayments. The failure to perform contractCloseouts in a timely manner puts CMS at increased risk of improper payments or waste, and may make identification and recovery of any such improper payments more difficult due to the passage of time. CMS is paying for costs that are not allowable or allocable to the contract. Putting off the control activity until the end of contract performance increases the risk of overpaying for indirect costs during contract performance. CMS may make identification or recovery of any unallowable costs during closeout of the contract during contract closeout. It may also make identification of anyUnallowable Costs during Contract Closeout during Contract closeout during contract closing. It is possible that CMS will have to pay for costs outside of the scope of their contract. CMS had not prepared guidelines or revised its invoice review policy to specify or provide examples of sufficient detail that would review. CMS policies did not provide guidance on what constitutes sufficient detail to support amounts billed on contractor invoices to facilitate the review process. It also did not describe under what circumstances or in what situations it would review an invoice. The CFA found it to be unresponsive to the recommendations because it did not provided the recommended additional guidelines on what the contractor should provide that would constitute sufficient detail. We estimate that for at least 59.0 percent of fiscal year 2008 contract actions, the project officer did not always certify the invoices. CMS asserted that its Acquisition Policy 16-01 entitled “Invoicing Payment Procedures” satisfies two of the prior recommendations. The intent of these two recommendations was to ensure that contractors provided adequate support to facilitate an appropriate detailed review of invoiced costs. We believe that CMS’s failure to follow established agency policy increases the risk of improperly paying contractor invoicing or purchase card transactions. policy to better define roles and responsibilities. CMS’s actions are unresponsive to the recommendation. The revised policy does not specify the documentation the contractors would be required to submit to support the invoices or what would be needed for the project officer, contracting specialist, or contracting officer to validate information in the invOices. No action taken. We reviewed the CMS revised invoice review policy and determined that new invoice payment procedures contain clear roles and Responsibilities. HHS reported that CMS revised its invoicereview policy. not always identify instances where invoices did not comply with contract terms and conditions. We also found that invoiced were not always maintained in the file, as required by CMS’s invoice review policy. In light of these continuing deficiencies, and the need for further revisions to its invoicereview policy, we believe CMS needs to make further changes to its policy. We are happy to share our findings with the CMS board of directors. The full report is available on the CMS website.