include whether the job requires face-to-face contact with others, is telecommutable or involves an IT-enabled work process, and involves routine or complex activities. Computer and mathematical; architecture and engineering; legal; and legal professions had a large share of employment within their most offshorable category, according to a study by Jensen and Kletzer. The study also looked at the number of people who were employed in IT-related jobs in the United States in the past year, and found that the majority of those jobs were in IT related fields. programmers, and support specialists], which generally possess higher educational requirements. Blinder also took an occupational approach and created an index of offshorability for hundreds of blue-collar, white- collar, and service occupations. The index was based on the degree to which the jobs required personal interaction that necessitated workers to be in close proximity to each other. The results were published in the book, "The New Workplace: The Rise and Fall of the Workplace," published by Oxford University Press. (e.g., Boulder, CO; Huntsville, AL; and Lowell, MA) or IT-enabled back-office jobs such as data-entry keyers and telemarketers. Jensen and Kletzer developed a different geographically based approach to estimate the share of tradable (offshorable) and nontradable (nonoffsh honorable) jobs in manufacturing and back- office jobs. They looked at jobs in Des Moines, IA; Omaha, NE; and Wilmington, DE. The different measures of offshorability the analysts developed may explain their different results. Blinder and Krueger used three alternative survey methods to try to determine how many of the jobs that workers held in 2008 were vulnerable to being moved overseas. All three methods found that the jobs were at risk of being moved away from the U.S. The different measures may explain the different results, as well as the different methods used to determine the jobs' vulnerability to change. The results are based on a survey of more than 1,000 people conducted in 2008. 2001, have attributes that could allow them to be sent overseas. These attributes include no in-person customer servicing required; an IT-enabled work process that can be accomplished via telecommuting; jobs that are routinized; a fairly wide gap between a job's pay in the United States compared to in a destination country; and a fairly large pay gap between U.S. jobs and jobs in the destination country. 2001, has attributes that can allow it to send people overseas. having 1 million or more inhabitants. They also tend to be located in the Northeast (e.g., Bergen-Passaic, NJ; Boston, MA; and Hartford, CT) and West. In addition, they generally have high concentrations of IT jobs. They are located in cities that have a high percentage of IT-related jobs, such as Dallas, TX; Minneapolis, MN; and Washington, DC; and San Jose, CA. They tend to also be in cities with high percentages of IT workers. to make the code fixes needed to avert problems with computer systems when the year 2000 arrived. Another development was the educational systems of low-wage foreign nations graduating an abundant supply of well educated programmers. Domestic firms that utilized these programmers reportedly were pleased with the quality of their work. They were able to work on computer systems that were in trouble at the time of their hire. They could also work on computers that were already in trouble. They also could work on software that was already in the works. With English the language of the computer industry worldwide, IT services can be provided from many non-English-speaking, comparatively.(sometimes English-speaking) individuals. In some cases, the number of persons with IT and accounting skills reportedly exceeded the immediate needs of their local economies (e.g., China, Eastern Europe, India, and the Philippines). The number of people with IT skills in some countries has exceeded the needs of the local economies, according to a report by PricewaterhouseCoopers. Services jobs to other countries may have different implications for the labor market and public policy than the movement of production jobs. Factory workers (e.g., textile machine operators) have predominantly had less than 12 years of schooling or attained at most a high school degree. Still others note that the move of services jobs could have a negative impact on the U.S. economy. The U.K. economy is expected to grow at a rate of around 2.5% this year, according to the World Bank. below average employment and wage growth during the period. The skills and education of this most vulnerable group range widely. Fifteen are office and administrative support occupations [e.g., bookkeeping, accounting, and auditing clerks], with relatively low education or training requirements. Another 11 are professional and related occupations [ e.g. computer operators, computer technicians, accountants, bookkeepers, and others]. The most vulnerable are those who are unemployed or underemployed, and those who have been unemployed for at least a year. high school diploma. Administrative support and professional workers much more often have taken some college courses or obtained at least a bachelor's degree. The change in the skill (educational) level of jobs being moved abroad has led some to wonder if it's a sign of things to come. The U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics says the change is due to the rise in the number of people working in non-agricultural jobs. The number of jobs in the non-Agricultural sector has also increased. Blinder: 22.2% of U.S. workers in 2004 were potentially offshorable. Blinder added to the conservative estimate those occupations about one in four U.s. jobs are potentially off shorable. The analysis of Blinder and Krueger suggests that offshorability is especially prevalent in factory and administrative support occupations, and on an on-the-job basis. This is about the same as Blinder's moderate estimate based on an entirely different approach (see the immediately preceding paragraph) 9.4% of total U.S. employment in 2000 was found to be in offshorable industries, according to one of their estimates. Both manufacturing and professional services industries were estimated to have above-average percentages of vulnerability to offshoring. Over 12% of employment in the customers.nonmanufacturing (e.g., agriculture, mining, construction, services) industries. He estimated that a majority of occupations (533) and employed persons (92.6 million in 2004) are non-offshorable. in category III he ranked as most susceptible to being offshored to create a moderate estimate totaling 25.6% of all U.S. workers. His aggressive estimate includes all of category III and totals almost 40 million workers. Blinder stated that "Contrary to conventional wisdom, the offshoring of American jobs is not as widespread as people think it is" He also said that it is not the case that the off-shored jobs are bad for the economy, but that they can be replaced by better ones. BLS estimated that 160 service occupations may be susceptible to transfer offshore. Service occupations having a larger percentage of bachelor's degree holders were ranked as more vulnerable to offshoring. More than one-half more offshorable occupations are not low-end jobs, whether measured by wages or by education. "The correlation between skill and offshorability is almost zero," BLS said in its report. "This conclusion supports the above-described research on offshored of services occupation by BLS economists," it said. In 2007, there were some 30 million jobs in these offshorable service-providing occupations; they accounted for over one-fifth of total employment in that year. Despite their vulnerability to being offshored, employment in these occupations grew slightly faster than overall service- Providing employment in the 2001-2007 period. Wage growth was comparatively greater in these Offshorable occupations between 2001 and 2007 as well. However, the 33 service-Providing occupations found to be most susceptible to offshoring experienced the greatest wage growth. life, physical, and social sciences; business and financial operations; and office/administrative support. Jensen and Kletzer's most offshorable category accounted for 27.4% of all employment in services occupations in 2005. They also found that a service occupation's relative degree of offshorability was positively associated with its level of educational attainment; that is, it was more offshored if it was a higher-educated job. The study was published in the Journal of the American Economic Association. provide services (e.g., writers of software code, processors of credit-card receipts, interpreters of CT scans of U.S. hospital patients) Jobs at risk of being offshored thus are both those held by information technology (IT) workers and IT-enabled workers. Events also transpired in China, where jobs were also at risk, and in the Philippines, where IT jobs were at risk as well, as well as in the UK, where they are still at risk. case of manufacturing, and almost 14% in the case of professional services. Jensen and Kletzer took a different approach that has become popular among researchers. They examined the task content of 457 service occupations to rank their relative vulnerability to being offshored. The measures of task content they used were used to rank the relative vulnerability of each job to offshoring. For more information, visit: www.businessinsider.com/business-insider/how-to-offshore-a-job. industries within the service sector as information, finance and insurance, and professional and business services. A study released by the Brookings Institution built upon the work of Bardhan and Kroll, Forrester Research, and others to develop projections of the share of jobs in 246 metropolitan areas that might be lost. The Brookings Institution released a report on the state of the U.S. economy in 2013. The report looked at 246 major metropolitan areas, including New York, Washington, D.C., Los Angeles, Chicago and San Francisco. was projected to be relocated outside the United States within the first 7 years of the 12-year period, and half over the following 5 years. Although 3.4 million jobs may sound like a large number, Forrester's forecasted loss of some 300,000 jobs per year on average through 2015 represents a very small share of the jobs typically created and destroyed each year in the U.S. Researchers have mostly focused on determining which jobs are susceptible to being moved abroad and then moving them back. Since 2004, BLS has asked firms that let go at least 50 workers in layoffs that lasted 31 or more days whether the firms moved the laid-off workers' jobs out of the United States. In the third quarter of 2012, when more than 100,000 workers were separated in extended mass layoffs, firms told BLS that they let go fewer than 1,600 workers in actions involving offshoring. Not surprisingly, the BLS series has consistently found that relatively few job losses result from the movement of work away from the U.S. market implications of offshore outsourcing remain unclear. Some observers claimed that the business practice explained much of the "jobless recovery" from the 2001 recession. Others asserted that the historical link between economic growth and job creation remained intact and, therefore, that the labor market would eventually recover from the short-run downturn in the business cycle. The labor market did in fact recover, which provided support for estimates of offshoring alone having accounted for perhaps 3% of net job loss (gross job gains minus gross job losses) in the 2000s. The U.S. unemployment rate remains high more than three years after the end of the December 2007-June 2009 recession. Despite U.s. firms having moved work outside the country for decades, the short- and long-run labor costs are still too high, the authors say. This concern is especially pertinent to policymakers at the present time because of the high unemployment rate, they say. The authors say policymakers should take steps to reduce the cost of living in the United States to the benefit of the nation's workers. well-educated office workers who lose their jobs to services offshoring. Congress historically has tried to promote U.S. job growth and assist those who lose jobs through no fault of their own. Job losses are caused by economic downturns (i.e., cyclical unemployment) or by shifts in the composition of jobs. It is unclear whether Congress would consider a bill that would help those who lost their jobs because of services off-shoring, or because of other factors such as the recession. responding to heightened competition from Japanese and European multinational corporations, opened facilities abroad during the 1970s and 1980s. In addition, U.S. companies reacted to the back-to-back recessions of the 1980s and 1990s. The goods formerly produced by comparatively well paid, often unionized factory workers (e.g., assembly-line workers in the auto industry) were no longer produced in the United States. They were produced elsewhere in the world and sold to other countries. physical separation of design and production personnel; and a lack of safeguards on intellectual property outside the United States. Perry provided more than 10 companies as examples of those that have returned production and jobs to the U.S. (e.g., Caterpillar, National Cash Register, Wham-O, Otis Elevator, and Buck Knives) He also said that there is a "lack of safeguards" on Intellectual Property outside of the US. He said there is "a lack of protections on intellectual Property outside the US" Some companies have begun returning call center operations and legal support work to the United States. Some have credited "reshoring" for part of the sector's employment rebound since the 2007-2009 recession's end. Among U.S. manufacturers that responded to CNN's call for help: General Motors, Caterpillar, Ford, General Electric, General Dynamics, Honeywell, Honeycomb, H-E-B, Hennessee, Lockheed Martin, Northrop Grumman, Nucor, North Carolina. to recent surveys, Perry found that about one-fifth had brought production back from overseas in 2011. He attributed what he regards as a nascent trend to "China's shrinking manufacturing wage and cost advantages" as well as "long delivery times and rising shipping costs for overseas production"; quality control issues; the economy's "shrinking manufacturing wage" and "cost advantages" He attributed the trend to China's "smaller manufacturing workforce" and the country's "growing manufacturing wages and cost advantage" benefits the nation as a whole by enabling firms to sell a greater variety of higher quality products to U.S. consumers at lower prices. Some question whether this scenario applies to services offshoring, however. cultural differences with the United States than India or the Philippines for example, likely reduces their customers' potential antipathy. And, despite the cost of labor rising in some Asian nations (e.g., India), there are many others whose low wages continue to draw U.s. jobs. the adoption by other countries of trade and labor policies intended to level the playing field for U.S. companies and workers in the international marketplace. Still others advocate for limited government intervention as the best means of promoting economic growth. This report does not attempt to sort through all the conflicting views on the issue of trade, labor and immigration policies. It is intended to provide an overview of some of the key issues facing the United States and other countries in the global marketplace at the time of the report's release. in other countries that enhanced their ability to export services. One such event was addressing the so-called Y2K crisis. U.S. firms, in response to a tight supply of computer programmers in the late 1990s, turned to companies principally located in India. In the 1990s the United States and other developed countries were facing a shortage of programmers. In response, companies principally based in India were asked to provide IT services to the U.K. and other countries in the West. Many organizations will also engage in large scale re-insourcing thereby further eroding the outsourcing market. Dell, for example, returned some help services to the United States due to customer dissatisfaction. Other U.S. firms reportedly had to employ IT service providers located in the United states to fix software produced abroad. The outsourcing market is expected to grow in the next few years, according to a report by Forrester. The report was based on a survey of more than 1,000 IT professionals. low-wage nations (e.g., Argentina, Brazil, Bulgaria, China, the Czech Republic, Hungary, Jordan, Lithuania, Mexico, Slovenia, Russia, and Ukraine) Taken together, these developments have allowed U.S.-based companies to increasingly fragment tasks across borders in both manufacturing and information and business services. Firms no longer just ship goods between countries. They can also provide information and services that can't be easily found in other countries, such as cloud-based software. as well as in the Middle East). Global providers of software services have responded by placing more of their clients' work in a variety of countries, including the "near-shore" markets of Canada and Mexico. Some individual U.S. employers also reportedly believe that moving work to nearby Canada, which has fewer jobs, would be a good move for them. The move would also be good for the country's economy, as well as for the software industry, which relies on the region for much of its business. airline carriers have continued their "increased outsourcing" of maintenance jobs overseas. Concern periodically has arisen among U.S. outsourcers over unrest in some regions (e.g., disputes between India and Pakistan), according to the report. The outsourcing includes jobs for international aircraft but even for planes on purely domestic routes. The report was compiled by CNN's Tom Foreman and published in conjunction with the Aviation Policy Institute. For confidential support, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. the early 1980s by focusing on their core missions and contracting out activities that specialized domestic enterprises could perform more efficiently. Firms also restructured their operations by outsourcing jobs to employees of temporary help agencies, professional and business services establishments (e.g., accounting firms), and independent contractors located in the U.S. and abroad. In the 1980s and 1990s, many U.K. firms began outsourcing their operations to companies based in the United States and elsewhere in the world. The trend continued into the 2000s and 2010s. Domestic outsourcing of formerly in-house functions is a permanent reorganization of how work is performed in the United States. The 2001 recession prompted U.S. employers to achieve further efficiencies by taking advantage of technological innovations that minimize costs. The persistence of these changes over time indicates that domestic outsourcing is becoming more common in the U.K. and U.N. in the coming years. In the United Kingdom, the outsourcing trend is the opposite, with companies outsourcing more of their work to other countries. issues raised above, some of which are addressed in the above-referenced CRS reports. Instead, it begins by briefly examining the development of outsourcing by U.S. companies to provide context for policymakers grappling with the business practices' latest iteration. It then synthesizes the information (both empirical and anecdotal) released since the CRS report was published in May. It concludes with a list of the key issues facing the U.N. Security Council and the European Union. The report is available in English and in Spanish. will lose "holy grail" status. In the future, companies will not outsource because it is the latest management fad. Organizations will carefully define core, strategic, and "thought-leadership" functions and will keep those inhouse to retain knowledge, confidentiality, and control. Some organizations will decide to outsource only short-term, such as in the next few months or even years. The future of outsource management is uncertain, but it is unlikely to be as bad as it once was. early 2000s on offshore outsourcing's impact on U.S. employment to help policymakers evaluate the adequacy of the nation's retraining and income support programs for workers displaced by greater global economic integration. The overseas relocation of manufacturing work predates by decades the recent wave of services offshoring. The management challenge will grow more urgent as rising global salaries dissipate the easy cost gains from offshore outsourcing. Some, therefore, are cautious about the future pace of moving abroad potentially vulnerable U.s. jobs. 3.4 million service-sector jobs might move abroad between 2003 and 2015. Half of the total (1.7 million) due to services offshoring over the 2004-2015 period. Five metro areas might lose somewhat more jobs (between 3.1% and 4.3%) by 2015: Boulder, CO; Lowell, MA; San Francisco, CA; San Jose, CA. Another 23 areas might have between 2.6% and 3.0% of their jobs offshored. the movement of work and that less than 1% of these workers had their jobs moved to another country. As a result of the dearth of data, some have stepped in to provide more information on the extent of offshoring today and in coming years. Forrester Research, Inc. was the study's source of data and said less than one in five of the people it surveyed had their work moved to a different country. The study was published in the journal of The Economic Journal. that actually have been or will be lost to offshoring because it does not consider other factors that may affect employers' decisions about the location in which work is performed. Offshoring does not take into account other factors such as the cost of living in the location of the work to be done. The U.S. government says it is trying to protect jobs in the United States from being lost to other countries. It is also trying to prevent the loss of jobs that have already been lost because of offshored. Recent decades. Technological change and deunionization appear to have accounted for relatively more of the so-called polarization of wages that occurred during the 1980s and 1990s. No database exists that provides a comprehensive answer to the question of how many workers have lost their jobs to offshoring. The only data available is from the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, which says it has no data on how many jobs have been lost to off-shoring in the past 20 years. Offshoring, also known as offshore outsourcing, initially referred to the practice of U.S. businesses contracting with firms beyond U.K. borders. Offshoring involves sending abroad the jobs of workers and a destination country having few language, institutional, and cultural barriers. The occupational groups identified as being vulnerable to offshoring include office support (e.g., data entry and payroll clerks), auditors and tax preparers, computer programmers and software engineers, medical transcriptionists and paralegals, and technical writers. Many economists agree that offshoring performed in the United States (i.e., structural unemployment) Some policymakers support measures meant to encourage U.S. firms to expand employment domestically rather than abroad. Some members of the public policy community also support the idea of off-shoring. The notion that off-shore jobs depresses job growth appears to underlie support among some policymakers for measures to encourage off-offshore jobs growth in the U.K. and the rest of the world. in blue-collar occupations employed on textile and auto assembly lines. The extension of offshoring from U.S. manufacturers to service providers that became apparent in the past decade has heightened public policy concerns about the extent of job loss and foregone employment opportunities. In the past 10 years, more than 100,000 jobs have been lost in the United States due to off-shoring, according to a report by the Bureau of Labor Statistics. The report also found that more than 80,000 people have lost their jobs because of the off-shore outsourcing. whether the offshoring of service, unlike production, activities will result in college graduates facing a dwindling supply of entry-level jobs. They also question whether the existing trade adjustment assistance programs can satisfactorily meet the needs of comparatively less well-off people. The U.S. economy is expected to grow at a rate of about 2.5 percent this year, according to the World Economic Forum. That's up from 1.7 percent in 2013. The economy is projected to grow by 2.4 percent in 2014, the U.N. says. now also locate intangible production tasks, such as research, design, management, and IT support across a number of different countries. Research suggests that the extension of task fragmentation to service activities accounts for the greater relative contribution of offshoring to increased wage dispersion (inequality) in the United States in the U.S. in 2013. In 2013, more than 40% of jobs were found to be in service jobs, up from 30% in 2000. In 2012, over 30% of all jobs were in services. industry basis, in manufacturing, finance, information, and professional services. One explanation for why perhaps only one-tenth of the potential market for offshoring global IT and business processes work was realized through 2006 is that "executives have a lot of work to do," says one analyst. There are others who believe fears about services offshored have been overblown, according to the report. The report was based on a survey of more than 1,000 executives in the IT industry. Despite 9/11, U.S. firms continued to offshoring IT services. Offshore providers of IT services were able to allay fears about security shortly after the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001. But at least three factors that could have put the brakes on off-shoring early in the last decade failed to do so. Despite 9/ 11, despite 9/12, U.,S. companies continued toOffshore IT services, for example, was able toAllay U.K. firms' fears aboutSecurity shortly after September 11. Milberg et al. suggest that companies engaged in offshoring of service activities may be its chief beneficiaries. Using the profits gained from lower input costs to increase dividends to shareholders, raise stock prices through buybacks, and undertake more mergers and acquisitions rather than reinvesting and promoting growth in the U.S., the authors say. The authors conclude that the benefits of offshored service activities are likely to be short-term and not long-term, and that they should be monitored closely. the importance of physical distance between companies. The now widespread dissemination of technologies that enable relatively low cost, good quality, and high speed transmission of voice and data communications has allowed U.S. firms to extend offshoring beyond the jobs of workers that produce goods to the jobs that workers that work for them. The importance ofphysical distance between firms has been overemphasized in recent years, according to a report by the World Economic Forum. The report also said that the number of jobs that have been lost due to off-shoring has been on the rise.