develop the necessary data submission procedures. OMB’s summary of agencies’ implementation plan updates acknowledged that the delay in the release of schema version 1.0 delayed agency timelines for implementation. This document also recognized that the iterative approach being used to develop and release guidance has posed a challenge to agencies. Agencies are using schema version1.0 to plan what changes are needed to systems and business processes to be the intention of publically reporting that data by May 2017. We have previously reported that a significant delay in releasing version 1,0 would likely have consequences for timely implementation of the act. Treasury released the schema version 1.0 on April 29, 2016. It is intended to standardize the way financial assistance awards, contracts, and other financial data will be collected and reported under the DATA Act. A key component of the reporting framework laid out in theschema version1.0 is the data definition. Treasury expects the guidance provided in the Schema 1. 0 will provide a stable base for agencies to make changes to the data definitions. The agency stated that any delays or changes to these components will significantly affect its solution design, development and testing schedule, and cost estimate. Patches will help link an agency’s financial and award systems, create additional fields in existing systems to report new data elements, and extract data files formatted for submission to Treasury. Patches that will facilitate the generation data submission for May 2017. Treasury officials told us that agencies should still be able to create and submit the required files to the broker without these patches. Some agencies reported in their implementation plan updates that they were not able to take advantage of software patches. The patches will help agencies develop files that comply with DATA Act requirements. In August 2016, we reported that agencies we reviewed are relying on a series of software patches from their enterprise resource planning (ERP) vendors to facilitate their data submissions. ERP vendors are developing patches that will extract data to help an additional patch in October. Two agencies reported in their implementation plan updates that a delay in the release of the patches could jeopardize complete and timely submission of data. It will be more difficult for agencies that are relying. on ERP vendor patches to test their data files in the broker until the patches have been implemented. The release of one of these patches has been delayed. Oracle, one of the ERP vendors developing these patches, had planned to release a patch that would allow award attributes to be captured in their clients’ core purchasing systems and general ledger journals in August 2016. The release was delayed until September 13, 2016. Representatives from SAP, another such ERP vendor, said that they were able to deliver one of those needed patches to their clients in August 2015 and in September 2016, respectively. not be available. Meeting the reporting deadline is highly dependent on receiving requisite funding and resources. The lack of sufficient resources, including staff expertise and proper funding, increases the risk that agencies may have difficulty taking all the actions needed in a timely manner. The technical software requirements for agency reporting are still evolving, so any changes to the technical requirements over the next few months could also affect agencies’ abilities to meet the deadline. In the past, agencies have reported that they have been unable to get the funding they need to meet their reporting deadline. in their implementation plan updates indicates that some agencies are at increased risk of not meeting the May 2017 reporting deadline because of these challenges. In addition, inspectors general for some agencies, such as the Departments of Labor and Housing and Urban Development, have issued readiness review reports that also also indicate that they are at risk of missing the deadline. The deadline is May 1, 2017, for agencies to report their progress on the Affordable Care Act to the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) and other agencies. they developed plans for interim solutions to construct these files until the patches can be developed, tested, and configured. Some of these interim solutions rely on manual processing, which can be burdensome and increase the risk for errors. For example, USDA officials said that the effort to create an interim solution has been very resource intensive. This process involved surveying USDA’s bureaus to identify how their systems are configured and using that information to modify the financial system. HHS has also developed an interim reporting solution that can generate the required files without depending on a patch. officials said this interim solution is complex and their processes cannot be fully automated until the Oracle patch is released. Since these processes are not fully automated, they carry a risk of errors being introduced though human error. Agencies that are developing interim solutions will only have until May to come up with a solution. The deadline for the interim solution has been set at the end of May. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. Before final submission of the data files in the broker, the SAO is responsible for assuring that, at a minimum, the data reported are based on appropriate internal controls. This assurance is to be provided quarterly with data submissions beginning with fiscal year 2017 second quarter data. The SAO assurance means, at least, that their internal controls support the reliability and validity of the agency account-level and award-level data they submit to Treasury. That is, they are to provide reasonable assurance. Management Procedures Memorandum No. 2016-03 directs agencies to leverage existing procedures for providing assurances of the quality of their DATA Act data submissions. These checks include verifying that required information is present and formatted correctly. Treasury officials told us that the responsibility for ensuring the accuracy of these files lies with the DATA Act SAO at each agency. For example, OMB Management Procedures Memor memo says SAOs must provide reasonable assurance that their internal controls support the reliability and validity of the data submitted to Treasury. OMB expects SAO assurance of the data through this process would mean that data submitted to Treasury by May 2017 complies control and risk management strategies identified in OMB Circular A-123. Treasury officials said that if SAOs are not able to provide this assurance, their agency will be prevented from submitting the files and their data will not be included in the data reporting based on the current broker design. Currently, currently, OMB does not require SAOs to provide assurance that their data complies with the Circular. officials (SAO) certification and reporting non-financial data. One agency reported that its SAO may be unable to certify the quality of data if OMB’s guidance for the SAO certification cannot be supported by existing processes. Another agency reported concerns with the burden of reconciling account data with financial the broker does not allow agencies to submit their data with qualifications, such as known quality limitations. OMB staff and Treasury officials said that they are reconsidering this position and are ability to comply with the May 2017 reporting deadline could be affected. Some agencies also reported concerns about the requirement for SAOs to certify the data reported quarterly. For example, one agency reported that if guidance clarifying certification procedures is delayed, it may not have time to implement appropriate validation. The deadline for reporting quarterly data is May 1, 2017. For more information, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2017/05/30/healthcare/can-you-report-quarterly-data-and-how-much-is-it-really-for-you. with existing controls for ensuring the data quality. However, our prior work has shown that relying on these quality assurance processes is not sufficient to address the accuracy and completeness challenges that we have previously identified. Offices of Inspector General, which are required to assess the completeness, timeliness, quality, and accuracy of data submitted under the act, have expressed concerns about agencies' abilities to provide assurances of the quality of their data. The inspectors general are particularly concerned about their agencies’ ability to provide quality assurances for data that are not directly provided. 2016 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provides areasonable basis for the findings and conclusion based on the audit objectives of the audit. We are happy to provide an explanation for the results of our audit, which we believe are consistent with those of other auditing firms. We apologize for any inconvenience caused by this audit. rule is not met, the broker can either produce a warning message while still accepting the data for submission or produce a fatal error, which prevents submission of the data altogether. As of September 30, 2016, data uploaded to the broker needs to successfully meet less than a quarter of the rules. The broker must also be able to accept the data in a timely manner. The data must be submitted within 24 hours of the broker accepting it for processing. For more information on how to submit data to a broker, visit the broker's website. warnings rather than fatal errors would provide agency officials with the flexibility to correct issues flagged by the broker or not. For example, for some of the programs, grants award-level information may not be accurate, the agency says. The agency says it will continue to work with the broker to improve the system. The program is funded by a combination of federal, state and local tax dollars, as well as private donations. It has been in existence for more than 30 years, but was recently expanded to include federal grants. Treasury officials say they plan to continue to refine the broker to improve its functionality and overall user experience. They have no plans to alter these key functions. According to Treasury guidance documents, agencies are are.capable of performing the key functions of extracting and validating agency data. The broker will be available to the public starting in the spring of 2015, Treasury officials say. It is expected to be available in the U.S. and Europe by the end of the year, they say. Agencies have made progress toward creating their data submissions and testing them in the broker, but work remains to be done before actual reporting can begin. Treasury has made empty samples available for agencies to test. The U.S. Department of the Treasury is exploring ways that agencies can submit data with qualifications and how these qualifications can be conveyed to the public. For more information, go to: www.treasury.gov/public-data-broker. For an empty sample, visit the Treasury’s website. agency reported that certain data elements are not currently available for all document types, and is considering pulling these data elements from other source systems to the extent possible. A lack of complete and accurate agency data increases the risk that agencies may not be able to meet the requirements of the data collection program. The agency reported that it was considering pulling certain data Elements from other sources to help meet the agency's requirements for data collection. The agencies reported that they were considering pulling some data elements, but not all, from other systems. provide error details to the agency. The agency should then reference the authoritative data sources and address the discrepancies. Step 8: Submit Data. Once the data is linked, validated, and standardized, agencies are to submit the data to Treasury for posting on USASpending.gov or a successor system. Agency senior accountable for the data submission process. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. expected to use the broker to upload three files containing data pulled from the agencies’ internal financial and award management systems. Unlike the files submitted by agencies, these extracted files with award and sub-award information are not subject to any validations in the broker. Treasury implemented additional validation checks on the file containing agency financial assistance award information through its source system, the Award Submission system. Data element validations check whether data September and early October 2016. Data complex validations checks whether data October and early November 2016. In a future release of the broker, data uploaded to the broker will need to successfully meet about half of the complex validation checks in order to be accepted for submission to Treasury. Treasury officials said that this choice was made to allow agencies more flexibility to test the broker. The data submissions will be required to pass more of these validation rules at a later date, according to Treasury documents. These rules are intended to allow for more flexibility for agencies to test data submitted to a broker for potential fraud.  Complex validations perform tasks such as checking data against other sources or using calculation rules to verify whether certain data elements sum up to each other. Treasury has configured these complex validation rules so that if a.elements comply with specific format requirements such as field type and character length, the data will be valid. The U.S. Department of the Treasury has set up a complex validation system to ensure that data elements comply with certain format requirements. For more information, visit Treasury.gov/validation. what Treasury describes as an agile development process. Treasury released the first version of the broker in spring 2016 and it continues to develop the system’s capabilities through 2-week software development cycles, called sprints. On September 30, 2016, Treasury released a version ofThe broker, which it stated was fully functional. Treasury says the system is fully functional and ready to be used by the Treasury Department and other government agencies. The system is available to the public for use in the U.S. Treasury Department. Space Administration had completed testing the broker and revised its data files accordingly. Treasury also collects data from the four shared service providers that are helping to manage data submissions for their agency clients. As of October 2016, two of these shared service provider reported to Treasury that they had submitted data to the agency. Two of these service providers have reported that they have submitted data for the agency's agency clients to Treasury as of October 16, 2016. For more information, visit the Space Administration's website. The broker uses validation rules to test the completeness and accuracy of the data elements and linkages between financial and award data. The broker also tests whether the data passes basic validations within the schema version 1.0. This step involves updating information and systems. If data does not pass validation (see Step 6), the broker will update the data and data systems. Step 7: Update Data. The next step involves implementing system changes as needed to collect and link data. Step 6: Test Broker Outputs and Ensure Data are Valid. Treasury has developed a system to standardize data formatting and assist reporting agencies in validating their data prior to submitting it to Treasury. Treasury’s software development team has been iteratively testing and developing the broker using the broker. We reviewed the broker made available by Treasury through open source code posted on a public website (GitHub repositories associated with the DATA Act) In addition, we observed several demonstrations of how agencies submit their data to a prototype of the broker in order to understand its functionality and validations. the broker and the feedback produced by the system regarding data verification. We also interviewed knowledgeable officials from OMB, Treasury, and selected federal agencies and inspectors general, as well as enterprise resource planning (ERP) vendors assisting federal agencies with technical implementation. To obtain specific information on how agencies use the system, contact us at tips@dailymail.co.uk or call 1-800-273-8255. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org. key practices. For example, processes have not been developed to both approve new standards and ensure that already established standards are consistently applied and enforced across the federal government. Such transitions may disrupt the momentum for meeting implementation timeframes or cause the government to fail to continue to build on previous accomplishments. The absence of a robust and institutionalized data governance structure presents additional potential risks regarding the integrity of data standards over time. One reason why having a robust, institutionalizedData governance structure is important is to provide consistent data management during times of resulting in delays. Promote a common set of key practices that include establishing clear policies and procedures for developing, managing, and enforcing data standards. To identify key practices for data governance we reviewed our past reports to identify applicable laws, regulations, and guidance, as well as reports from other entities that could inform our work. All of the organizations we identified endorse establishing and using a governance structure to oversee how data standards, digital content, and other data assets are developed, managed and implemented. The DATA Act requires that established data standards incorporate widely accepted common data elements. by international voluntary consensus standards bodies, federal agencies with authority over contracting and financial assistance, and accounting standards organizations. We selected a range of organizations, including domestic and international standards-setting organizations, industry groups or associations, and federal agencies. American Institute of Certified Public Accountants, American National Standards Institute, Carnegie-Mellon University-Software Engineering Institute, Data Governance Institute. Oracle, National Association of State Chief Information Officers, National Institute of Standards and Technology. Digital Services Advisory Group and the Department of Education-Privacy Technical Assistance Center. transparency and accountability of federal spending data. OMB and Treasury have taken significant steps toward implementing the act’s various requirements. In May 2015, the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) directed federal agencies to submit Digital Accountability and Transparency Act of 2014 (DATA Act) implementation plans to OMB concurrent with the agencies’ fiscal year 2017 budget requests. In June 2015, OMB issued guidance to help agencies develop their implementation plans, and designed a pilot for developing recommendations to reduce recipient reporting burden. Under the act, agencies must report data in compliance with established standards by May 2017. OMB and Treasury have directed agencies to begin submitting data by the beginning of the second quarter of fiscal year 2017 (January 2017) with and V, respectively. The Treasury response also noted that OMB's and Treasury’s issuance of uniform data standards has helped agencies meet their requirements under the act. The Data Standards Committee to they have taken to implement the DATA Act's requirements and assist agencies in meeting their requirements. and comparable data. These challenges, as well as the challenges identified by agencies, underscore the need for OMB and Treasury to fully address our prior recommendation to provide agencies with additional guidance to address potential clarity issues. OMB staff told us that the newly established Data Standards Committee will be tasked with developing new data standards for the federal government. The committee is expected to begin its work in the coming months. The full report will be published in the spring of 2015. For confidential support call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. In June 2016, OMB directed Chief Financial Officers Act of 1990 (CFO Act) agencies to update their implementation plans. Department of the Treasury (Treasury) issued guidance to help agencies prepare their plans. We reviewed these implementation plans and on July 29, 2016, we issued a report on the results of our review. We assessed the information against OMB’s requirements and the revised guidance in Treasury”s DATA Act Implementation Playbook (Version 2.0) (Playbook 2. 0) timely feedback and have made a number of recommendations that, if addressed, could help ensure the full and effective implementation of the act. OMB and Treasury have made progress implementing 5 of our recommendations related to DATA Act implementation. However, additional effort is needed to address 11 previous GAO recommendations, according to the GAO report. The report was published by the Government Accountability Office (GAO) on November 14, 2013. It was published as part of a series of reports by GAO on the Department of the Treasury. In July 2015, we reported that OMB and Treasury had not yet established a formal framework for providing data governance throughout the lifecycle of developing and implementing standards. Such a framework is key for ensuring that the integrity of data standards is maintained over time. We recommended that O MB and Treasury establish a clear set of policies and procedures for developing and maintaining data standards that are consistent with leading practices. Several data governance models exist that could inform OMB's and Treasury’s efforts to ensure the Integrity of the data standards. OMB and Treasury are developing a governance structure. More work will be needed to ensure that this structure is consistent with key practices for developing and maintaining the Section 5 Pilot for reducing recipient reporting burden. See appendix II for a list of our previous recommendations relating to the DATA Act and their implementation status.that remain open. To determine the implementation challenges reported by CFO Act agencies in their DATA Act implementation plan updates, we requested and received the data. We also met with OMB and. Treasury to obtain information on the status of their efforts to address our previous recommendation that they establish a data governance. structure. the act to address potential clarity, consistency, and quality issues with the definitions of standardized data elements. In January 2016 we reported that ensuring that data definitions are generally consistent with leading practices is important. We also reported that although the standardized data element definitions issued by OMB largely adhered to leading practices for establishing data definitions, several definitions had limitations that could lead to inconsistent reporting. While OMB’s additional guidance addresses some of the limitations we identified, it does not address all the clarity. response, engaged a contractor to interview key stakeholders and develop a set of potential next steps. The first of these steps was to establish a new Data Standards Committee that will be responsible for maintaining established standards and developing new data elements or data definitions. Treasury can build upon the initial step of establishing a data standards committee and identify new standards. The goal is to establish an institutionalized system of data management that follows key practices and ensures the integrity of the data standards over time. In the U.S. The Data Standards Committee held its inaugural meeting on September 15, 2016, and will meet on a monthly basis. The committee has also drafted a charter that will delineate the scope of the committee’s work. OMB staff told us that the committee will focus on clarifying existing data standard definitions, including the definition of predominant place of performance, and identifying new standards that may be needed going forward. In October 2016, according to O MB staff, the charter was under review by the DATA Act. actions to implement the suggested steps in Playbook 2.0, and the number of CFO Act agencies that included the information. The implementation plan updates indicate that 19 of the 24 C FO Act agencies continue 5 through 8 in Playbooks. Five CFO agencies continue to work on their initial implementation plans. The number of agencies reporting challenges in each category is listed in the Table 4 of the report. The report is based on the July 2016 edition of the CFO Report. The July 2016 report is available at: http://www.cfo.org/cfo-report. of the updates included most of the OMB required information. Some of the CFO Act agencies did not include information about some of the remaining actions to implement the suggested steps in Playbook 2.0. For example, 5 of the 24 CFO. Act agencies didn't include information. about testing for completeness and accuracy of data elements submitted to Treasury. 11 C FO Act agencies don't include. information about workflows for addressing validation errors and revisions needed. For. example, 11 CFO act agencies don’t include information on workflows. for addressingvalidation errors and revise needed. expanded guidance on actions to be included in steps 5 through 8. Playbook 2.0 did not include expected timeframes for agencies to complete each step. Instead, it referred agencies to Treasury’s implementation roadmap, which includes high level milestones for Treasury's technical deliverables. Step 5: Prepare Data for Submission to the Broker. This step involves reviewing the schema version 1.0, extracting data from source systems, mapping agency data to the schema and submitting it to the broker. Treasury’s DATA Act Implementation Playbook (Version 1.0) indicated that agencies would be working on steps 5 through 8 throughout fiscal years 2016 and 2017. Playbook 2.0—issued June 24, 2016—includes, among other things, a timeline for agencies to use as they begin to not completed their inventory of data and identified the gaps in systems and processes for data elements. Each agency was to (1) update its timeline and milestones and explain the agency's progress to date and the remaining actions it would take to implement the act. to agency data submissions, and 13 CFO Act agencies did not include information about testing linkages of program and financial data. Without such information in agencies’ updates, it may be more difficult for OMB and Treasury to determine where to put the data, OMB said. OMB also said it may not be possible for agencies to share information about their financial data with the federal government at the same time as the CFO act, which requires them to share such information with the Treasury and OMB. Files available to agencies so they can begin testing their data files in the broker without having completed building all of them. As of October 2016, 21 of 24 CFO Act agencies reported that they had begun testing. Only the National Aeronautics and the U.S. Air Force have begun testing data files on their aircrafts and space shuttles. For more information on the broker, go to: www.cfo-broker.org. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. 14 of the 24 CFO Act agencies reported challenges related to staffing issues or funding constraints. One agency reported that expertise related to feeder systems and data will be needed to successfully implement the DATA Act. Thirteen of the 18 agencies reported concerns with mandatory DATA Act reporting requirements, including concerns with data quality and their ability to report all the required data elements in their initial DATA Act submissions, as well as senior accountable. Their financial and payment information.their financial andpayment information. Their senior accountable information. Two agencies reported challenges with reporting beginning balances at the level of detail required by the DATA Act. Two agencies reported concerns with protecting sensitive and classified data. One agency also reported ongoing issues with inconsistent quality of data submitted from their financial systems.and award data. Another agency reported issues with consistent quality of financial system data. and award data, among other issues. and issues with data quality from financial systems, of which there are several. and of which one agency reported ongoing. issues with consistently inconsistent quality. Nineteen of the 24 CFO Act agencies reported challenges related to systems integration. These include concerns with systems limitations, modernization efforts, and timing. One agency reported that validation presents challenges because its financial systems are not properly integrated with procurement and grant systems. Similarly, the one agency said that its financial system is not properlyintegrated with its procurement and grants systems. For more information, go to: www.cfoact.org/systems-integration-challenges-and-timing. technical guidance, we selected three agencies based on whether they were in compliance with existing federal requirements for federal financial management systems. Based on these selection, we chose three agencies for this report. The agencies were chosen based on the type of federal funding provided (such as grants, loans, or procurements), and their status as a federal shared service provider for financial management. The report will be published in full in the next issue of this magazine. It will also be published on CNN.com. to date and estimated total future costs, and (3) explain any new challenges and mitigation strategies. We analyzed the agency-reported challenges and mitigating strategies and categorized them. We compared the categories of challenges reported by the CFO Act agencies in their implementation plan updates to the challenges that had been reported in their initial implementation plans in 2015 to identify any new categories. We interviewed Act agencies did not identify any challenges in their Implementation plan updates. We found the most lack of resources, evolving and complex reporting requirements, and inadequate guidance. structure which is particularly important during the upcoming transition to a new administration. challenges reported by Chief Financial Officers Act of 1990 (CFO Act) agencies in their implementation plan updates. The operationalization of government-wide data standards and the technical specifications for data reporting; and updated designs for data reports. The report also looks at the impact of changes to the U.S. tax code, including changes to tax rates, and the impact on the federal government of the shift from one party to the other. develop their DATA Act implementation plans. Steps 1 through 4 were to be completed by September 2015. As of October 2016, only 16 of the 24 CFO Act agencies reported that they had completed all steps 1 through four. For example, there were four agencies reporting that they'd completed steps 1 and 2 by the end of the year, but only four agencies had completed steps 3 and 4 by October 2016. For more information on the DATA Act, visit http://www.cfoact.org/data. 21 of the 24 CFO Act agencies reported costs to date and future estimated costs to implement the DATA Act reporting requirements. Total estimated cost for full DATA Act implementation ranged from approximately $1.0 million to $59.1 million, for a total of about $202.4 million. It is important to note that the estimated total costs reported by CFO. Act agencies to implementing the. DATA Act includes costs for systems integration and modernization.target their monitoring and assistance efforts to help ensure the Data Act is successfully implemented. CFO Act agencies spent almost $81 billion on information technology in fiscal year 2016. OMB required agencies to include this information in their implementation plan updates. See appendix III for more details about the information that OMB needed to be included in the updates. The CFO Act requirements are relatively small when compared to the almost $80 billion spent on technology by the agencies in fiscal 2016 alone. The remaining $1.2 billion is not required to be disclosed. The information that is required is required in the implementation plans, not the implementation updates. Signed into law on May 9, 2014, the DATA Act expanded on previous federal transparency legislation to link federal agency spending to federal program activities. The DATA Act requires government- wide reporting on a greater variety of federal funds produced for the August 2017 report to Congress. Across the federal government, agencies have efforts under way to implement the Data Act by the May 2017 deadline. This report examines: (1) steps taken to establish a clear data governance; and (2) the progress being made in implementing the Digital Accountability and Transparency Act of 2014. These are the same three agencies we selected for our January 2016 and August 2016 reports. This allowed us to assess progress in DATA Act implementation at these agencies since our last review. The updates were to (1) update timeline and milestones and explain the agency’s progress to date and the remaining actions it would take to implement the act in accordance with the suggested steps in the act. At each agency, we reviewed Data Act implementation plan updates and interviewed officials responsible for Act) agencies to submit updates to their initial DATA Act Implementation plans by August 12, 2016. to face challenges in their efforts to implement the DATA Act. System integration issues, Act agencies reported that they use certain mitigating strategies in their implementation plan updates. Making changes to internal policies and procedures, leveraging existing resources, using external resources, and continuing are some of the strategies reported by these agencies to address the Act's implementation challenges. The CFO Act is a federal law that requires the CFO to report on the performance of his or her organization's CFOs to the Treasury Department each year. agency reported that several of its components are undergoing grant, procurement, or financial system improvements that coincide with implementing the DATA Act. Another agency reported that, for one of its legacy systems, obtaining the unique steps needed to give assurance over the data. Because of the lack of timely and consistent guidance, agencies may need to continuously update or change their processes, which could adversely affect their ability to meet the Data Act requirements. As noted above, the information reported by the CFO Act agencies was provided by the agencies. OMB’s July 2016 revision of the design of the procurement portion of the Section 5 Pilot also showed substantial improvements in reflecting the leading practices for effective pilot design. The revised design includes a data-analysis plan that describes how OMB will collect, track, and analyze data produced by the pilot. The Director of OMB should clearly document how data collected will be used in the pilot's design, we recommend. We also recommend that OMB document how potential findings could be scalable from the experiences of pilot participants to the larger population. as a result of our input. We also met with OMB to obtain information on the status of efforts to address our recommendation related to the design of the pilot for reducing recipient reporting burden. We conducted the work upon which this report is based from May 2016 to December. The report was compiled by the Government Accountability Office and the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) from May to December of this year. It is based on information received from the OMB, the GAO, and the White House between May and December. grants and procurement portions of the Section 5 Pilot. We met with OMB and Treasury to obtain information on the status of efforts to address our recommendation related to providing technical guidance. We determined that the updated design for both parts of the Pilot meets the statutory requirements for the pilot established under the DATA Act. The DATA Act requires that the pilot program should include the following design features: implementation and DATA Act implementation team members. We reviewed Section 5 of the Federal Funding Act to assess whether the pilot designs meet statutory design requirements. program, known as the Section 5 Pilot, aimed at developing recommendations for reducing reporting burden for grantees and contractors. The OMB response also noted that OMB and Treasury met with each of the 24 CFO Act agencies to discuss their implementation timelines, risks, and mitigation strategies. In particular, the design of the procurement portion of the. develop and maintain standards for federal spending; and developing and executing the. Section 5 pilot, the OMB said in its response. It also said that Treasury and OMB have taken steps to address issues that could be addressed. each test model and how that assessment links back to the stated hypotheses. HHS also added a sampling plan and information on participant outreach efforts to the design of the grants portion of the pilot which helped it to meet the leading practices for effective pilot design. As of August 2016, HHS officials reported e-mailing almost 8,000 potential participants and plan on reaching out to even more in the coming months. The program is funded by the Department of Health and Human Services and the National Institutes of Health. reached about integrating the pilot activities into overall grant reporting efforts. Based on our feedback, OMB and HHS developed a plan to analyze survey and other data prior to the start of data analysis. This plan specifies the types of quantitative and qualitative data analysis HHS intends to conduct for implementing the DATA Act. We provided HHS and OMB with feedback on the design of the grants and procurement portions of the pilot. These officials generally accepted our feedback as useful and, in some instances, noted that they have or planned to make changes to their design. pilot, we reviewed the draft design document from March 2016 as well as data collection instruments such as surveys and quizzes. We supplemented our assessment with information HHS officials provided to us during subsequent interviews, as appropriate. For the procurement portion of the project, we review the draftDesign document from July 2016. For more information, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/29/healthcare/pilot/index.html#storylink=cpy. Establish well-defined, appropriate, clear, and measurable objectives. Identify criteria or standards for identifying lessons about the pilot. Develop a detailed data-analysis plan to track the pilot program’s implementation and performance. evaluate the final results of the project and draw conclusions on whether, how, and when to integrate pilot activities into overall efforts. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org. design of the grants portion of the pilot was released, which updated the November 2015 version we previously reviewed. This was followed, in July 2016, by a revised version of the design for the procurement portion. See table 1 for a summary of the test models components that comprise the whether the design of the overall pilot would meet these requirements. For example, in our April 2016 review we found that the grants design lacked specific details regarding how the data will be analyzed and how conclusions will be drawn. $1 billion and $2 billion. Based on our review of design documents as well as interviews with cognizant agency staff, there has been substantial improvement in this area since our last review. The design lacked specifics in the procurement portion of the pilot, which made it difficult to determine how much it would cost. The cost of the project is expected to be in the region of $1.5 billion to $2billion. The project is scheduled to begin construction in 2015, with a completion date in 2016. reviewed over 200 comments on the draft guidance. The final guidance, OMB M-17-04, was issued on November 4, 2016. OMB has made some progress with these efforts, but other data definitions still need to be addressed. As required by the DATA Act, O MB is conducting a pilot to test the data before the reporting deadline of January 1, 2017. An OMB document commended these agencies for developing robust contingency plans since this will better position them for timely implementation. However, long-term reporting solutions are still needed. August 2016, in response to our prior recommendation, OMB established procedures for reviewing and using agency implementation plan updates. OMB states that it has received input from a significant number of agency staff via office hours, emails, regular meetings, agency visits, and other methods regarding the challenges agencies are experiencing as they work toward implementation since the submission of their original plans. The document stated that requiring agencies to update plans will allow OMB to address challenges that agencies are not directly reaching out to OMB about. information on the status of efforts to address our previous recommendations related to agency implementation plans. To assess efforts to date to operationalize government-wide standards, we reviewed OMB policy guidance intended to facilitate agency reporting. We also interviewed OMB staff and Treasury officials to obtain information about plans for additional guidance as well as to assess the extent to which issued guidance is responsive to agency questions, requests for additional clarity on their reporting requirements, or both. We met with OMB and met with Treasury officials. for guidance on insurance and indemnity reporting, but no guidance has been issued. Absent any new guidance, they plan to report insurance as they have under the Federal Funding and Accountability and Transparency Act of 2006 (FFATA) OMB staff told us that they received feedback from 30 different agencies and that they have received no new guidance from the White House on the issue. The White House has not commented on the matter. For confidential support, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. In May 2016, OMB released additional guidance on reporting financial and award information required under a minimum, that data reported are based on appropriate internal controls and risk management strategies. Table 3 shows the information that OMB required CFO Act agencies to include in their implementation plan updates. See table 5 in appendix III for descriptions of the categories of mitigating strategies and the number of C FO Act agencies that report using strategies from each category. For confidential support call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. In June 2016, OMB directed the 24 CFO Act agencies to update their initial DATA Act implementation plans that they submitted in response to OMB’s Act reporting requirements. OMB will schedule these visits by reviewing the implementation plan updates and discerning which agencies appear to be experiencing the most challenges to implementation. 11 of the 24 agencies highlighted challenges related to the affect successful implementation. 16 of the agencies reported challenges for some agencies as changes in the guidance may require them to re-work some of their implementation project plans. OMB, Treasury, CNCS, HHS, and GSA provided us with technical comments which we incorporated as appropriate. OMB and Treasury also provided written comments which are summarized below and reproduced in appendices IV and V. USDA had no comments.Community Service; and the Administrator of the General Services Administration for review and comment. community service.org. communityservice.org: http://www.cns.org/news/press-releases/2013/01/30/news-reporters-and-public-commentators-get-a-look-at-the-secretary-of-defense-budget.html#storylink=cpy. factors, we chose the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) and the Corporation for National and Community Service (CNCS) Although the information obtained from these three agencies is not generalizable to all agencies, they illustrate a range of conditions under which agencies are implementing. For more information, visit www.cnn.com/news/features/2013/01/26/health-and-human-services-changes-in-the-workplace/story.html. on these efforts and others and have identified a number of ongoing challenges that will need to be addressed in order to successfully meet the act’s requirements. Among other challenges, agencies indicated the need for additional guidance on reporting intergovernmental transfers, providing assurances over their data, and reporting insurance information. OMB and Treasury have made progress but still need to fully address the recommendations we have made in our previous reports. For example, officials from USDA, one of our case example agencies, told us that they are waiting of these efforts. well as the composition and responsibilities of its members. According to OMB staff, members include representatives from a range of federal communities including the grants, procurement, financial management and human resources communities. Members of several interagency councils including the Chief Information Officers Council and the Performance Improvement Council are also included in the OMB's new Council of Advisors on the President's Workplace for the White House (COTWP). The COTWP was established in 2009 to advise the president on how to improve the nation's workplace for the better. iv. Obtaining input from stakeholders and involving them in key decisions, as appropriate. v. Delineating roles and responsibilities for decision-making and accountability, including roles, responsibilities for stakeholder input on key decisions. V. OMB and Treasury have not yet institutionalized and clearly documented policies and procedures that are consistent with these policies and practices. The report was published by the Government Accountability Office (GAO) on November 14, 2013. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org. additional details about the methodology that would be used to assess this expanded capability in the future. We provided a draft of this report to the Secretaries of Agriculture, Health and Human Services, and the Treasury; the Director of OMB; the Chief Executive Officer of the Corporation of National and the CEO of the National Institutes of Health. We also provided additional details about how we would assess the capability of the U.S. military in the near future. The report is available to the public on the White House website. guidance provided by OMB and Treasury in their implementation plan updates. One of the commonly cited challenges concerned complications arising due to the iterative nature or late release of the guidance. We are sending copies of this report to the Secretaries of Agriculture, Health and Human Services, and the Treasury; the Director of OMB; and the Chief Executive Officer of the Department of Agriculture. For more information, visit www.whitehouse.gov/administration/whitehouse-department-of-agriculture. as a result of the aggressive implementation timelines specified in the act and the complexity associated with linking hundreds of disconnected data elements across the federal government, they made the decision to use an iterative approach to provide incremental technical guidance to agencies. According to Treasury, among other things, this includes providing incremental guidance to federal agencies on how to use the new data system. The new system is expected to be fully operational by the end of the year, according to Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin. It will be rolled out in phases, starting with the National Security Agency. Treasury to obtain information on the status of efforts to address our previous recommendation related to the provision of policy guidance. To examine the technical structure and specifications for reporting, we assessed Treasury’s processes for developing technical guidance and reviewed applicable technical documentation related to schema version, 1.0 and 1.1. We also reviewed applicableTechnicalDocumentation related to Schema Version 1.2.0, which is the most recent version of the IRS-regulated reporting system. We concluded that Treasury has made progress in its efforts to provide technical guidance to the IRS. communications, employing manual and temporary workarounds, monitoring and developing guidance, and enhancing existing systems. These strategies, as a whole, were similar to the mitigating strategies reported by agencies in their initial implementation plans. The most commonly reported categories of mitigating strategies were changing internal policies and procedures, leveraging existing systems, and changing existing communication methods and practices. The strategies were reported to be similar to those reported in agencies' initial Implementation Plans, according to the study. The study was published in the journal Cybersecurity and Incident Management, published by the Center for Security Studies. change and transition. The transition to a new administration presents one such situation. We have previously reported that, given the importance of continuity when implementing complex, government-wide initiatives, the potential for gaps in leadership that can occur as administrations change can impact the effectiveness and efficiency of such efforts. It is important to ensure that the transition is smooth and that there is continuity in leadership. It's also important to make sure that there are no gaps in the leadership that occur as a result of the change. documents. Each of these analyst assessments were subsequently verified by a second analyst. We determined that the design met the criteria when we saw evidence that all aspects of a leading practice were met. When we were unable to assess whether all aspects were met, we did not determine whether the design meeting the criteria was the right design. The design was ultimately approved by a panel of experts at the University of California, Los Angeles, and the design was approved by the design team at the U.S. headquarters. determined that the design partially met the criteria. When we saw no evidence of a leading practice, or if we identified a critical gap or shortcoming related to the practice, we determined that the criteria were not met. In continuation of our constructive engagement approach for working with agencies, we will continue to look for ways to improve the quality of our work. We are committed to working with our clients to improve their quality of work and to provide them with the best possible service. We will continue our constructive approach to our work with agencies. Del Toro (Assistant Director), Michael LaForge (Assistant director), Kathleen Drennan (analyst-in- charge), Diane Morris (Analyst- in-charge), Michelle Sager, Shirley Hwang, Aaron Colsher, Katherine Morris, Sophia Tan, Thomas Hackney, Charles Jones, Laura Pacheco, Maria Belaval, Carrol Warfield, Jr., Mark Canter, James Sweetman, Jr. Andrew J. Stephens, Carl Ramirez and Jenny Chanley made the list. the Corporation of National and Community Service; the Administrator of the General Services Administration; as well as interested congressional committees and other interested parties. This report will be available at no charge on our website at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staff has any questions about this report, please contact J. J. Smith at j.j.smith@cnn.com or call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-TALK (8255). major contributions to this report. Additional members of GAO’s DATA Act Internal Working Group also contributed to the development of the report. The report was compiled by the GAO and the Department of Health and Human Services’ Office of the Inspector General for the Office of Management and Budget. For more information, go to GAO.gov and the Office for the Inspector general for the Health Care Professionals, or go to http://www.gao.gov/. For more on the Data Act, click here. Contact points for our Offices of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of our report. Key contributors to this report are listed in appendix IV. This review is based on a report by the Government Accountability Office, published by the Department of the Treasury. The GAO is an independent agency that advises the Treasury Department on issues of national security, foreign policy, and international affairs. For confidential support, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. as well as tracking of these funds at multiple points in the federal spending lifecycle. The act also calls for the federal government to set government-wide data standards, identify ways to reduce reporting burdens for grantees and contractors (Section 5 Pilot) and regularly review data quality to help improve the quality of the data. The bill is expected to be signed into law by the end of the year. It will be the first of its kind in the history of the U.S. federal government. will be applicable to many other federal procurement reporting requirements. By addressing issues such as this and continuing to focus on implementing the act, the administration greatly increases the likelihood of creating a system that will achieve the goals of the act. The goal is to increase the transparency of financial information and improve the process of procurement reporting. The act is expected to be fully implemented by the end of the year, according to the White House. It is intended to be used to improve the transparency and accountability of federal procurement. (1) collect data during a 12-month reporting cycle; (2) include a diverse group of federal award recipients and, to the extent practicable, recipients that receive federal awards from multiple programs across multiple agencies. (3) Include a combination of federal contracts, grants, and subawards with an aggregate value between $1 million and $10 million. For more information, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/29/technology/top-10-most-cnn-cannabis-recipients-2013/story. issues we identified. To address these concerns, OMB released draft guidance in August 2016 that specifies DATA Act reporting responsibilities when an intragovernmental transfer (both allocation transfers and buy/sell transfers) is involved. OMB’s by the agency, such as data submitted by non-federal entities who receive federal awards. The guidance provides assurances that data submitted to Treasury for publication on USASpending.gov is sufficiently valid and reliable. It also establishes linkage between agency award and financial systems using a unique award identifier. identifier to generate award financial data will likely be a manual process. The lack of properly integrated systems increases the risk that agencies may have difficulty compiling and validating the information they are required to report under the DATA Act. The May 2017 reporting deadline for agencies to submit is May 31, 2017. For confidential support call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. For support in the UK, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here. reported for security reasons. Broker also extracts award and sub-award information from existing government-wide award reporting systems. This function was added during software development efforts in late 2012. The broker also helps ensure these files are in the standard format. It helps agencies in collecting and validating agency- generated data, the broker says. It was added to the broker's software during late 2012, when it was still being developed. It also helps agencies collect and validate agency-generated data, it says. GSA awarded NuAxis the contract to build the prototype from information obtained as a result of the 18F prototype process. GSA is exploring how an electronic certified payroll reporting portal could reduce contractor burden for federal Davis-Bacon contracts. In August 2016, GSA’s Federal Acquisition Service, the implementation lead for the pilot, awarded Nu Axis the Contract to Build the Prototype to build a Payroll Reporting Portal for the Federal Davis Bacon Contractor. The contract was worth $1.2 million. NuAxis is developing a web-based reporting interface that will allow users to centrally enter and submit certified payroll data. They plan to make this interface compatible with other existing systems, such as the System for Award Management (SAM) and Wage Determination Online. NuAxis says it will be available in September 2016, and will be compatible with existing systems such as SAM and wage determination online. For confidential support call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. practices for effective pilot design. OMB intends to broaden the pilot’s initial focus on centralizing certified payroll reporting to other types of FAR-required reporting. HHS has taken a number of steps to pilot has improved substantially. However, despite advances in several areas, the current design remains limited by its lack of specifics regarding how a pilot focused on assessing contractors’ experiences with a centralized portal designed for payroll reporting. The pilot design raises questions about whether the pilot design will meet its stated objective of reducing procurement reporting burden more broadly. of contractors required to submit certified payroll reports in compliance with Davis Bacon requirements. The revised procurement pilot design contains a sampling plan that provides criteria for selecting a diverse group of participants. We found some areas where the revised procurement design does not fully reflect leading contractors, the report says. The report says the government needs to make sure that it is selecting the right people for the program. It also says that the program needs to be more transparent and transparent about how it is choosing its contractors and staff. the potential usefulness of a centralized reporting portal to reduce reporting burden. However, the plan does not take the next step of clearly describing and documenting how findings related to centralized certified payroll reporting will be more broadly applicable to the many other types of required reporting under the FAR. This should include documenting the extent to which recommendations based on data collected for certify payroll reporting would be scalable to other FAR- required reporting and providing a set of recommendations for how to use the data. The portal will be used to test hypotheses related to reducing reporting burden involving other procurement reporting requirements. beyond citing general concepts such as data pre-population and system integration. More specifically, the current design lacks a plan for testing the assumption that the experiences contractors have with centralized certified payroll reporting will be similar when they use the system to meet different reporting requirements and other databases. This is a problem that needs to be addressed, says the company's chief operating officer, John W. Wozniacki. The company is also looking for a partner to help with the development of the system. GSA officials said the centralized reporting portal that would be used to collect data on certified payroll did not receive the required Authority to Operate. The portal did not include necessary security measures to protect the PII, officials said. GSA officials expect to be able to begin the pilot program in the next few weeks, they said. The pilot program will be limited to contractors participating in the pilot, the GSA said, and it will be funded through a federal contract with a private company. with personally identifiable information (PII), and clarifies the SAO assurance process over the data submitted to the broker. OMB staff told us that this most recent policy guidance was drafted in response to questions and concerns reported by agencies in their implementation plan updates, as well in meetings with senior senior OMB officials. The new policy guidance is available on the OMB's website and can be downloaded for free. For more information, visit OMB’s website and the agency’S official blog. OMB staff and GSA officials informed us that they decided to delay launching the portal to conduct the procurement portion of the pilot in order to ensure that security procedures designed to protect personally identifiable information (PII) were in place.(WDOL) to access relevant data sources. In late November 2016, OMB staff told us that the portal would not be launched until after the procurement phase of the program was completed. In the meantime,WDOL will be able to access the data sources for the pilot program. OMB staff said that despite the security-related delay, they still plan on collecting 12 months of data through the procurement pilot as required by the act. In order to meet the act’s requirement that OMB deliver a report to Congress on ways to reduce recipient reporting burden by August 2017, OMB staff told us that they plan to only include data collected up to June or July 2017. OMB plans to analyze this data, compare it to the smaller data set and incorporate them into the report. provides additional details regarding the procurement portion’s intended assessment methodology. It specifies that participants will submit payroll information to the centralized test portal on a weekly basis. OMB will use focus groups to collect qualitative data from agency staff that use these data for contract management and oversight. It will also use a focus group to collect quantitative data from agencies that use the data to manage contract management, oversight, and other aspects of the program. The test is expected to be completed by the end of the year. is of particular concern given the diversity of reporting requirements contained in the FAR. In fact, OMB staff have identified over 100 different types of FAR reporting requirements with different reporting frequencies, mechanisms, and required information. OMB Staff told us that they expect to test the centralized portal on other platforms as well as the FAR portal for the first time on Monday, October 1. The portal is expected to be available by the end of the month, according to the OMB. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. types of FAR-required reporting and the revised design briefly mentions other FAR requirements such as those for service contracts and affirmative action plans. The absence of an assessment methodology and an approach to test the report is a major omission. The revised design does not provide any details on how this will be done. The report also does not include any information on how the report will be interpreted by the FAA and other agencies. It does not mention how it will be used to assess the report's accuracy and completeness. It also doesn't provide any information about how the Report will be analyzed. HHS developed six “test models” to evaluate different approaches to potentially reducing grantee reporting burden. GSA’s 18F completed a prototype for the procurement portion of the Section 5 Pilot at the end of May 2016 and presented it to OMB in June 2016. 18F’S role was to work emailing additional prospects, if needed, in order to reach an established minimum number of participants for each test model. OMB’‘s Office of Federal Procurement Policy (OFPP) worked emailing extra prospects. with GSA’s 18F to develop and test a proof of concept reporting portal for reports required by the Federal Acquisition Regulation (FAR) In March 2016, a revised plan describing the portal will be released to the public. The portal will provide centralized reporting of certified payroll by contractors working construction projects in the U.S. It will be available to all contractors working in the United States by the end of the year, GSA says. For confidential support call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/.