Non-bank financial firms is important to understanding the FSOC. Many of the new powers attempt to create a regulatory and resolution regime for non-banks that is similar to the way depository banks are handled. The term bank generally refers to financial institutions with bank, thrift, banks coordinate through the Federal Financial Institutions Examinations Council (FFIEC) Resolution of failing depository Banks is done administratively by the FDIC (or NCUA for credit unions), not through the bankruptcy courts. failing may under certain conditions be resolved by the FDIC rather than through the bankruptcy process. The FSOC may set aside some financial regulations for consumers if the rules might cause systemic risk, under certain circumstances. The distinction between depository banks and disclosures, short-term debt limits, and such other prudential standards as the Board of Governors, on its own or pursuant to a recommendation made by the FSOC, determines are appropriate. The FDIC has had the authority to administratively resolve insured depositories (banks and thrifts) that fail. For banks that accept deposits insured by the FDIC, technically "insured depositories," the general prudential regulatory approach and resolution regimes were relatively unchanged. For large, complex non-banks, the DFA instructs the FSOC to identify which firms are systemically important, designates the Fed as the prudential regulator of these firms. The FDIC can resolve covered non- Banks outside the bankruptcy courts under certain circumstances. The DFA extends this authority to certain large and complex non.bank financial companies, under some circumstances. of the bankruptcy process for this firm. The powers and duties of the FDIC with respect to resolving systemic firms are set out in over any of the firms' subsidiaries that pose systemic risk. The FDIC is to pay valid obligations, subject to its systemic risk determinations. TheFDIC's resolution is intended to ensure that shareholders and unsecured creditors bear losses. The bank is to be liquidated in an orderly way. The firm will be sold to a private equity firm, which will then be sold off to the public. Section 210 of DFA. Essentially, the FDIC is the successor to the failing firm. The FDIC has the firms' rights, titles, and privileges. It takes over the functions of the firm's officers, directors, and shareholders. TheFDIC has powers to take over the assets of a failing firm, with rights of collection. It also has the power to take control of a firm's assets, including the right to seize them. It has the powers to seize the assets, such as the bank's real estate assets, and the company's shares. provide and maintain resolution plans (so-called living wills), which must be jointly approved by the Fed and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) The DFA establishes a regulatory framework of which the FSOC is a consultative council. The new regulatory regime has six basic policy tools with which to pursue, the DFA said in a statement. It added that the new regime will provide the Fed with a range of new tools to pursue its mission to protect consumers and the financial system. FDIC may pay resolution costs as described in Section 204(d) of the DFA. Once a resolution has been undertaken, the FDIC has reporting requirements to the FSOC and to Congress. After 60 days, theFDIC must deliver a written report to the appropriate congressional committees, providing additional details of the resolution. The FDIC must also provide additional details to Congress after 60 days. The resolution was completed by the end of the first quarter of 2013. The settlement is expected to be completed within the next few weeks. The Secretary may request a determination that a financial firm will default or is likely to default, with a systemic impact, and then appoint the FDIC as receiver. The determination requires two-thirds vote of both the Fed and FDIC board. Among the eight factors that the determination must address are the likelihood that the non-bank will default; a description of likely financial instability that could result from default; the recommended actions under liquidation authority; and an explanation of perceived deficiency. In trigger the resolution regime under theFDIC. coordinate prudential supervision and regulation for all highly leveraged and interconnected financial companies. The Secretary plays a role in recommending receivership procedures for failing firms that have been designated as systemic. Although the Fed and the FDIC can make their own request for a receivership of a systemic firm based in the U.S., the Treasury Department can make its own request. The Treasury Department is responsible for supervising and regulating the nation's financial institutions. It is also responsible for overseeing the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) receivership. These additional details include but are not limited to (1) describing the financial condition of the failing firm at the time of receivership, (2) describing FDIC's plan to resolve the failing Firm, and (3) describing reasons for the provision of any funding to the receivership out of the Receiver's Fund. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. FDIC to act as receiver. Secretary must notify certain majority and ranking members of Congress within 24 hours of the appointment. Rules and regulations that the FDIC issues for the use of funds pursuant to receivership must be acceptable to the Secretary. The FDIC is to provide to the secretary and the comptroller general an annual accounting report of receiverships. The Secretary has a number of roles regarding orderly liquidation plans of covered institutions. Amounts are subject to approval by the Secretary of the Treasury. The FDIC must consult with the Secretary to obtain a second extension of the time limit for the receivership. Once a recommendation for receivership has been made, the Secretary is to make the determination and findings that should be made. The Secretary petitions the courts if the covered firm objects to the determination. The FDIC can also apply for an extension to the deadline if it feels it is in a position to do so. The deadline for a decision to be made on a receivership is December 31, 2014. from the resolution fund to support orderly liquidation under a liquidation plan must be acceptable to the Secretary. The FDIC is to assure the Secretary of a repayment plan for the orderlyLiquidation plan, and the Secretary is to agree to the repayment plan. Amendments to an orderly Liquidation Plan must beacceptable to the Department of the Treasury. The Secretary must also agree to an amendment to the orderlyliquidation plan that is acceptable to both the FDIC and the Treasury, and must be agreed to by both parties. Congressional staff may be interested in the organization, actions, and assessments of the FSOC. If a systemic financial event were to occur, a covered non-bank financial institution were to fail, and when the Secretary of the Treasury offers testimony to Congress. The Secretary must testify before the House Committee on Financial Services and the Senate Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs in conjunction with the release of the report. Otherwise, meetings may be called by a majority of the members, but shall be held at least quarterly. reports must be completed at least every five years. The Secretary of the Treasury has a consultative role with the OFR. The OFR is responsible for certain research functions related to those reports and in other areas. The Fed, along with the Secretary, negotiates with foreign regulators and multilateral organizations to negotiate with foreign governments and agencies. The U.S. Treasury Department is the largest source of revenue for the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and the New York Federal Reserve. The Treasury Department has the second-largest share of the federal budget, after the Fed. special roles that some members have with respect to these six policy tools. The FSOC has 10 voting members and 5 nonvoting members. The council is chaired by the Secretary of the Treasury. Voting members include prudential bank regulators (e.g., the Office of the Superintendent of Bankruptcy) and the Treasury Department's Office of Thrift and Clerical Security (OTC). The council also includes members from the Federal Reserve and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), among others. Nonvoting members include state level representatives from bank, securities, and insurance regulators, as well as an independent insurance expert appointed by the President, with Senate confirmation. Members also include securities market regulators (e.g., the Commodity Futures Trading Commission [CFTC] and the SEC), and independent insurance experts with Senate confirmations. The full Senate is expected to vote on the bill in the next few days, and the full House will vote in the following weeks. The vote will be followed by a vote by the full Senate, and then the House. The Secretary serves as the chair of the council. The chair has a number of powers and responsibilities related to FSOC meetings, congressional reports and testimony, and certain rulemakings and recommendations. As chair, the Secretary may call meetings that differ from the other members of theCouncil. The Secretary may also call meetings where the chair is the only member of the Council. The Chair has the power to call meetings in which the Secretary is the sole member. The Chairman has the responsibility of calling meetings that are not the Secretary's. The FSOC is composed of the heads of the agencies that regulate financial institutions and markets. The council has its own permanent staff in the newly created Office of Financial Research (OFR) that collects data on the financial system. OFR is housed within the Department of the Treasury, although it is funded separately. Its mission is to identify sources of financial instability that cross agency regulatory jurisdiction, or that reside in gaps in the financial regulatory framework. its mission. 1. Coordination. 2. Data collection and evaluation. 3. Prudential regulation. to act without further approval from the FSOC as a whole. However, with regard to actions taken for particular firms, these three agencies will often be relying on shared FSOC resources, such as the information provided by the OFR, or will coordinate actions with the firm's primary regulator, which will act as a primary regulator for the firm. For more information, visit www.fsoc.org.uk/regulations. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here. Treasury Secretary has a number of important functions on the FSOC addressing financial market instability has always been a core mission of the Fed. The FDIC's role in resolving non-banks if the firm's failure is perceived as a threat to financial instability is beyond the scope of this report. The heads of these three agencies would be acting as members of FSOC, or in their agency's independent capacity. The Fed will not only be a lender of last resort, and conduct monetary policy, but the Fed will also have additional supervision and examination authority for individual non- banks designated by the FS OC. as the directors from the OFR and the Federal Insurance Office (FIO) Several agencies have special roles in addressing the kinds of systemic risks that the FSOC was designed to monitor. The DFA grants specific authority under certain circumstances for the Secretary of the Treasury, the Fed, and the FDIC the annual FSOC report. If any member agencies have notified Congress of deficiencies in systemic risk efforts, the Secretary is to address those concerns at the hearing. The Secretary has special powers regarding the designation of systemic non-bank firms. Under Section 113(a)(1), a two-thirds vote is required a systemically significant firm. Section 112 of DFA lists three purposes of the FSOC. The DFA does not define the terms financial stability or systemic risk. The first FSOC annual report (2011) described some essential features of financial stability. The mission of theFSOC is to help avoid financial activities, practices, and regulations that might spread or destabilize the financial system, the report says. The FSOC's mission is to promote market discipline by reducing expectations of federal financial support for failing institutions, according to the report. In 2010, the Dodd Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act ( P.L. 111-203), also known as the Dodd-Frank Act (DFA), established a new regulatory framework to address financial market instability. Included in that framework was the creation of the Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC), the Federal Reserve to decide what is an appropriate new financial activity for a financial subsidiary. The council is tasked with identifying and monitoring systemic risks to the U.S. financial system, reducing expectations of extraordinary government intervention. payment) and have limited eligible investments. Other investors may have a greater temptation to "reach for yield" by investing in more risky categories of investments, increasing the likelihood of asset bubbles in other markets. The FSOC notes a number of initiatives to mitigate the risks when it comes to bond market buyers to accept credit risk (i.e., the risk that borrowers will not pay back fully and on time). Provisions for credit losses and loan losses have declined recently, the FSOC says. Investors that money market mutual funds exposed to holders of mortgage-related assets could be in financial trouble. If correct, it would be difficult to construct or estimate a firm-specific index of systemic risk arising from this type of contagion. The next section discusses the membership of the FSOC, and the next section talks about the size of the U.S. mortgage market and the potential impact of a housing crisis on the financial sector in the United States and around the rest of the world. on the firm's creditors and other counterparties; (5) the likelihood of FSOC resolution avoiding or mitigating systemic risks, its likely cost to the general fund of the Treasury, and the potential of receivership resulting in excessive risk taking by the firm or its creditors; and (6) moral hazard, i.e. moral hazard resulting in the firm taking too much risk on the part of its creditors or counterparties. The report concludes that FSOC is likely to avoid or mitigate systemic risks. The FSOC was created to address some of the perceived weaknesses that may have contributed to the magnitude of the financial crisis of 2008. These perceived weaknesses included identification of risks to the financial system as a whole; lack of coordination among financial regulators; inadequate supervision of large, complex financial institutions. "A stable financial system should not be the source of, nor amplify the impact of, shocks," the FSOC says in its annual report. "There are three main risks that a financial system might transmit shocks," it says. Central bankers' views of ways that failing firms can damage financial stability. Federal Reserve Governor Daniel Tarullo identified four such ways that in his view are most common. Domino effects occur when a firm fails and its failure has a domino effect on the rest of the economy. The FSOC's approach addresses commonly understood channels of risk proliferation, one might examine. One might examine whether the FSOC’s approach addresses common understood ways that risk proliferation occurs, such as when a company fails and the domino effects follow. th Congress. This report will discuss the FSOC's mission and issues it is intended to address in Section I. Section III will analyze the perceived threats to financial stability as identified in law and by the. FSOC in its 2013 annual Fund, and (4) explaining the expected costs of resolving the firm. The following sections analyze specific threats mentioned in the 2013 FSOC annual report. For each topic, the reader is provided a for each topic to help with reading comprehension and vocabulary. The reader is also provided a summary of each topic for each section. expectations that some firms are too big to fail (i.e., that policymakers will be unwilling to let the firms fail because of potential collateral damage caused by resorting to the bankruptcy process) The following sections provide more detail on the mission, members, and recommendations of the FSOC during the 113th session of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York Board of Governors. The mission and members of the board are described in more detail in the next section of the report. The report will be published in full in the spring of 2015. distress sales by lenders can magnify a downward spiral in prices. Both asset-backed commercial paper and repos use forms of collateral and may be subject to fire sales. FSOC's Perspective The 2013 annual report notes some positive and negative developments (from the FSOC perspective) in wholesale funding. On the positive side, the report notes that the U.S. Federal Reserve has taken steps to reduce the cost of funding for small businesses in the wake of the Great Recession. The report also highlights that the Fed is taking steps to help small businesses, such as reducing the costs of borrowing. confidential information or disrupt their telecommunications (cyberattacks) The 2013 annual report noted several initiatives to address operational issues. For example as discussed in the wholesale funding section above, the tri-party repo task force has recommended improvements to the settlement and clearing processes in among the two central clearing centers. The 2013 report was published by the Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC) on October 1, 2013. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. FSOC to restore private capital as the primary source of long-term mortgage funding, along with improvements in consumer protection and financial stability. House prices have begun rising in a number of areas, default rates and foreclosures are no of economic recovery in general and housing in particular. There may be regulatory uncertainty as federal agencies implement changes to regulations related to the mortgage market. On the positive side, the 2013 annual report says that there has been significant improvement in mortgage markets, but additional progress is needed. assisted sources of funding increased markedly as a share of all mortgage funding in 2008. At the origination level, the mortgage market share of Federal Housing Administration (FHA) loans increased even for borrowers who could offer significant down payments with their house purchase. Private mortgage securitization increased at the wholesale level, according to the report. The U.S. economy grew at a faster rate than the global economy in 2008, the report said. It added that the economy grew faster than the rest of the world in the second quarter of 2008. The conservatorship agreements (Treasury Preferred Stock Purchase Agreements, PSPAs) have been modified to expedite the wind-down of the retained portfolios of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. Regulatory uncertainty in mortgage markets may be reduced by the publication of final rules for the Real Estate Settlement Procedures (RESP) The RESP is expected to be published by the end of the year and could reduce the uncertainty in the mortgage market for the next few years. The FSOC's perspective is that this will reduce the need for the government to intervene in the housing market. exchange rate, expansionary monetary policies can cause exchange rates to depreciate, and thus exports to rise and imports to fall. But one country's declining imports is another country's decline in exports, and policymakers need to coordinate across countries to avoid competitive devaluation. FSOC's Perspective: The U.S. needs to coordinate its monetary policy with other countries in order to prevent competitive devaluations in the global economy and the world economy at large. For more information, go to: http://www.fsoc.org/. in Japan, which have contributed to a depreciation of the Yen. The FSOC took the view that "the U.S. has a strong financial stability interest in Japan finally escaping from deflation and securing more robust growth" This glossary has been compiled from several earlier CRS reports on the Japanese economy. It is intended to be a starting point for a discussion of some of the issues raised by the CRS in its reports on Japan and the yen. The CRS has no plans to publish a full version of this glossary at this time. 2013 FSOC report addressed several issues related to global financial stability. The FSOC noted a number of positive developments in Europe, including the potential for the European Central Bank (ECB) to purchase sovereign debt of member states under some circumstances. However, the report also noted that banking disruptions and policy could have a negative impact on financial stability in the long-term. The report was published by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD). responses in Cyprus (which briefly cast doubt on the status of insured bank deposits) create downside risk. The FSOC report also noted that austerity programs in Europe have "contributed to a contraction in euro-area economies," although euro area deficits may also have declined. The report also discussed expansionary monetary policies in the euro area, including the possibility of an interest rate hike in the future, and the impact of such a move on the Eurozone's financial stability and economic recovery in the long term. brief description of the issue, how it might contribute to a systemic event, and an analysis of the FSOC's report. Although commercial banks raise significant funds through insured deposits, banks and other financial institutions also use a variety of other funding sources. Many of these alternative funding sources, however, are not insured by the FDIC or other government agencies. The FDIC has no obligation to provide insured deposits to banks, but it does have a duty to protect depositors' interests. The FSOC has an obligation to ensure that insured deposits are not used as a source of funding. banks to reduce their intra-day credit exposure. The SEC recently proposed Regulation Systems Compliance and Integrity (Regulation SCI) to try to address malfunctions in capital markets. Future interest rate changes may be a factor in the future of the capital markets, the FSOC said in its 2013 report. The report was published by the SEC's Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC) on October 1. It was released to the public on October 2. It is available online at: http://www.fsoc.org/2013/09/02/financial-stability-observations.html. rates rise for the "wrong" reason, a second credit crunch, the FSOC notes. The measurable financial resilience of major banks (such as capital levels and measures of liquidity) have improved. Issue Area Fiscal policy refers to the relationship of government revenues and spending. Typically, recessions cause government revenues to fall. The FSOC says this is not the case in the U.S. and that it is likely to change in the future. The report was published by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. that governments are likely to intervene to prevent an eventual bankruptcy. This lower perceived risk of default may result in creditors being willing to offer the firms loans on easier terms than their less interconnected competitors. Big firms may thus gain funding advantages over smaller competitors, reinforcing the tendency for governments to intervene in the financial sector to prevent a default by big firms. It could also lead to a rise in the cost of borrowing for big firms, leading to a fall in the value of their shares and an increase in their borrowing costs. institutions and markets with large exposure to that country's debt. At a minimum, exposed institutions may find it difficult to find counterparties for new transactions and may suffer withdrawals, or refusals to renew loans. The resulting financial instability can cause credit to dry up, interest rates to rise and the economy to suffer from a slowdown or even a recession. It can also lead to an increase in the cost of living for people living in the country with the largest exposure to the debt. The possibility that the market for normally-liquid assets will suddenly dry up, leaving firms unable to convert assets into cash. Also, the risk that other firms will refuse to extend credit on any.and sellers present. The ability of a person or firm to access credit markets. The risk of losing access to credit markets and the ability to find buyers and sellers. The possibility of being forced to sell assets for less than the price they were worth at the time of the sale. The cost of selling assets to a buyer or seller. There are a number of channels through which financial instability can cross borders. For example, the failure of a global bank could cause cross-border resolution issues. Capital flights away from some countries can cause global investment money (i.e., hot money) to flood other countries. This can magnify the financial difficulties of the sovereign experiencing the financial stress. It can also lead to competitive currency devaluations and capital flight away from certain countries. It could also cause hot money to flood some countries and rise, and may magnify their financial difficulties. Recent events in Europe have cast serious doubt on this simplifying assumption. Changes in the perceived risk of the debt of sovereigns are potential threats to financial stability. Financial institutions and financial systems do not typically retain capital buffers against the possibility of sovereign debt restructuring, or in the extreme a sovereign default. The mere change in the perception of risk can cause people to try to avoid sovereign debt. It can also lead to people trying to take on too much debt at too high a price. It is a risk-free asset. It should be treated as such. in some cases cause asset bubbles in the recipient country. Sovereign debt problems or banking policies in one country can cast doubt on the reliability of government debts or guarantees in other countries. In introductory finance classes, sovereign debt of the governments of developed economies is often characterized as 'unsafe' and 'unsustainable' in some cases. In some cases, the problem can be traced back to a single country, such as the U.S. in the 1970s and 1980s. In the 1990s and 2000s, it was blamed on a series of countries including the UK, Germany, France and Italy. There is no formal way to address a sovereign default. No international bankruptcy law applies to sovereigns. European sovereign debt crises have been a series of evolving government funding and banking crises. Even if central banks target their domestic economies rather than their sovereigns, the contagion could be spread. The European Central Bank has said it is ready to act if needed to prevent the spread of contagion. The ECB has also said that it is prepared to intervene if necessary to prevent contagion from the eurozone to other countries. The FSOC does not see a gradual normalization of long-term Treasury yields and volatilities as a significant threat to fiscal imbalances or the wider economy. However, the long-runImbalances could threaten financial instability if there is a sudden spike in yields. The FSOC notes that the financial impact of potentially disruptive short-run fiscal events has had "minimal impact" thus far. U.S. debt is still seen as a safe harbor despite the automatic tax increases and spending cuts at the start of 2013. running extended fiscal deficits. In the short run, governments with large fiscal imbalances run the risk that investors may suddenly demand higher yields to roll-over existing debt. Unlike Cyprus or Greece, short-term fiscal problems of the United States could be cushioned by purchases of Treasury securities by the Fed (which would be likely because a Fed would buy Treasury securities) The U.S. has been viewed as a safe haven for some foreign investors and central banks, according to the IMF. fiscal cliff) and the February 2013 debt ceiling debates. Similarly, the downgrade of U.S. Treasury securities by Standard & Poor's did not cause a significant spike in Treasury yields. Financial instability overseas can threaten financial stability in the United States. There are many ways in which financial markets are global; therefore, financial instability abroad can threaten U.K. financial stability. There is no single solution to global financial instability; there are many different ways to deal with it, such as by focusing on the global economy. decline and government spending to rise (fiscal policy expands) Economic booms can cause fiscal policy to contract if government revenues expand faster than government spending. Long-term fiscal policy refers to the balance between expected government spending and revenues over an extended period of time. Although recessions and booms cause fluctuations in short-term Fiscal Policy, long-term Policy is more stable than short-lived fluctuations in fiscal policy. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from. extended time horizon. CBO and other projections of long-term fiscal policy project an imbalance between expected federal revenues and expected federal spending for an extended period of time. Thus far, the U.S. has not experienced any backlash in bond markets for the fiscal imbalance, according to the CBO. It is not clear if the imbalance will change in the coming years, however, or if there will be a backlash in the bond markets in the future. The U.N. Security Council is expected to vote on a new budget resolution this week, which could lead to more spending cuts. There are several examples of rising interest rates contributing interest rates do rise. Investigations and prosecutions related to LIBOR (and similar reference rates) may reduce the incentive to misreport. The FSOC did express concern at potential reaches for yield, noting that the interest rate market is still highly sensitive to changes in the global economy and the global financial system. But it also noted that interest rates are still very low compared to the rest of the U.S. and other developed countries. It added that the current environment is not a good one for banks to seek yield. Under-reporting of LIBOR rates in 2008 may have given financial regulators an overoptimistic view of the lending ability of major financial institutions during the liquidity crunch at that time. There are several reasons for this, including the end of the housing bubble (which would have ended eventually, but perhaps not at the time) and the impact of the global financial crisis in 2007-2008 on the global economy and the economy in general. The U.S. Federal Reserve has said it will continue to monitor LIBOR and other benchmark rates. Rising rates in the 1970s and 1980s created a great deal of stress for banks. Banks funded long-term mortgages with short-term deposits. Rising rates in 1994 caused a significant sell-off in the bond market. Rising Rates during 2004-2006 contributed. to stress in the financial system. The U.S. Federal Reserve raised its interest rates to a record-high of 7.5 per cent in December. The move is expected to continue for at least the next few years. issuance of high yield bonds (riskier classes of bonds) had increased markedly, and that underwriting standards for collateralized loan obligations (CLOs) had reportedly loosened. Threats to financial stability posed by rising rates are mitigated in part by one of the potential causes of rising rates—improved financial conditions. Even if rates continue to rise, the impact on financial stability is likely to be limited, according to the IMF's global financial stability report, released on Wednesday. A global savings glut, deficient aggregate demand, and central bank interest-rate policies have contributed to an extended period of low interest rates. At some point, interest rates are likely to rise, either because the demand for loanable funds rises as ways in which the current interest rate environment could contribute to financial instability. Low interest rates make it difficult for savers to earn significant returns with relative safety. For example, money market mutual funds are at greater risk because their income stream (from relatively safe bonds) is close to zero. the economy improves driving up the rates or because a negative shock causes a spike in interest rates. Financial intermediaries, including but not limited to banks, can be damaged by rising interest rates if they have not adequately addressed the mismatch between the interest rates on their cost of funds. The impact of rising rates on financial intermediaries can be felt for years to come, according to a report by the International Institute of Actuaries (IIA). IIA: The Impact of Rising Interest Rates on Financial Intermediaries (IIAC) is published by the IAC on behalf of the International Actuarial Institute. factors. First, capital market participants forecast continued low interest rate policies by major central banks globally. The second is the pricing of short-term risk, which is partially caused by the increase in Treasury market purchases by institutions with low-risk sensitivity. The third factor is the third factor, that is the interest rate outlook for the rest of the year and into 2015 and 2016. For more, go to: http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-293852/Bank-of-America-forecasts-continued-low-interest-rate-policy. short-run fiscal crisis is often accompanied by the same kinds of poor economic conditions that cause the Fed to expand its monetary policies. In the longer term, the combination of higher interest rates and higher outstanding debt can cause interest payments to crowd out the Fed's interest rate increases. The Fed has expanded its monetary policy in the past, including in the early 1980s and the 1990s. The U.S. has a long history of borrowing money to fund its deficit and debt. The Federal Reserve is expected to continue to do so in the future. An investing company that pools the funds of individuals and other investors, and uses them to purchase large amounts of debt or equity obligations of businesses and sometimes debt obligations of governments. The owners of the mutual fund hold proportional shares in the fund. Classes of bonds, called tranches, can be purchased by mutual fund investors. The mutual fund can also be bought by individual investors, who can buy shares of the fund for a fraction of the value of the bonds they are buying. A mutual fund is a type of investment company. entire pool of securities in which a fund invests. Owners pay taxes on their distributions from a fund; the mutual fund itself is not normally subject to federal or state income taxation. Naked option —The sale of a call or put option without holding an equal and opposite position in the fund. The sale of an naked option is the sale of the option without the option holder holding the same position in both options. The naked option can lead to a loss of money if the investor sells both options at the same time. or asset will decline, resulting in a loss to the holder. Money market mutual fund (MMF)—A form of mutual fund that pools funds of individuals and other investors for investment in high-grade, short-term debt and bank deposits paying market rates of return. Examples of these money market instruments include U.S. dollar-denominated money market mutual funds and money market exchange-traded funds (MMEs) Money market funds are a type of money market instrument that invests in short- and long-term investments. Treasury bills, certificates of deposit, and commercial paper. In addition to the investment features, most MMFs offer check-writing redemption features. Moral hazard — The tendency of people to take more risks once another party has agreed to provide protection. Regulatory interventions to bail out failing firms are often said to create moral hazard. In the UK, the risk of moral hazard in financial markets is greater than in the U.S. and is often referred to as ‘Moral Hazard’. moral hazard, on the assumption that others will expect to be saved from their mistakes, too. Mortgage-backed security (MBS)—A bond backed by a pool of mortgage loans. The bondholders receive a share of the interest and principal payments on the underlying mortgages. The cash flows may be divided among different cash flows, such as dividends and interest payments, for different types of MBSs. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. terms to a firm that is perceived as distressed. Mark-to-Market — The process by which the reported amount of an asset is adjusted to reflect true the market value instead of the purchase price. Market risk — The risk that the price of a tradeable security will fall below the expected future sale price, or expected future price of the asset in question. The risk is that the asset will be sold for less than its expected future value, or the expected price of its future value. market value has fallen. Appendix B. Acronyms: "Market value" is a term used to refer to the amount of money that has been lost by a company since it was founded. Appendix C. is a list of acronyms used to describe the company, including "market value" and "market capitalization" "Market capitalisation" is the amount that has fallen since the company was founded, and is often referred to as the value of the company. "Market Capitalization" is also known as the sum of all the money that the company has lost since its founding. of an asset exceeds its fundamental value for a sustained period, often followed by a rapid price decline. Speculative bubbles are usually associated with a "bandwagon" effect in which speculators rush to buy the commodity (in the case of futures, "to take positions") before the price trend ends, and an increase in the price of the commodity is followed by an increase of the value of the asset. The price of an asset can also rise and fall at the same time. computing the value of assets for purposes of capital, segregation, or margin requirements. A percentage reduction from the stated value (e.g., book value or market value) to account for possible declines in value that may occur before assets can be liquidated. Hedge funds —Hedge funds are essentially unregulated mutual funds. For more information on hedge funds, visit: www.hedgefunds.com. for more information about Hedge Funds, go to: http://www. HedgeFunds.org/. Hedge funds are pools of invested money that buy and sell stocks and bonds and many other assets. Hedge funds are limited to qualified investors with high net worth. Hedging —Investing with a hedge fund is like buying a stock with a low price and a high price with a high value. It is a way to bet on the future of a company or a country by betting on the price of its assets. It can also be used to make money by buying and selling shares of other companies or investments. the intention of reducing the impact of adverse movements in interest rates, commodities, or securities prices. Typically, the hedging instrument gains value as the hedged item loses value, and vice versa. Illiquid Assets —Assets that cannot be easily or quickly sold. Insolvent —A firm whose liabilities exceed its assets. Institutional – A firm whose assets exceed its liabilities by a wide margin. The Hedge Fund Institute is a London-based, non-profit investment management firm. Its clients include hedge funds, banks, insurance companies, pension funds and endowments. Financial intermediaries typically raise money in one market to fund activity in another. During periods of uncertainty and financial instability, financial intermediaries may lose trust in each other, and refuse to extend or extend loans. Financial intermediaries can also refuse to lend money to each other during periods of financial instability. During these periods, banks may be forced to stop lending money to one another, or stop lending to both banks at the same time. In the U.S., this can lead to a loss of trust between banks and their customers. to control large dollar amounts of a commodity or security with a comparatively small amount of capital. Leverage can be obtained through borrowing or the use of derivatives. Liquidity —The ability to trade an asset quickly without significantly affecting its price, or the condition of a market with many buyers. The ability to sell an asset without significantly changing its price or the conditions of the market where it is traded. The use of a derivative to make an asset more liquid or to make it more volatile. A derivative can be used to make the asset more volatile or more liquid. Ownership of a derivative does not require the holder to actually buy or sell the underlying interest. Derivatives are used by hedgers, who seek to shift risk to others, and speculators, who can bet on the future of a commodity or financial variable. They can also be used as a way to hedge against the risk of a specific event, such as an interest rate or currency price change, or a stock index. The term "derivative" is used to refer to a financial instrument that can be traded on a stock exchange. Net Asset Value (or NAV)—Value of an asset minus any associated costs; for financial assets, typically changes each trading day. Office of Financial Research (OFR)—An office created by the Dodd-Frank Act ( P.L. 111-203 ) to support the Financial Stability Oversight Council and member agencies by collecting data. The office collects data on the value of the underlying instrument, as well as the costs associated with it. The data is collected by the Office for Financial Research, which is part of the Department of Treasury. meet its capital requirements if it is a regulated entity. Variable Rate Demand Obligation —A security which pays a variable interest rate, and can be redeemed upon the demand of the holder. Write-Downs —Reducing the value of an asset as it is carried on a firm's balance sheet because the firm has written off its value on its balance sheet. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. even greater rush to sell the commodity (unwind positions) when prices reverse. Capital —Assets minus liabilities; what a firm owns minus what it owes. Regulators often require financial firms to hold minimum levels of capital. Capital requirements —Capital is the owners' stake in an enterprise. It is a critical line and is often required by regulators to be held at a minimum level. It can be used as a barometer of a firm's ability to withstand a downturn. It's also a good way to test whether a firm is in a position to take on more debt. of defense when losses occur, both in banking and nonbanking enterprises. Capital requirements help assure that losses that might occur will accrue to the institution incurring them. In the case of banking institutions experiencing problems, capital also serves as a buffer against losses to the federal deposit insurance funds. Capital also serves to protect the depositors' money, which is the government's way of protecting depositors from losses in the event of a bank failure or failure to meet its financial obligations to depositors. Certain pension systems may find it difficult to earn adequate returns safely, especially if they have committed to defined benefits. This means that they are more likely to "break the buck" (return less than a dollar for each dollar invested) If any of their investments experience losses, they may be unable to earn enough returns to cover their defined benefit obligations. For more information on how to protect your pension, visit www.pensions.gov.uk or call the Pension Protection Fund on 1-800-273-8255. one firm is a signal to investors that firms in the same industry or with similar assets are likely to be in financial trouble. Contagion can result in the restriction of liquidity to other firms as possible counterparties shy away. The failure of critical functions can cause systemic risk if the death of a canary in a coal mine, the failure of even the smallest firm may signal that large firms, if they are exposed to similar risks, may be in danger. The risk is based on the information that a firm's failure provides to investors, rather than a specific firm. of these firms to grow relative to their markets. The remaining source of systemic risk identified by Tarullo, contagion, is relatively independent of firm size and complexity. Systemic risk regulators may attempt to construct and estimate a firm-specific index of systemicrisk arising from these three sources of instability. Like this article? Share it with your friends and family on Facebook and Twitter. Back to Mail Online home.Back to the page you came from. Click here to share this article with your family and friends.  domino effects, fire sales, and critical functions, depend upon a firm's connections to other firms. These three forms of interconnectedness will typically be correlated with the size and scope of the firm, at least in relation to its market or service. If potential creditors to large firms judge large firms, they may not be able to afford to take on such a large amount of debt. If they do, they could be forced to sell off large parts of their business to pay down the debt. Tarullo interprets the run on money market mutual funds that occurred in September 2008 as contagion that had little to do with the size, complexity, or transparency of Lehman Brothers. Rather, in Tarullo's view, the failure of Lehmann Brothers was a signal to investors that the financial system was not as strong as they thought it to be. The run was not caused by Lehman's failure, but by other factors, such as the lack of transparency in the money market. What is true for each individual firm in isolation may not be true when all firms follow similar strategies. Just as while one person standing in a crowded stadium sees better, that strategy will fail if everyone stands at the same time. To better see better, visit CNN.com/soulmatestories. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. The term "systemic risk" does not have a single, agreed-upon definition. Some define systemic risk as the risk an institution faces that it cannot diversify against. In other circumstances, systemic risk is defined as therisk that the linkages between institutions may be at risk.magnify shocks to the financial system. There is no single, commonly accepted definition of the term systemic risk among financial professionals. The FSOC annual reports address the definition of systemic risk. All definitions attempt to capture risks to and reporting purposes with its parent. evolves with changes in communication technology and the organization of firms. Historically, telegraphs, stock tickers, telephones, and computers have allowed for improved financial communications across long distances. But the stability of such systems can be threatened by the potential disruptions to the operational network. How it Might Go Wrong: The financial infrastructure is the most important part of a firm's business model. It can't afford to let it go to pieces, and it can't be left to the whims of a single person. is vulnerable to natural disasters and human activity. For example, Hurricane Sandy temporarily halted trading on the New York Stock Exchange in October 2012. Malfunctions have disrupted the issuance of securities (such as the initial public offering of Facebook). Reportedly, major financial institutions have been subjected to attempts to access the internet. The U.S. Federal Reserve is the world's largest central bank, with a $1.2 trillion balance of assets and a $2.1 trillion liability. The Federal Reserve has a $3.1 billion balance of debt and a debt-servicing capacity of $1 billion. criteria and designates which financial market utilities be subjected to safety and soundness regulation. An example of a financial market utility would be an organization that provides settlement and clearing services. 5. Resolution of non-banks. Upon a determination of a threat to financial stability, a covered non-bank in danger of being taken over by a bank is considered to be a non-Bank in danger. The resolution would be based on a risk assessment of the non- bank's ability to provide financial services. essentially the "plumbing" of the financial system. It includes the environment in which financial trading occurs, communications of the interbank payment system, clearing and settlement of retail payments. The security of confidential financial information, and the resilience of information storage systems are also part of the role of the finance industry in the economy. The finance industry is responsible for 80% of the world's GDP, according to the World Economic Forum. The U.S. economy is the second largest in the world, followed by Europe. A broad term referring to protection of banking institutions through deposit insurance, discount window credit, other lender of last resort support, and certain forms of regulations to reduce risk. Commercial and industrial companies generally lack any of these types of protection.sellers meet to trade futures and options contracts or securities. Federal safety net is a broad term for protection of banks through deposit Insurance, discount Window Credit, and other lender-of-last-resort support. It is also used to refer to certain types of regulations that reduce risk to banks. respond to emerging threats to U.S. financial stability. Firewalls —Barriers to the flow of capital, information, management, and other resources among business units owned by a common entity. In case of financial distress of one operation ("fire"), the "walls" are intended to prevent the spread of loss to the other. "Firewall" is a term used to refer to a firewall between two or more business units that are owned by the same parent company. For more information on the firewall, go to: www.firewall.org. Possible features of systemic risks include externalities and the fallacy of composition. With externalities, there are costs or benefits of actions by financial market participants that are not borne a firm provides a unique financial service with no close substitutes. For example, if a clearinghouse has a monopoly on settlement services for a market, and the clearinghouse fails, then other market participants may not be able to process their own transactions. Three of the sources of systemic risk identified by the IMF are the failure of clearinghouses, financial institutions and market participants. of the U.S. financial system. Items (1) and (2) are arguably directed at minimizing the chances that particular firms will be viewed as too big to fail, or too connected to fail. Item (3) is arguably a more general catch-all for any firms that pose risks to the financial system, such as Facebook, Google, and Twitter, which could be affected by the government's actions in the event of a financial crisis in the future. The government has said it has no immediate plans to take action against any of these firms. and standardizing financial data, performing applied and long-term research, developing tools for risk measurement and monitoring. Operational risk — The possibility that a financial institution will suffer losses from a failure to process transactions properly, from accounting mistakes, from rogue traders or other forms of insider fraud, or from other causes. The risk of losing money due to errors in accounting, or other causes such as rogue traders, insider fraud and other causes is a common reason for financial institutions to close their doors. FSOC has the ability to classify certain non-banks as systemic. Systemic firms with more than $50 billion in assets must also to designate a non-bank as posing systemic risk. However, one of the affirmative votes must be that of the Secretary of the Treasury. In other words, the chair of the FSOC has an effective veto over the designation of individual firms. For more information, visit the Federal Reserve's website or go to www.fed.gov/fresnobank. regulation of certain non-banks. The FSOC establishes the criteria and designates which firms will be subject to additional prudential regulation by the Fed. The Fed can limit the ability of the company to merge with other companies. It can restrict the products the firm offers, or impose conditions on the manner that the firm conducts activities. Under some circumstances, the Fed can restrict a firm’s ability to merge or to offer certain products or services to its customers. The Federal Reserve Board of Governors has the authority to regulate certain Financial Market Utilities. Dodd-Frank Act directs the Fed to supervise certain large non-bank financial companies. The FSOC recommends the standards for these firms. The standards must be more stringent than the standard for non-Bank financial firms which are not under Fed supervision and do not present systemic risks. The requirements include risk-based capital requirements, leverage limits, liquidity requirements, resolution plan and credit exposure report requirements, concentration limits, a contingent capital requirement, enhanced public disclosures, and enhanced public disclosure requirements. (8) short-term debt limits, and (9) overall risk management requirements. Standards for foreign firms are to acknowledge equality of competitive opportunity and take into account the extent to which the foreign non-bank is subject to comparable standards in its home country. The Fed has several powers and duties over covered covered by these rules. The US Federal Reserve is the world's largest central bank, with $2.2 trillion in assets and $1.4 trillion in liabilities. It is the largest bank in the United States, followed by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. the Fed can require the company to sell or otherwise transfer assets or off-balance-sheet items to unaffiliated entities. The Fed also has information collection authority, including through examinations, for covered firms, although the Fed is to rely on existing data sources to the extent possible. In cases in which the Fed can’t reach a decision, it can issue a warning to the company, which can be followed by a fine of up to $1.5 million. It can also issue an order to stop the company from selling off assets or transferring items to other entities. covered firm has another primary regulator (such as the OCC), the Fed is to give the primary regulator reasonable notice of the proposed examination. The DFA permits the Fed to establish standards for systemic firms in a number of additional areas. These areas include a contingent capital requirement, enhanced public disclosure, and enhanced public information requirements for firms that fail to comply with the requirements of the DFA. The Fed is expected to make a decision on the new rules in the coming weeks or early months. Bank holding company debt holders receive payment only after senior debt claims are paid in full. Subsidiary is a company whose controlling shares are owned 50% or more by another ("parent") corporation. A subsidiary is usually consolidated for regulatory purposes. Affiliates that are less than 50% controlled are usually not treated as subsidiaries. A bond is a share in a pool of debt obligations or other assets. The holder is entitled to some part of the repayment flows from the underlying debt. (See "Securitization.") national and state-chartered banks are authorized to form financial subsidiaries to engage in activities that would not otherwise be permitted within the bank itself, subject to certain limits. Besides the permissible financial activities enumerated in P.L. 106-102, the law provides a mechanism between the U.S. Department of the Treasury and the bank's parent company. The law also provides for the creation of a joint venture between the bank and its parent company to conduct certain financial activities in the United States. units—especially to banking units. Foreign bank —Banks and their holding companies headquartered in other countries may have a variety of financial operations in the United States. U.S.-chartered subsidiary —U.S. subsidiary could not be covered by any of the holding company's bank subsidiaries. A holding company could not cover losses in a securities subsidiary of a holding company because it was not part of the bank. The holding company may not be able to cover any losses in any of its bank subsidiaries because it is part of it. reports, the FCIC report, the CFTC and SIFMA websites, and from other sources. Affiliate — A corporate relationship of control. Two companies are affiliated when one owns all or a large part of another, or when both are controlled by a third (holding) company (see "Subsidiary"). All subsidiaries are affiliates, but not all are affiliated with the parent company of the other company that owns the other. The SEC says it has no plans to change its rules on affiliates. in the local communities in which they take deposits. Consolidated Supervised Entities program — A Securities and Exchange Commission program created in 2004 and terminated in 2008 that provided voluntary supervision for the five largest investment bank conglomerates. Conservatorship — When an insolvent financial institution is reorganized by a regulator with the help of the SEC. The U.S. Federal Reserve is the world's largest bank regulator. It supervises the largest banks in the United States and around the world. It also supervises banks in Europe, Asia and Australia. The term applied to comprehensive regulation of a holding company and its parts by one or more holding company regulator(s) Undercapitalized —A condition in which a business does not have enough capital to meet its needs. Umbrella supervision —To monitor and assure the treatment of collateral.transaction and to monitor and assurance the treatment. of collateral in a transaction by the holding company or parts of the company. The term is also used to refer to a company that is not adequately capitalized. Created by the Fed in 2008, this program purchased three-month unsecured and asset-backed commercial paper from eligible companies. Commodity Futures Modernization Act of 2000 (CFMA, P.L. 106-554, 114 Stat. 2763)—Overhauled the futures market. Office of the Comptroller of the Currency; state banks, by the individual states. Commercial Paper Funding Facility Emergency Program — created by the Federal Reserve in 2008 and purchased three months of commercial paper. Commodity Exchange Act to create a flexible structure for the regulation of futures and options trading. Largely repealed by the Dodd-Frank Act. Community Reinvestment Act 1977 — A federal law which encouraged depository institutions to make loans and provide services.largely repealed. Dodd- Frank Act — A law which allowed banks to offer loans to small businesses and individuals who could not afford to pay back the loans they had made to them. The Act was passed in 2010 and has since been largely repealed. usual hearing before its designation as systemic. As part of those anti-evasion provisions, if certain large recipients of Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP) funds (specifically, if they hold over $50 billion) cease to be bank holding companies, then they are automatically considered systemic. If they were part of the Capital Purchase Program, they would be considered systemic if they no longer held $50B or more of TARP funds. They would then have to go through the normal hearing process. Troubled Asset Relief Program provides financial assistance to U.S. financial institutions through the purchase of senior preferred shares in the corporations on standardized terms. Charter conversion —Banking institutions may, with the approval of their regulators, switch their corporate form between: commercial bank or savings institution, and bank or credit union, depending on the type of institution.Purchase Program — Initiative under the Troubled Asset relief program providing financial aid to financial institutions. The Purchase Program is funded by the federal government through a combination of public and private sources. as systemically important; this applies to domestic and foreign firms, and for anti-evasion. The chair's vote is required to rescind or reevaluate the systemic designation of a firm. In emergencies, the chair's affirmative vote is needed as part of the determination that a non-bank will not be granted the systemically significant designation. This applies to banks and non-banks, as well as foreign and domestic firms. The vote is also required in emergencies, such as in the case of a terrorist attack. to fund capital market activity may be subject to runs similar to a depository bank, but would not typically have access to certain emergency lending facilities such as the Fed's discount window. Some wholesale funding markets can be subject. to runs and fire sales. Banks may be forced to sell assets to fund capital markets, such as shares, to raise money for their operations. Some banks may also have to sell shares to raise cash for operations, which can lead to a loss of capital. Banks could also be required to sell some of their assets to raise funds for operations. fire sales should there be a default by a major market participant, has not been completely eliminated. Efforts to address potential instability in money market mutual funds have not as yet been finalized by the SEC (as regulator of MMFs as issuers of securities). Issue Area Reliance on government has not yet been fully addressed by the government, which could be a problem for the MMF industry in the future. The SEC has yet to make a decision on how to address the potential for instability in the money market. institutions that did not accept deposits, but had their own prudential regulatory regime under the Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight. As then-Federal Reserve Governor Donald Kohn evaluated lessons from the financial crisis, "We [the Fed] traditionally have provided backup liquidity to these institutions," Kohn said. The Federal Housing Finance Agency, or FHFA, is the agency responsible for regulating housing finance agencies. The agency was created in the wake of the 2008 financial crisis. It was created as a result of the failure of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. and the FDIC must report to Congress on the terms of the repayment plan. To date, no firms have been subject to an orderly liquidation. Since its creation in 1913, the Federal Reserve (the Fed) has had the authority to address financial market instability. Congress created the Fed as a result of the Great Depression of the 1930s and 1940s. The Federal Reserve was created as a response to financial instability in the United States in the wake of the Second World War. It was created by Congress in response to the Panic of 1907. These cushions against loss. Federal Open Market Committee — Its members are the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Financial holding company — A holding company. Federal Reserve Bank of New York — A New York-based bank with a large presence in the U.S. market. The Federal Reserve Board of Canada — A board of governors with large numbers of members in the New York City area, including certain of the presidents of the Fed's member banks. The Fed Board of Japan — A group of members that oversees the Bank of Japan's operations in the United States. Primary federal regulator is the Federal Reserve, under the International Banking Act of 1978 as amended. States and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency may also regulate them. Functional regulation —Regulatory arrangements based on activity ("function") rather than organizational structure. Exchange —A central marketplace with established rules and regulations where buyers and banks, agencies, branches, and representative offices are located. The primary state regulator for state-chartered banks is the state; for national banks, the Office. of the comptroller of Currency is the primary regulator. undertaking of an enterprising nature, especially one involving considerable financial risk on the chance of unusual profit. States are the primary regulators in the insurance field. States as well as the federal government may charter, regulate, and supervise depository institutions. State regulation is similar to the dual system of bank regulation in the U.S. and in Europe. States can regulate banks, insurance companies, and other financial institutions in the same way as they regulate banks and insurance companies. States have the power to impose fines on banks that fail to comply with state regulations. cases in which the firm is a broker-dealer, or its largest subsidiary is. The Fed and the SEC by two-thirds vote that make the determination, in consultation with the FDIC. The director of the Federal Insurance Office make the recommendation for insurance companies, and the Fed makes the decision for banks and broker-Dealers. The decision is made by a vote of the SEC, the Fed, or both, on a case-by-case basis, depending on the circumstances. (6) a federal regulatory agency has ordered the firm to convert all of its convertible debt instruments that are subject to the regulatory order; and (7) the company satisfies the definition of a financial company. The Secretary has a number of duties pertaining to the determination and procedures for the conversion of the convertible debt. The company will convert the debt if it meets these criteria. The conversion is expected to take place by the end of the year. The firm will then seek to sell the debt to raise cash. financial activity for FHCs. Blue sky laws —State statutes that govern the offering and selling of securities. Broker/dealer —An individual or firm that buys and sells securities for itself as well as for customers. Bubble —Self-reinforcing process in which the price of a stock rises and falls in tandem with the value of the underlying asset. FHC is a financial institution that provides services to individuals and businesses. It is not a government agency. It does not have the authority to regulate financial services. Investment bank is a financial intermediary, active in the securities business. Investment banking functions include underwriting, counseling regarding merger and acquisition proposals, brokerage services, advice on corporate financing, and other services. Regulation is institution-specific as contrasted with activity specific (see "Functional regulation" for more information. For more information on investment banking, visit: www.investmentbanking.com. In the U.S. visit: http://www.bankonline.com/investment-banking/. Investment bank holding company — A holding company for securities firms authorized under the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act. Such holding companies are subject to regulation by the Securities and Exchange Commission. Issuer — A person or entity (including a company or bank) that offers securities for sale. The issuing of securities, where the issuer is a bank or company. Proprietary trading. The trading of securities in which the issuer owns or controls a majority of the shares or a controlling interest. SIPC is a private nonprofit membership corporation set up under federal law to provide financial protection for the customers of failed brokers and/or dealers. SIPC has no supervisory or regulatory responsibilities for its members, nor is it authorized to do so.loans, thrifts, and mutual savings banks. It is a liquidator; it has no Supervisory or Regulatory Responsibilities for Its members. It has no powers to issue loans or guarantee deposits. It does not have the authority to issue bonds or guarantees. statute under which the Fed regulates bank holding companies and financial holding companies (FHC) The law provides a mechanism between the Federal Reserve and the Department of the Treasury to decide what is an appropriate new form authorized by the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act ( P.L. 106-102 ) that goes beyond the limits a of bank holding company. It can control one or more banks, securities firms, and insurance companies as permitted by law and/or regulation. Financial institution —An enterprise that uses its funds chiefly to purchase financial services. A bank holding company controls through equity ownership ("holds") one or more banks and, often, other affiliates in financial services. On the federal level, these businesses are regulated through the Bank Holding Company Act. The federal bank holding companies are regulated by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, or FDIC. The FDIC is the nation's largest deposit insurance provider, with a market value of more than $1.2 trillion. The U.S. economy is expected to grow at a rate of about 2.5 percent this year. National or State charter, and to stockholder ownership from depositor ownership. Various regulatory conditions may encourage switching. Clearing organization may be a division or affiliate of a particular exchange, or a freestanding entity. A clearing organization is an entity through which futures and other derivative transactions are cleared and settled. Also known as a clearing organization, it is a division of an exchange or an affiliate of one, or an independent clearing organization. It may also be called a clearing agency, clearing house, or clearing house. Act (RESPA), the Truth in Lending Act (TILA), and the Dodd-Frank Act's ability-to-pay standard. Additional work may need to be done to raise GSE guarantee fees to make room for private competitors to the GSEs. The financial infrastructure can also be a source of systemic risk. This is a problem for the U.S. housing market. It is also a problem in the global financial system. It can be a cause for concern for investors. Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act ( P.L. 106-102 ) called for more functional regulation than in the past. Government-sponsored enterprise (GSE) —GSEs are private companies with government charters. Government sponsorship typically gives them a funding advantage over purely private competitors, while their charters restrict the kinds of businesses they may conduct. Haircut — in the U.S. hair is cut by a professional stylist, not a barber. to as off–balance-sheet arrangements, SPEs are legal entities created to perform a specific financial function or transaction. They isolate financial risk from the sponsoring institution and provide less-expensive financing. The assets, liabilities, and cash flows of an SPE do not appear on a sponsoring institution's books. Speculation —A venture or a business venture that is run by a group of people or individuals. A venture or business venture is a business that runs by people or groups that are run by others. holding companies had resided in the Office of Thrift Supervision (OTS) Some non-banks accepted prudential regulation by the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) Bankruptcy courts were to handle failures among most non- banks, and non-bank subsidiaries of banks. The government-sponsored enterprises (GSEs), Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, are large, complex financial institutions. They were created by the U.S. government in the 1930s and 1940s. The GSEs are now run by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac had trouble raising additional capital in 2008. Policymakers tried unsuccessfully to enhance investor confidence by pledging financial support for the GSEs. Despite this pledge, in September 2008, Fannie Mae was placed in conservatorship with explicit financial support from the federal government. In July 2009, the government placed Fannie and Freddie Mae into conservatorships with explicit support from federal taxpayers. The two companies were later bailed out by the Federal Reserve and the U.S. Treasury Department. almost completely evaporated, making the government sponsored enterprises (GSEs) the dominant providers of wholesale mortgage funding. GSE funding has a variety of government support, including preferred stock purchases by the U.S. Treasury. The lack of significant private capital in mortgage funding is a sign that financial instability in mortgage markets has not yet completely healed (things already went wrong). It has been an announced goal of the Obama administration to stabilize the mortgage market. It has not been achieved yet, but it is a step in the right direction. longer rising sharply, and the flow business (current mortgage revenues and guarantee fees compared with current payments) of the GSEs has been positive in recent quarters. One possible contributing factor for a delay in the return of private capital to mortgage markets (in addition to general pessimism about the speed of the return) is a lack of confidence about the future of the U.S. housing market, according to the report. The report also notes that the European Central Bank has taken steps to shore up the housing market in recent months. sound depository institutions. But in the crisis, to support financial markets, we had to provide liquidity to non-bank financial institutions as well. In common parlance, people have sometimes referred to "too-big-to-fail" firms (TBTF), but what is typically meant are complex and interconnected financial institutions that may not rely on deposits. It's a very different concept than "too big to fail" or "too small to fail," says the IMF's chief economist. Too-big-to-fail doctrine: An implicit policy holding that very large financial institutions must be rescued by the government. Tri-Party Repo Market: A repurchase agreement in which a third party agrees to clear and settle the debt. (See "Moral hazard" for more on the Too-Big-To-Fail doctrine. The U.S. Treasury Department's Office of Thrift Supervision is responsible for supervising financial institutions. For more, go to: www. Treasury.gov/Thrift. for a large share of their funding, and whose failure may spread and magnify losses throughout the financial system. Governor Kohn expressed frustration for the perceived inadequacy of existing tools to deal with TBTF non-banks. Dissatisfaction with existing regulation grew with the progression of the mortgage crisis, Kohn said in a letter to the Treasury Department. The letter was published in the New York Times on Wednesday. It was the first of a two-part series on the state of the U.S. banking system. crisis that began in August 2007, especially following extraordinary government support related to the failure of several large non-banks. Some of this support was designed to prevent some creditors of failing non- banks from protracted uncertainty in the bankruptcy courts or other resolution process. Similarly, for some qualified financial contracts, support was also designed to protect the interests of some creditors in the event of a bankruptcy or other financial crisis. For more on this story, visit CNN.com/CNBC's special coverage of the U.S. banking crisis. may have been designed so that some creditors would not suffer losses in the bankruptcy process. For example, in March 2008, losses on mortgage-related securities caused the distress sale of investment bank Bear Stearns. The Fed provided financial support for the purchase of Bear Stears by JPMorgan, avoiding the bankruptcy. It is possible that the Fed may have been trying to avoid the bankruptcy by providing financial support to some creditors in the event of a financial crisis. It's possible that this is what happened in this case. In fall of 2008, Congress provided Treasury with up to $700 billion to address troubled assets (such as mortgages) in the financial system. Despite these interventions to recapitalize and restore confidence in financial institutions, damage to the broader economy (as measured by unemployment and lost output) was severe. Congress passed a bill in December 2009 that would provide $1.5 trillion to address the financial crisis. The bill was passed by Congress on December 18, 2009. It was signed by President Barack Obama. Treasury. offered a temporary guarantee program for money market mutual funds. Lehman Brothers failed shortly thereafter, and declared bankruptcy. AIG, one of the world's largest insurers, would have failed the day after Lehman. However, the Fed subsequently intervened on behalf of AIG,. In this case avoiding a bankruptcy process. Following the declaration of bankruptcy, financial panic spread to other non-bank institutions and markets, with runs on money market Mutual Funds and repurchase agreements (also known as "repos") financial institutions that offer loans or other sources of capital, but do not have a bank charter and do not rely on deposits for their own funding. Prior to the financial crisis of 2008, investment banks, such as Bear Stearns and Lehman Brothers, were examples of large, complex, non-bank financial institutions. The U.S. Federal Reserve is the world's largest bank, with $1.2 trillion in assets and $2.1 trillion in liabilities. It is the largest bank in the world by assets and liabilities. institutions, even though in some cases they may have had relatively small subsidiaries that accepted deposits (technically "thrifts"). The insurance company American International Group (AIG) is another example of a large non-bank financial institution that had a relatively small subsidiary that accepts deposits. Authority to regulate non- bank thrifts and their subsidiaries is given to the Treasury Department by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) The FDIC has the power to issue fines to banks that accept deposits from non-banks. Collateralized lending can be subject to fire sales because borrower defaults are likely to occur at the same time that the market for the collateral is also distressed. Fire sales may become reinforcing when a product serves as the collateral to finance itself or in markets in which participants must post risk-based margin. When the lender seizes the collateral, the value of the collateral may be falling—the addition of the fire sales may be reinforcing. When one firm fails, the failure of one firm causes its creditors to fail, which causes the creditors' creditors to failing, and so on. any government guarantee. A fire sale occurs when someone holding an asset must sell it in a distressed market. Some wholesale sources of funding, such as repos and asset-backed commercial paper, may be subject to government guarantees. A better price could likely be had if the seller had more time to sell the asset. The U.S. Treasury Department has no immediate comment on this article or any potential changes to its policies on the sale of government-guaranteed debt. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. self-reinforcing if failure to pay causes lenders to seize the collateral (the good itself), sell it at distressed prices, and thereby cause further losses on other holders of the asset. These holders may then default on their loans or fail to post margin. Contagion can occur if the failure of a bank to pay is followed by a failure of the bank to post a margin on the collateral. This can cause the collateral to be seized and sold at a distressed price. The collateral can then be sold to a new owner, causing further losses. where the borrower sells securities to the lender as collateral and agrees to repurchase them at a higher price within a short period, often within one day. Also known as savings and loan association, mutual savings bank, or federal savings bank. The federal regulator for most savings associations is the Office of Thrift Supervision. In recent years, such institutions' charters have been expanded to allow them to provide commercial loans and a broader range of consumer financial services. The primary function has traditionally been to encourage personal saving (thrift) and home buying through mortgage lending. affect the financial system as a whole, through a dynamic sometimes referred to as contagion. Thrift holding company —Also known as a savings and loan holding company, a business that controls one or more savings associations. These holding companies are regulated under the Home Owners' Loan Act by the Office of the Treasury. The Office of Treasury is responsible for the regulation of the Thrift and Loan Holding Companies (TLCCs) in the United States. The TLCCs are regulated by the Homeowners' loan Act. Wholesale funding sources are not eligible for certain government initiatives that assist financial stability, such as deposit insurance. Non-banks that use wholesale sources roll over their loans to each other. The resulting reduction in wholesale funding can have many of the characteristics of a bank run by depositors if providers of wholesale funding fear that wholesale borrowers will not repay their obligations. Wholesale sources of funding typically do not have deposits, but unlike deposits, sources of wholesale Funding typically do Not have Deposit Insurance. Commercial banks are typically limited to acting as dealers in specified high-quality debt obligations, such as those of the federal government. Depository institution —Customarily refers to commercial banks, savings institutions, and other financial institutions. Broker/dealer —Dealers of metals, foreign exchange, etc. for its own account and at its own risk as principal (see "Broker/Dealer" for more information on broker/dealers. Savings institution —Depository institution Customarily  refers to commercial banks, savings institutions, and others. Financial institutions are differentiated by the manner in which they invest their funds: in loans, bonds, stocks, or some combination; as well as by their sources of funds. Depository financial institutions may accept assets such as loans and debt securities, as opposed to tangible property. Financial institutions are also differentiated in that they may accept other types of assets, such as stocks, bonds and other financial instruments, rather than tangible property, for investment. For more information on how to invest in a financial institution, visit: www.financialinstitution.com. credit unions, since traditionally the greater part of their funding has been in the form of deposits. Deposits are a customer's funds placed with an institution according to agreed on terms and conditions and represent a credit to the depositor. Derivatives are financial contracts whose value is linked to the price of goods or services. They are used by banks to make loans to depositors, as well as to pay interest and other fees to the customers of the institution. They can also be used as a way to raise money for the bank's operations. deposits which are federally insured against loss to the depositor. Non-depository financial institutions such as life and property/casualty insurance companies, pension funds, and mutual funds obtain funds through other types of receipts, whose values may fluctuate with market conditions. Financial subsidiary —Under the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act ( P.L. 106-102 ), both banks and financial institutions are insured against losses to depositors by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation ( FDIC) or credit union charters that offer loans and raise a large proportion of their funds through insured deposits. Insured depository banks have prudential regulators who monitor their assets and liabilities, including the ability to prevent concentrations in particular types of loans or reliance on particular funding sources. Prudential regulators of banks and credit unions can be found at: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/29/business/financial/banks-and-credit-unions-have-prudential-regulators-to-watch. intent to restoring it to an ongoing business. Counterparty —The opposite party in a bilateral agreement, contract, or transaction, such as a swap. Credit Default Swap (CDS)—A tradeable contract in which one party agrees to pay another if a third party experiences a credit event. CDSs are used to hedge the risk that a party will default on a loan or credit card, for example, or to protect the value of an investment in a futures contract in the event of a default. arising inside the institution. Over-the-counter (OTC)—Trading that does not occur on a centralized exchange or trading facility. OTC transactions can occur electronically or over the telephone. Receivership —When an insolvent financial institution is taken over with the intent to liquidate its assets. Repurchase Agreement (Repos) —A method of secured lending. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. in full, or that a derivatives counterparty will default. Credit unions accept deposits of members' savings and transaction. May be state or nationally chartered. Credit union — A nonprofit financial cooperative of individuals with one or more common bonds (such as employment, labor union membership, or residence in the same neighborhood) May be national or state-chartered, or state or national- chartered, and accept deposits from members of the same bank or credit union. May also be a non-profit financial cooperative. balances in the form of share accounts, pay dividends (interest) on them out of earnings, and primarily provide consumer credit to members. The federal regulator for credit unions is the National Credit Union Administration. Dealer — An individual or financial firm engaged in the purchase and sale of securities and commodities. Member — A member of a credit union who holds a share of the bank’s stock or shares of a bank or insurance company. The bank or company that provides credit to its members is known as a member. side, the annual report notes that intra-day credit exposure of the two clearing banks (JPMorgan and BNY Mellon) in the tri-party repo market has declined significantly. Similarly, the reliance of broker-dealers on overnight repos as a source of funding has also declined. However, the potential for runs on broker-Dealers, or runs on banks, is still very high, according to the report. The annual report was released on Thursday and is available on the IMF's website. called a clearing house, multilateral clearing organization, or clearing association. Collateralized debt obligation (CDO)—A bond created by the securitization of a pool of asset backed securities. Commercial bank —A deposit-taking institution that can make commercial loans, accept checking accounts, and whose deposits are insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. National banks are chartered by the National Bank of Canada. (See CDO and CMO.) Collateralize mortgage obligation (CMO)—A multiclass bond backed by a pool. of mortgage pass-through securities or mortgage loans. lender of last resort following the recommendations of a commission established to investigate the causes of a financial panic that had occurred in 1907. Relative financial stability after WWII, and congressional directives to focus on price stability and maximum employment, may have redirected the Fed's focus to macroeconomic variables, but may have also been a factor in the decision to focus more on the central bank's role as a lender of last resorts. The Fed is the U.S. Federal Reserve's primary tool for managing the economy. the proceeds accrue to the issuer, is distinct from the secondary, or resale, market, where securities are traded among investors. Lender of last resort —Governmental lender that acts as the ultimate source of credit in the financial system. In the United States, the Fed has this role. Leverage —The ability to use the ability of a bank to lend money to another bank to make a loan to a financial institution, such as a bank that is a government lender. Figurative term for the Federal Reserve facility for extending credit directly to eligible depository institutions. It may be used to relieve temporary cash shortages at banks. Borrowers are expected to be expected to make a.profit if they can successfully forecast price trends. Examples include futures contracts, options, and swaps. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. The term derives from the practice whereby bankers would come to a Reserve Bank teller window to obtain credit in the early days of the Federal Reserve System.to have tried to borrow elsewhere first and must provide collateral as security for loans. The phrase refers to the dual banking system. It is used to refer to the banking system in the U.S. and the banking industry in the UK. The term is also used in Australia and New Zealand, where it is known as the Dual Banking System.  securitization is the process of transforming a cash flow, typically from debt repayments, into a new marketable security. Holders of the securitized instrument receive interest and principal payments as the underlying loans are repaid. Shadow Banking is financial activities that in some respects parallel banking activities but are subject to less regulation than commercial banks. Institutions include mutual funds, investment banks, and hedge funds. Special-purpose entities (SPEs)—Also referred to as ‘shadow banks’ debt obligation, bankruptcy, or credit rating downgrade. Credit Risk — The risk that a borrower will fail to repay a loan. Fitch Ratings, Moody's Investors Service, and Standard & Poor's are among the credit rating agencies that evaluate the credit quality of securities and provide ratings on those securities; the largest are Fitch and Moody's. The largest U.S. credit rating agency is Fitch, which is based in Washington, D.C., and has a market value of more than $100 billion. also have authority over securities companies, mortgage lending companies, personal finance companies, and other types of companies offering financial services. Structured debt —Debt that has been customized for the buyer, often by incorporating complex derivatives. Subordinated debt — Debt over which senior debt takes priority. In the event of bankruptcy, subordinated debt is taken over by senior debt and taken over in favor of the subordinated portion of a company's debt in the event it files for bankruptcy. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details.