examination and supervision by an agency of the United States or a state. In any state, a single agency or a single nonprofit private agency designated by the state. Under certain circumstances, an eligible institution; under certain circumstances,. the Student Loan Marketing Association or the Holding Company of the Student loan Marketing Association, including any subsidiary of the. Holding Company, or any agency of any state functioning as a secondary market; and. a guaranty agency; a Rural Rehabilitation Corporation. and an agency functioning in any state. an eligible lender is defined as under certain circumstances, a national or state chartered bank, a mutual savings bank, or a savings and loan association. A pension fund as defined in the Employee Retirement Income Security is an insurance company that is subject to the law. A bank is an eligible lender if it is a national, state, or local chartered or savings bank. A credit union is a bank that is a credit union. A savings association is a savings association that is not a bank. ineligible lender. Education said that it has not yet decided which policy to establish nor how to formalize the decision once it is made. Education did not say when it expected to implement our recommendation. We are sending copies of this report to the Honorable Richard Riley, Secretary of Education; eligible lender trustees; ineligible lenders; and other interested parties. Copies will also be made available to others on request. If you or your staff have any questions about this report, please contact us. that the loan servicer, United Education and Software Company, failed to transfer certain information to its new computer system. As a result, student loans totaling approximately $400 were falsely added to a computer program that falsely added collection activity information for a large volume of loans held by the secondary market. That program falsely added data for about $400 worth of student loans, the court found. The judge ordered the company to correct the problem and ordered the servicer to pay back the money it lost. Corporation, because these organizations must use a trustee to originate or purchase loans. To determine the protections offered the federal government by trustee arrangements, we identified and synthesized applicable legislation and regulations. We also interviewed eligible and ineligible lenders, guaranty agencies, servicers, Education officials, and other student problems lenders faced in using trustee arrangements. Because of the competitive nature of the student loan market, information obtained from the lender community was sometimes general in nature. We obtained Education officials’ interpretation of applicable laws and their views on the effects of past rulings. lenders we interviewed, current initiation and annual trustee fees do not prohibit them from conducting business in the student loan market. Trustees and ineligible lenders reported similar criteria used by trustees to evaluate ineligibles before they entered into arrangements. A few ineligible lenders stated they were uncomfortable with trustees having the final say as trustees. elements also expressed concern that because trustees also originate student loans for themselves, trustees may decide to end their eligible lender trustee services rather than continue to provide the mechanism for a competitor to do business. We focused our review on trustee arrangements created to allow ineligible lenders to originate or purchase student loans. To determine the number of existing trustee arrangements, we obtained data from Education’s lender database. Other major contributors to this report are listed in appendix III. Call me at (202) 512-7215 or visit www.cnn.com/cnnfinance/2013/01/30/student-loan-finance-fraud-report-2013/index.html. lenders fall into two categories: (1) secondary marketsthat have not been designated as an eligible lender for a state and (2) private companies that wish to make and hold student loans. Ineligible lenders generally contract with trustees for three purposes. These trustee arrangements allow ineligible lenders not only to originate loans, but also to purchase loans that other lenders have originated. This purchasing rolepermits originating lenders to free up capital to make new loans. For example, some secondary markets raise capital increasing the amount of loan capital available to students. Strict application of this rule would require eligible lenders to include loans they hold as a trustee for an ineligible lender in this calculation, although the regulations do not specifically address these loans. Education officials told us that although Education has inconsistently applied the regulations in the past, it currently the number of trustees could decline. This decline could, in turn, reduce competition in the student loan market. To clarify eligible lenders’ capacity to serve as trustees for ineligible lenders, the Secretary of Education should formally clarify Education’s interpretation of how the HEA provision prohibits banks or their subsidiaries from serving as trustees. ineligible lenders reported that trustee arrangements have had a positive effect on the student loan market. For example, both participant groups believe that market participation and loan availability are positively affected since trustee arrangements allow lenders that do not meet HEA’s eligible lender definition to make and hold loans. Loan market participants on the responsibilities of an eligible lender trustee and the process Education uses to oversee market participants and to recoup any losses it may incur on defaulted loans. We interviewed eligible and ineligible lenders, secondary markets, guaranty agencies, servicers, and Education officials. Eligible and ineligible lenders agree that participation by ineligible lenders increases competition among lenders. Some ineligible lenders, however, believe that two factors—HEA requirements and the general evolution of financial markets—could affect their participation in student loans. To see the full report, go to CNN.com/soulmatestories. For more information on the Student Borrower Lender Program, visit the Student Lender Lending Program's website. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. between $2,500 and $20,000. Some secondary markets reported that their trustee charged this initiation fee each time they issued bonds to raise capital. Annual trustee fees reported by ineligible lenders ranged between $4,500 to $75,000, depending on a number of factors. These lenders reported that the fees could be a flat fee or calculated as a percentage of outstanding loan balances or on the outstanding balance of bond issues. Ineligible lenders reported the annual costs are used to pay for trustee fees. Eligible lender trustees and ineligible lenders reported limited day-to-day interaction. One trustee reported no daily interaction. Some trustees reported that they interact with the ineligible lender only when it is necessary to sign forms, such as quarterly reports that must be submitted to the Department of Education. Trustee arrangements come with some protections, but not all trustees feel they have enough protection to oversee the loan servicer, the report says. The report says the trustees perform limited monitoring activities and mostly review annual reports and audits. Costs of trustee arrangements fall into two categories—payments to initiate the agreement and annual fees to maintain it. The ineligible lenders we interviewed reported that initiation costs were generally a flat fee ranging purchase loans. Some eligible and ineligible lenders reported that a variety of other factors could influence the size of both initiation and annual fee. Some ineligible lenders feared that some trustees would charge administrative fees on a per-loan basis rather than as aflat fee. The additional services the trustee will perform for the ineligible lender, such as payroll services, and the strength of the trustee’s relationship with the ineligible lenders. in trustee arrangement contracts, (3) amounts of review performed of ineligible lenders, and (4) amount of day-to-day interaction between the trustee and the ineligible lender. For example, trustees reported that most important in deciding whether to enter an arrangement is the business reputation of an ineligible lender and the reputation of the trustee. In one case, the trustee was required to review the lender's business reputation before entering an arrangement. In another, the lender was found to have violated the terms of a loan agreement. the loan servicing organization it has chosen. In addition, some trustees review the structure of the financing method used by the ineligible lender to raise the capital necessary to originate or purchase loans. This review might include examining a rating agency’s report on the transaction. Trustees and ineligible lenders also also review the financing methods used to raise capital for the loans they are seeking to make. The process can take months or even years to complete, depending on the size of the loan and the amount of capital involved. maintain the arrangement and cover the necessary services provided by the trustee, such as transferring documents between the trustee and the ineligible lender for signature. handle paperwork associated with the guarantors and servicers involved in the loan transactions, and carry out administrative activities associated with obtaining financing to originate or originate a loan. The trustee is responsible for ensuring that the loan is made to an ineligible lender and that it is paid back to the rightful owner of the property. It is the responsibility of the trustee to make sure that the loans are made to the right people. reported that their contracts included similar clauses covering trustee and ineligible lender resignations. For example, trustee resignation clauses allow the trustee to resign from the arrangement by giving a specific number of days’ notice to the ineligible lender, such as 60 or 90 days. In any event, most trustees and ineligible lenders reported that the trustee would probably remain in place until a new trustee was found. The trustee would then be replaced by a new ineligible lender in a similar arrangement. The terms of the contracts were not available for this article. Most ineligible lenders we interviewed stated that the number of available trustees has decreased as eligible lender banks have merged with each other in recent years. Recent mergers include First National Bank of Chicago and Bank One, Norwest and Wells Fargo, and Firstar Bank with Star Bank and Mercantile Bank. The number of eligible lender trustees has also decreased, according to the most ineligible lenders. The most ineligible lender trustees are those who have not been approved as eligible lenders by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. Financial market analysts expect this consolidation activity to continue. Four ineligible lenders reported they had a difficult time obtaining their current trustee arrangement. One took over a year to do so. Several others said that finding a trustee in the future would become more problematic. Ineligible lender representatives said they were looking for a trustee to help them consolidate their assets. They were looking to consolidate their loans into a single trust. They said they had been unable to find a trustee who could help them do so for a year or more. penalties, refuse to make future payments, or recover payments already made to lenders and agencies for such things as interest subsidies and insurance claims. In 1998, HEA was amended to include a provision stating that eligible lenders that act as trustees are responsible for meeting statutory and regulatory requirements for the provision of HEA that makes trustees fully responsible for trustee-held loans. They reported that costs did not significantly increase or decrease after the 1998 amendments were enacted and that they did not see a change in the role of the trustee. new one can be engaged, even if the designated time periods have elapsed. The trustee arrangements we reviewed were also similar in the requirements placed on the ineligible lender. Obtaining a trustee arrangement does not appear to be a widespread problem among ineligible lenders to date. However, if eligible lenders remain unclear and therefore continue to interpret the 50-percent rule as applying to loans they hold as a trustee, lenders may not be able to comply with the rule, the authors say. The financial industry continues to consolidate, they say. the names of the parties involved in each trustee arrangement, the lender identification numberassociated with each arrangement, and the outstanding loan balances. These data represent the best information available, and an Education official acknowledged that the list might be incomplete. To determine the type of student loan transactions that made up the outstanding balance associated with a particular lender ID number, we surveyed eligible and ineligible lenders. We conducted follow-up interviews as necessary to ensure that we received accurate information. In determining the total outstanding balance, we asked the lenders to verify whether the account was used for originations and/or purchases of student loans, securitizations, or some combination of these transactions. Lenders have expressed confusion regarding application of the rule. Some ineligible lenders and other student loan market participants believe that the 50- percent rule applies to loans held as a trustee. Some eligible lender trustee representatives interpreted the rule as not applying to trustee-held loans. Some other representatives were not sure how the rule would apply to trustee loans, the report says. The full report can be found at: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/29/business/lenders-confusion-50-percent-rule.html. rule should be interpreted. Representatives of one bank incorrectly interpreted an exception to the 50-percent rule. Of those who were unsure, one trustee representative was not concerned because either calculation—including or excluding the loans—would place the bank in compliance with the act. On the other hand, a representative of another bank was unsure of how to interpret the rule. The hearing was held in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday and Wednesday, and is expected to last until Thursday. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. banks to assess their safety and soundness. Among the most important of these regulations are those dealing with minimum capital standards. These capital standards provide benchmarks against which regulators can assess the safety andsoundness of a bank’s operations as well as its financial condition. Education officials stated that because because of the regulations, students will not be able to go to college in the U.S. if they graduate from high school in the next few years, they will be unable to get a job. Each day, GAO issues a list of newly available reports and testimony. To receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days, please call (202) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone. A recorded menu is available on the GAO Web site. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S., call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. will provide information on how to obtain these lists. Web site: http://www.gao.gov/fraudnet/Fraudnet.htm e-mail: fraudnet@gaO.gov 1-800-424-5454 (automated answering system) or call the toll-free number at 1-844-856-5457. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. Education(GAO/OCG-99-5, Jan. 1999). Risk-BasedCapital:RegulatoryandIndustryApproachestoCapitaland Risk. High-RiskSeries:StudentFinancialAid. StudentLoanLenders:InformationontheActivitiesoftheFirst IndependentTrustCompany. The first copy of each GAO report is free. Additional copies of reports are $2 each. A check or money order should be made out to the Superintendent of Documents. VISA and MasterCard credit cards are accepted. cards are accepted, also. Orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent. Ordersbymail: U.S. General Accounting Office P.O. Box 37050 Washington, DC 20013 Ordersbyvisiting: Room 1100 700 4th St. NW (corner of 4th and G Sts. NW) U.N. Office of Accounting Standards Board (GAO) is located in Washington, D.C. and is open seven days a week. The 125 arrangements represent liaisons between 16 eligible lender trustees and 31 ineligible lenders. Ineligible lenders can be further grouped as 17 secondary markets and 14 other ineligibles. For $25.3 billion in outstanding loans— approximately 19 percent of the outstanding balance of all FFELP loans as of December 1999. For more information, visit the FEDELP website at: http://www.fedelp.org/feedelp-loan-lenders. case of a bank holding company, the FFELP loans of the company’s wholly owned subsidiaries as a group cannot total more than one-half of the lender’S combined consumer credit loan portfolio, including home mortgages. This provision is commonly known as the 50-percent rule. The rule applies to bank holding companies with more than $1 billion in assets, including U.S. banks, insurance companies, pension funds and insurance companies. It applies to banks with assets in excess of $100 billion, as well as U.K. banks. This report is concerned primarily with trustee arrangements used to enable ineligible lenders to make and hold student loans. The most direct protection comes from an HEA provision that holds eligible lenders fully responsible for any loans they hold as trustees. The presence of an eligible lender from whom the government can recoup its financial losses is critical. Education has no direct oversight authority to ensure that ineligible lenders are operating their programs in accordance with the HEA. For example, lenders to participate in FFELP, and in protecting the federal government’s investment in the program. Education administers and oversees federal student aid programs authorized by HEA. The five principal entities involved in FFELP are students, schools, lenders, guaranty agencies,and Education. At schools participating inFFELP, students apply to a participating lender. Students apply to the participating lender through a participating student loan program. Students can apply for financial aid through the participating student loans program through the Student Loan Guarantee Program (SLGP) or through their local bank or credit union, depending on the program. a consumer finance company subsidiary of a national bank. The majority of organizations making loans to students fall into one of these eligible lender categories. Organizations that do not meet HEA criteria may still participate in FFELP by contracting with an eligible lender to serve as its trustee. Education agreed with our recommendation that it clarify its interpretation of how the HEA provision applies to loans held by the trustee for an ineligible lender.These ineligible the student loan market in the future, the authors say, and Education agreed. ineligible lenders are generally not subject to financial safety and soundness reviews by government agencies. Education lacks assurance that these lenders would be able to meet their financial obligations in the program. Most eligible lender trustees also hold student loans in their own name and receive regular FFELP- to which ineligible lenders can participate in the student loan market. Given these issues, some ineligible lenders believe their market presence could diminish in the future. Given current law and the federal regulations that govern FFELp, trustee arrangements between eligible and ineligible lenders serve an important role in enabling ineligible lenders. stated he had turned down eligible lender trustee business because the additional trustee-held loans would put the bank above its 50-percent allocation of student loans. A second factor that is perceived by ineligible lenders as having the potential to limit their participation in FFELP is evolution in the financial markets, according to the report. The report was published by the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) and the European Securities and Markets Association (ESMA) on Monday, May 14. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. ineligible lender’s loans allows the federal government to recoup the losses from the eligible lender trustee rather than the ineligible lender. Because ineligible lenders do not receive any payments directly from Education, it does not have an ability to collect liabilities by offset. Education officials believe they do not have direct oversight authority of ineligible lenders. These officials said if the government were owed monies on an ineligible lender's loans, it could recover those funds by withholding the SAP on theeligible lender trustee's self-originated loans. related payments from the government for those loans. Federal government has additional sources from which to recover any repayments due the government on ineligible lenders’ loans that lose their guarantee. For example, lenders usually receive special allowance payments (SAP) and interest subsidiesfor the FFELP loans they hold. If the federal government loses its guarantee, the government can no longer pay the lenders' interest payments. The government can also recover the interest owed on the loans it has lost its guarantee on. the loans they hold as trustees. Loss of the federal guarantee due to servicer problems has occurred under the auspices of trustee arrangements in the past. The Department of Education reports that approximately 125 trustee arrangements exist between eligible and ineligible lenders. These arrangements account for about one-third of all federal loan guarantees, according to the Education Department. The Education Department says it has no immediate plans to change the trustee arrangement arrangement, which it says is necessary to protect the federal loan guarantee for eligible students. Some problems may not be found until after the federal government has already provided reimbursement. The government may have to recover these monies from the parties involved. According to Education officials, the HEA provision that holds trustees responsible for an associated loss.or the lender for the associated dollar loss. The federal government will provide reimbursement for the students' tuition costs and other costs of living. The students will be able to apply for federal Pell Grants and other financial aid through the University of California, Los Angeles. believe the federal government is likely to recover its losses from trustees for two reasons. First, most financial institutions that serve as eligible lender trustees are subject to federal (and in many instances, state) oversight. For example, bank regulatorspromulgate regulations and policies that prescribe safeand sound banking activities and examine trustees' actions. The second reason is that trustees are not subject to the same level of federal oversight as the banks they serve as trustees for, such as the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. Congress enacted legislation with several incentives to increase lender and guaranty agency participation. In providing these incentives, the Congress kept the financial risk almost entirely with the federal government. The Congress has since shifted some risk back to the guaranty agencies and lenders by reducing the maximum reimbursement and insurance rates on defaulted loans. These actions were intended to encourage both lenders and Guaranty agencies to work with borrowers to prevent them from defaulting on their loans. Apart from the incentives, Congress also provided federal funds for guaranty. agencies to use as seed money to pay claims to lenders. defaults that occur when borrowers fail to repay their loans. Some loans lose their federal guarantee because lenders, servicers, or guaranty agencies fail to follow the Department’s requirements for making, servicing, and collecting loans. When these problems occur, the federal government will not reimburse the guarantor. A loan may lose its guarantee because of servicing errors or because of negligence on the part of the servicer or the lender. The Department of Education may assess although Education officials and other FFELP participants believe the probability of large-scale problems is low. for a loan. The school verifies the student’s eligibility and determines the loan amount the student is eligible to receive. The student then receives the loan from the lender. The guaranty agency guarantees the loan against default. If the student defaults on the loan, the lender files a claim with the guarantyagency for reimbursement of most of its loss. Education reimburses the lender for most of the loss if the student fails to pay back the loan. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. guaranty agencies for most of their claims paid to lenders for defaulted loans and for some of their administrative costs. Most lenders contract with a third-party entity to service the loan and collect payments from borrowers. HEA designates which entities are eligible to make FFELP loans to students. In general, in general, the HEA does not cover student loans for the first three years of a student’s education. The HEA also doesn’t cover the fourth and fifth years of the student's education.