This report will be available at no charge on GAO’s Web site at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staffs have any questions about this report, please contact me at (202) 512-3604 or by e-mail at farrellb@GAo.organizations. In addition, this report is available on the GAO Web site for download at: http:// www.gaO.gov/gao/report/Report/2013/07/08/GAO-Report-2013-07-08. organizations and offices we contacted, see table 1. We conducted this performance audit from August 2009 through January 2011 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings, according to the audit report. The audit was conducted in compliance with the requirements of Generally Accepted Government Auditing Standards (GGAAS) for the period August 2009 to January 2011. For more information on the audit, visit: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/29/government/audit/index.html. Once the Secretary of Defense designates a service to meet a medical requirement, that service identifies and selects units and personnel to fill the requirement. While the procedures and systems used by each service to select medical personnel vary, the services’ processes for filling requirements all result in units and medical units and Personnel to fill requirements for Iraq and Afghanistan. The U.S. military has more than 100,000 medical personnel in Afghanistan and Iraq. The number of medical personnel is expected to grow over the next few years. support hospital in Afghanistan. For requirements, including medical personnel and units, that are not known in advance, DOD used the emergent force management process extensively to meet requirements through requests for forces. Requests for forces are generally made through the request for forces process. Generally, the parties involved in this process have separate, sequential roles in the process. For more information, visit the U.S. Department of Defense's force management website. for more information on the force management site, visit: http://www.dodforcemanagement.org/force-management. together general officers from interested parties. General officers lay out known requirements, review and endorse sourcing recommendations and associated risk and risk mitigation options. In sourcing requests through the emergent process, requirements are prioritized according to the needs of the combatant commanders. The requirements are then submitted to the Joint Staff for validation, and then to the joint and service force providers to identify potential sourcing solutions to fill requirements before being transmitted to the Secretary of Defense for approval. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. to a force allocation decision model. emergent requirements are considered within the model’s general framework. Each request for forces is individually evaluated as it is received, meaning that officials focus on whether or not forces are ready and available to fill the request rather than trying to determine the exact number of troops needed to fill a position. The U.S. military has more than 100,000 troops stationed in Iraq and Afghanistan, and the majority of them are based in the West Bank and Herzegovina. DOD designed the Global Force Management process to provide insight into the global availability of U.S. military forces. For the rotational force management process, requirements are identified 2 years in advance. In both Iraq and Afghanistan, medical personnel and unit requirements are included in the Global force Management Allocation Plan. The plan provides an approach for Central Command, the services, and the services’ force providers to manage the sourcing of rotational requirements, including requirements for medical personnel, units and units. relative priority of the request, as is done at the Global Force Management Boards for rotational requirements. As part of providing and evaluating potential solutions for the request for forces, the services’ force providers often conduct risk assessments to provide information on the availability and readiness of both active and reserve forces. For more information, visit the U.S. Department of Defense’s force readiness assessment website, or go to: http://www.usdoj.org/force-readiness-assessment. DOD designed the Global Force Management process to provide insight into the availability of U.S. military forces to deploy, including medical personnel. Figure 3 depicts the process and the key participants in Global Force management. More information on the Global force Management process and services’ personnel filling processes can be found in appendix II. The U.N. Force Management Process was established in 2005 and provides insight into military forces' ability to deploy medical personnel to theater. The process was designed to provide an insight into how military forces are able to provide medical personnel for contingency operations. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. The Department of Defense (DOD) uses its Global Force Management process to meet its requirements, including those for medical personnel and units. For more information, visit the Defense Department's website at: http://www.dod.mil/forces/global-force-management-process-for-medical- personnel-and- units.html. For additional information on the DOD's global force management process, visit: http:www.DOD.mil/. For more details about the DOD’s global force Management process, go to: www.dOD.gov. Secretary of the Army direct the Army Medical Department to update its doctrine and the organization of medical units concerning their size, composition, and use. DOD concurred with our first recommendation that the department clarify the level of care that deployed DOD civilian employees can expect in theater. DOD noted that there is an unquestionable need to formally update doctrinal publications. DOD also noted that the Army is constantly reviewing and assessing medical capability, the use of those capabilities, and updating doctrine to evolving staffing requirements. to which the Army has adapted the composition and use of its medical units to provide advanced medical care in Iraq and Afghanistan. We reviewed reports from the medical task forces in theater, Army documentation of the composition of medical units. We interviewed representatives from the Army Medical Department Center and School, Directorate of Combat and Doctrine Development about the relevance of doctrine and the organization ofmedical units. In addition, we interviewed officials with the medicaltask forces and Surgeons’ offices inIraq and Afghanistan about the current use and composition ofMedical units in theater. GAO examined the Department of Defense’s efforts to identify and fill its military medical personnel requirements in support of operations in Iraq and Afghanistan. The Army has adapted the composition and use of its medical units to provide advanced medical care, and the Army fills medical personnel gaps that arise in theater. GAO staff who made major contributions to the report are listed in appendix IV.may be found on the last page of this report. For confidential support, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. a recent review of medical capability indicated the need for additional medical personnel. The Army responded with guidance to increase the number of enlisted health care specialists assigned to Army Brigade Combat Teams. The department also noted that the Army continues to capture lessons learned and input from commanders. The Department of the Army says the Army is working to improve the quality of medical care available to soldiers and their families in Iraq and Afghanistan. It is also working to ensure the Army has the capability to respond to the needs of the nation's military. About 4,000 medical personnel were in Iraq and about 6,000 were in Afghanistan at the end of July 2010. The United States’ military presence in Iraq is scheduled to end no later than December 31, 2011. As of September 2010, about 104,000 U.S. military personnel were deployed in Afghanistan, according to administration estimates. Figure 1 shows the breakdown of all military medical personnel inIraq and Afghanistan by service at the start of July. The DOD has established a database of medical personnel by service. In 2010, the designation of U.S. troops in Iraq became United States Forces-Iraq. The commanding generals of the two theaters are advised by a lead surgeon on medical policy and procedures. The positions of United States forces-Afghanistan Surgeon and the commander of the task force medical command in Afghanistan are filled by the same individual. According to theater medical officials, the lead surgeon and staff collaborate closely with thetask force medical brigade commander and staff in Iraq to coordinate medical policy. During our evaluation, we contacted DOD and service officials, including officials from U.S. Forces-Iraq and United States Forces-Afghanistan. We also contacted the Offices of the Surgeons General for the Army, the Navy, and the Air Force. We are happy to share the results of our evaluation with the public. For more information, go to CNN.com/soulmatestories and follow us on Twitter @cnnstories and @CNNStories. In wartime, each service’s medical personnel processes allow for the deployment of medical personnel from fixed military treatment facilities to support contingency operations. The processes attempt to distribute the burden of deployments within and across medical specialties (e.g., orthopedic surgeons, critical care nurses, and psychiatrists), to comply with service guidelines, such as required time at home for servicemembers. To maintain a healthy inventory, the processes try to distribute deployments across and across specialties to maintain ahealthy inventory. five levels of medical care to treat injured or sick military personnel. Each level provides progressively more intensive treatment. Over the course of operations in Iraq and Afghanistan, the military has integrated more advanced medical wounded while deployed in support of U.S. military forces engaged in hostilities. Civilians are eligible to receive health care treatment and services at the same level and scope provided to military personnel, according to theater guidance for Iraq and Afghan forces. The guidance provides detailed information on medical care for deployed civilians, among others. During the offensive in Bastion, Afghanistan, officials relocated some mental health providers in Afghanistan to Bastion for the duration of the heightened operational tempo. In addition, officials with the Task Force 30th Medical Command told us that they relocated some mentally health providers to the Bastion area so this type of care could be better provided in the area. The U.S. Army's 30th Army Medical Command is based at Camp Bastion in Afghanistan. For more information, visit www.30thArmyMedicalCommand.unit. an increase in medical resources would have to be balanced against other high-priority needed resources. For example, the former commander who oversaw military medical units in Afghanistan noted to us that while there is no medical-specific force cap, there is a limit on the number of medical personnel within the larger force cap. Any additional military personnel needed in theater must be balanced by the loss of other military personnel in other areas, such as a transportation unit, and that the force cap has been in place for decades. personnel, the requesting unit is asked to offset the increase in forces on a one-to-one basis within the unit. If they are unable to do so, operational and medical officials determine if the request for additional medical forces takes precedence over the need for other types of personnel already in the military. If the request is approved, the request will be sent to the U.S. Department of Defense for approval. The request is expected to be made by the end of the month. U.S. Central Command requested additional medical personnel to provide medical care to the increased number of military personnel in theater. Local base commanders can request extra medical personnel if they believe that the number of U.s. soldiers or civilians merits an increase. The current commander who oversees military medical units in Afghanistan stated that local base commanders are able to request more medical personnel for a number of reasons, including the need for a theater hospital and a preventative medicine. The number of medical personnel requested must be balanced with other types of forces needed to conduct and support ongoing operations. Two Army sustainment brigades deployed to Afghanistan without enough medical personnel. Task Force 62nd Medical Command in Afghanistan requested additional forces for these two brigades. DOD met this requirement by deploying 22 Air Force medics to Afghanistan. Medical officials in Iraq and Afghanistan told us that they must consider two operational limitations which affect how many medical personnel they formally request. First, the cap on how many medics can be sent to Iraq or Afghanistan. Second, there is a cap on the number of medical personnel that can be deployed at any one time. guidance with regard to eligibility for routine medical care for deployed DOD civilian employees. Secretary of Defense reported to Congress in April 2010 that with each new mission, the need for new civilian skills have resulted in an increase in the DOD deployed civilians and federal civilian employees that might be injured or wounded in support of contingency operations. DOD noted in its report that withEach new mission,. the need to learn new skills has resulted in a increase in. the number of DOD deployed civilian employees who need medical care. About 2,000 DOD civilian employees were deployed to Afghanistan. Medical officials in Afghanistan told us that they provide routine medical care to U.S. federal civilians. DOD’s report to Congress on deployed DOD civilians stated that the department believes it is imperative that each federal civilian be treated at the same level of care as the rest of the military. In response to congressional interest, DOD reviewed the department's existing policies for medical care for for care at the the same scope provided to military personnel. care in Afghanistan provided additional guidance that is inconsistent with both the DOD directive and with guidance provided elsewhere in the document as to the level of care to be provided to DOD deployed civilians. One section of the guidance stated routine care for all civilians was to be routine. Another section said routine care was not routine, but that it was routine for the military to provide routine care to all civilians in the U.S. military. The guidance also stated that routine care is not routine for all military personnel, but it is routine for those in the military. states that DOD civilians are eligible for emergency care but most routine care for them is subject to availability. This differs from the DOD directive that states care should be at the same level and scope provided to military personnel. Another section of the same guidance stated routine care was to be provided for deployed DOD civilians. The previous version of DOD Directive 1404.10 indicated that civilians designated as emergency essential employees would be eligible for routine care. In addition, we found that the theater guidance document for provided subject to available. Not all patients progress through all five levels of care. Joint and service definitions for each level of care vary marginally due to service-specific support requirements, but they essentially align. Patients being evacuated may skip one or more levels of Care as appropriate. Fort Sam Houston, Texas, is home to the U.S. Army's 1st Battalion, 1st Brigade, and the 2nd Battalion, 2nd Regiment, of the Texas Army National Guard. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. that 16 additional veterinary food inspectors were needed for food safety inspections. Although DOD primarily provides both emergency life-saving medical care as well as routine medical care to U.S. military personnel in Iraq and Syria, they did not formally initiate that request due to the current shortage of these specialists. The U.N. Food and Agriculture Organization has called on the United States to increase the number of food inspectors to 16. The United States has not formally initiated that request. The Pentagon has said it will consider the request in the coming days. number of deployed civilians and that these civilians are not immune to the dangers associated with contingency operations. Although we did not learn of any deployed DOD civilians being turned away from receiving routine care in theater during the time of our review, officials in theater said it could be a concern. DOD could still benefit by assessing the implications the inconsistencies in guidance could have if there were a sizeable increase in the number of DOD deployed civilians in theater. Conducting counterinsurgency operations in often uncertain, dangerous environments such as Iraq and that its operating units have sufficient organic medical support and the medical needs of deployed civilians are being met. Theater operational and medical officials determine providing critical life-saving capabilities for counterinsurgency operations in other theaters and in the future. To better understand the extent to which deployed DOD civilian employees have access to needed medical care, as appropriate, we recommend that the Secretary of Defense direct the Combatant Commander of U.S. Central Command to clarify the level of care that deployed civilians should receive. Afghanistan, it is unclear what level of routine medical care deployed DOD civilian employees can expect in theater. About 2,600 DOD theater needs to achieve the goal of providing advanced life-saving care quickly. To enhance medical units’ preparedness to conduct current and future operations, we recommend that the military increase the level of care available to DOD deployed civilians, including their eligibility for routine care. We also recommend that DOD increase the number of combat support hospitals and forward surgical teams in Iraq and Afghanistan. the number of deployed civilians and that these civilians are not immune to the dangers associated with contingency operations. Although DOD guidance clearly provides that deployed DOD civilians will receive life-saving emergency care, there is no guarantee that they will receive the care they need. The U.S. military has not ruled out the possibility of sending more troops to Iraq and Afghanistan in the future. The Pentagon has not confirmed any plans to send additional troops to the Middle East in the near future, but has said that the number of troops deployed is expected to rise. if the number of civilians increased, and at that time they would assess the impact of a civilian increase on the need for more medical personnel. At the conclusion of our audit, an Army official agreed that if there is an inconsistency between departmental guidance and theater guidance, it should be examined. As long as an increase of about 800 to 1500 civilians would have to occur before they would consider revising military medical personnel requirements, the Army said. The Army said it would consider such an increase. DOD Directive 1404.10 states that the department’s civilian employees who become ill, are injured, or are civilians is unclear due to inconsistent guidance. Inconsistent guidance could potentially impact the medical personnel requirements planning process if medical officials in theater are uncertain about deployed DOD civilian employees’ access to routine medical care. DOD could reduce the uncertainty about the level of routine care these deployed civilians can expect in theater by examining inconsistencies in departmental guidance compared to theater guidance, the authors say. It is unclear what level of care deployed DOD civilian employees can expect in theater. Theater commanders in Iraq and Afghanistan are providing quicker access to advanced emergency care. A DOD directive governing medical care for DOD deployed civilians is inconsistent with in-theater theater guidance. The military medical personnel requirements planning process may not be fully informed by department-level expectations, the authors say. The authors interviewed officials with the theater-level medical task forces and Surgeons’ offices in Iraq, Afghanistan and the U.S. Army Forces Command. how many and the types of medical personnel needed to support operations in Iraq and Afghanistan. The assessment includes an evaluation of the operational mission and other planning factors, such as historical injury statistics and medical workload data. In their assessment, theater officials also analyze gaps in the medical personnel pool. The U.S. military has more than 100,000 medical personnel in the Iraq and Afghan theaters of operations. The number is expected to grow over the next few years as more troops arrive in both countries. The 9l5th Forward Surgical Team was authorized to deploy to Iraq in September 2009 with three general surgeons. Instead, it deployed with only one another surgeon for deployment. By the time the Army Reserve was able to identify a surgeon who could deploy, the unit had been in Iraq for a month out of its first 90-day period. The Army Reserve is able to quickly fill these gaps when a medical provider is not able to deploy. The unit is based in Fort Worth, Texas. The 9l5th Forward Surgical Team did not have one out of its authorized three general surgeons for the first three 90-day rotations. The Army Reserve identified a doctor to fill one of the two vacancies; however this individual could not deploy due to an inability to be credentialed as a general surgeon. The 915th Forward surgical Team was expected to operate as two smaller units at two separate locations in southern Iraq, but it was unable to provide surgical services. The U.S. military is still searching for the third general surgeon for the team. Army data show the magnitude of these unfilled gaps or late arrivals for the reserve components ranged from about 3 percent to 7 percent from January 2008 to July 2010. Unfilled reserve component personnel requirements can have serious consequences depending on the needed medical specialty. Therefore, medical commanders in theater typically cross-level to fill short-term temporary personnel gaps, although medical officials in theater often fill the gaps as well. The 915th Forward Surgical Team not having all of its medical personnel before the end of each 90-day rotation. It can take 120 to 180 days to identify, notify, and then mobilize an Army reservist to fill an unfilled requirement. The Army’s 90-day rotation policy is intended to ease the financial burden of deploying reserve medical personnel and help retain them. It can be challenging to fill the gap before the start of the next 90- day rotation. To mitigate other risks they believe are higher, the Army is taking steps to mitigate the risk of injury or death to reservists. Risk assessments include violations of the services’ rotation policies regarding the required time at home for servicemembers. The impact to current missions and operations, such as the staffing of U.S. military treatment facilities in the case of medical personnel, if a service is selected to meet the risk assessment. The risk assessment is based on a review of the military’s policies and procedures, as well as a risk assessment of the potential impact on current missions, operations and personnel. deployment policy for reservists applicable to physicians, dentists, and nurse anesthetists. To determine the extent to which the Army’s reserve component medical units deployed their authorized medical personnel in 2008, 2009, and through the first 6 months of 2010 to Iraq and Afghanistan. We assessed the reliability of the data by interviewing the agency official responsible for manually collecting and summarizing the data. We determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report. Additionally, to better understand how military medical personnel are deployed, we reviewed Army. deployment data on late deployments of medical providers. another dentist not in Iraq who was eligible to deploy to fill this need. DOD officials told us that selecting and deploying an active component medical provider to backfill a position typically takes about 45 days. Cross-leveling involves the temporary relocation of personnel from one unit in theater to another, officials said. It typically takes 45 days to deploy a medical provider from one theater to the other, they said. The U.S. military has more than 2,000 medical providers in Iraq, according to the Pentagon. Cross-leveling is often used as an interim measure to minimize risk when a gap in medical personnel coverage occurs. For example, an operating room nurse assigned to a forward surgical team in Iraq had an unexpected medical situation and appropriate course of action. Army officials told us that they are willing to accept some risks in order to fill medical personnel gaps. DOD has continued to assess its need for medical personnel in theater based on the requirements of the mission and a variety of medical data and has made adjustments to meet specific needs. care into the first three levels of care, which are typically provided in theater. Care can be provided by the wounded soldiers, medics or corpsmen, or battalion aid stations. Figure 2 illustrates the different levels of medical care that may be provided to U.S. servicemembers who become ill or injured while in theater, as well as the different types of care available to them in the field. Level 1 – First responder care. This level provides immediate medical care and stabilization before evacuation to the next level. Forward resuscitative care. This level provides advanced emergency medical treatment as close to the point of injury as possible to attain stabilization of the patient. Examples of level 2 units include forward surgical teams, critical care nursing and temporary holding. In addition, it can provide postsurgical inpatient services, such as critical care Nursing and temporary hold. It can also provide post-surgical services such as post-surgery care and post-trauma care. It is a level 2 unit that can provide forward surgical care. hospitals, and Navy expeditionary medical facilities. Level 4 – Overseas definitive care. This level provides the full range of preventative, curative, acute, convalescent, restorative and rehabilitative care. An example of a level 4 facility is Landstuhl Regional Medical Center in Germany. Level 5 – U.S. definitive care, but most typically is located in the continental United States. Examples include Walter Reed Army Medical Center and National Naval Medical Center, in Bethesda, Maryland. shock trauma platoons, area support medical companies, and combat stress control units. Level 3 – Theater hospital care. This level provides the most advanced medical care available in Iraq and Afghanistan. Examples include Army combat support hospitals, Air Force theater level 3 combat support. hospitals and level 2 forward surgical teams. According to documents from the 28th Combat Support Hospital, the number of surgical sites has increased due to the increased number of soldiers in the field. The number of surgeries performed has also increased. The U.S. command structure in Iraq and Afghanistan has evolved over time. For purposes of this report, we focused primarily on level 2 and level 3 facilities. The facilities provide the most comprehensive and advanced medical care. In 2009, the designation “level 3” was added to the list of military hospitals in Iraq. The designation was added in 2009, and the number of hospitals was increased to 1,000 in 2010. The number of beds was increased from 1,100 in 2004 to 2,500 in 2006. manuals related to the determination of medical personnel requirements in theater. The current design of combat support hospitals is not flexible enough to accomplish what they are now being asked to do. As such, they now have to continuously use what is referred to as specialized medical personnel. manuals. The military is now using what is called a ‘specialized medical personnel manual’ to determine medical personnel needs in theater and how they are to be dispatched. The manual is available on the U.S. military’s website. field manual still does not specify what the number and mix of medical specialists should be. By splitting or dividing the standard traditional design for combat support hospitals, DOD has also had to adjust the number of medical personnel in those units as well. Instead of relying on the U.S. military for medical care, the military is now relying on other countries for medical help. The U.N. is the only country that currently provides medical care to troops in Iraq, Afghanistan and other countries in the Middle East. medical workload. Officials use this information to increase or decrease the number of medical personnel in line with demand for medical services. For example, DOD medical officials conducted an analysis to determine the need for cardiovascular specialists in Iraq and Afghanistan based on, among other variables, the volume of cardiovascular-related work. For more information, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/30/health/features/health-care-specialists-in-iraq-and-afghanistan/index.html. such as the number and dispersion of U.S. forces, the expected intensity of combat, capabilities of the adversary to inflict harm, geography, and climate. Officials said that this information allows them to determine the level and structure of medical care they expect to need to support missions throughout the theater. The information also helps them determine how much medical care will be needed to support the mission, officials said. It also allows for better planning and planning on how to provide medical care to the troops. Medical officials analyze data from the Joint Theater Trauma Registry, the Joint Medical Work Station, and service and joint data on disease and non-battle injuries to determine trends. To further assess the need for specific types of medical specialists in a given unit and across the theater, medical officials analyze the data from a number of sources, including the Joint medical work station, Joint Medical Registry, and Joint Medical Service Center. To see the full report, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/29/military/features/military-medical-specialists-in-joint-targets/story.html. Identifying and selecting medical personnel and units to fill requirements can often be challenging due to shortages of medical personnel. DOD officials told us they have been able to fill almost all medical personnel requirements since the start of the program. The identification of individual medical personnel to fill the requirements is important because medical personnel across the services typically are.personnel deploying to an operational theater to carry out a mission. The services’ processes for filling requirements all result in a unit and its personnel deploying to the theater of operations. including the limit on the total number of forces in theater and shortages of and high demand for certain medical personnel. In determining the number of military medical personnel and the medical specialties needed, theater operational and medical officials told us that they begin by evaluating various mission planning factors. However, if theater officials concluded that they needed more medical personnel due to increases in numbers of DOD deployed civilians, we recognize that that could have an impact on the planning process for determining medical personnel requirements, the officials said. medical care given different potential scenarios and the associated risks. This ongoing assessment takes place in theater and allows theater officials to identify new medical personnel requirements. High demand for medical personnel in certain specialties also plays a role in decisions about whether to request medical forces. For example, officials in Iraq determined that they needed medical help in order to maintain their authorized force cap. Further, theater operational and medical officials also consider operational limitations when developing their medical personnel requirement, theater, and if so they decide which personnel will redeploy out of theater to stay within the authorized force caps. critical care nurse, physician assistant, psychiatry, and clinical psychology are high-demand specialties. Each of the services maintains a list of specialties that are in high demand relative to available personnel. The services use unique yet similar processes to identify and select and select specialties for the program. The programs use a combination of internal and external criteria to determine the level of service required. The program uses a mix of internal criteria and external factors to determine levels of service needed for each of the programs. The process is similar to that used by the other programs. of medical specialists. In addition to the contact above, Laura Talbott, Assistant Director; John Bumgarner; Susan Ditto; K. Nicole Harms; Stephanie Santoso; Adam Smith; Angela Watson; Erik Wilkins-McKee; Michael Willems; and Elizabeth Wood made major contributions to this report. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. For support in the U.S., call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. commanders split these units because they found that the field hospital’s standard design configuration was no longer suitable for the model of care that has evolved in Iraq. Splitting medical units, such as in Iraq reported that one of its top issues was advocating for updates to the doctrine and organizational redesign of these split units that govern its use and personnel allocation. By leveraging lessons learned collected from this practice, especially the needed number and mix of medical personnel, the Army could leverage lessons learned from split medical units. injury, the Army has not fully incorporated these current practices into Army doctrine and organizational documents. In response to a draft of this report, DOD explained to us that Army leadership has recognized that split hybrid operations and the injury they cause are a problem. The Army has also acknowledged that split Hybrid Operations are a potential problem for the Army in the future, the report says. The report has been updated to reflect the Army's response to the draft of the report, which has been released to the public. medical care by placing more medical units in more geographical areas to save lives. Army doctrine, which is the starting point for defining and planning a unit’s capabilities, has not been updated fully to reflect these changes in theater. Updating doctrine and organizational design of these split medical units used in theater could help to assure that these units will be resourced with the needed number and mix of medical personnel to continue to be used in counterinsurgency operations. The Army could benefit from incorporating its lessons learned, where appropriate, and be better assured the current practice of splitting medical units to provide advanced life-saving emergency medical care to those severely injured. that flexibility in the doctrine is critical, but that doctrine needs to reflect the realities of operations on the ground. The degree to which current practice of splitting medical units has filtered into medical doctrine has been limited. Recognizing these lessons learned in an environment that is continuing to change is key to the future of the military. The U.S. military has a long way to go before it can be considered a fully-fledged military service, says the U.N. Secretary-General's spokesman. dispersed environment in the theater of operations have generated a requirement for additional medical structure. According to an Army regulation, the Army maintains a lessons learned program to, among other things, systematically update Army doctrine to enhance the Army’s preparedness to conduct current and future operations. By updating Army doctrine, the U.S. Army will be better prepared to respond to future crises, according to the Army regulation. The Army will also be able to better prepare for future crises by having a better idea of how to respond. theater, which indicates the number and mix of skilled medical personnel these units should have, has not been updated to reflect current practice in theater. commanders in Iraq and Afghanistan have been splitting or reconfiguring medical units typically designed to operate in one location into multiple smaller units. Army theater commanders have reconfigured the composition of field hospitals and forward surgical teams by breaking them down into smaller stand-alone units to better position them to give the severely wounded or injured, such as the casualties of blast-type injuries. their size, composition and use. Army commanders have used two approaches to fill these gaps: backfilling and cross-leveling. Backfilling involves the identification and deployment of medical personnel into theater from the U.S. or elsewhere who were not originally scheduled to deploy overseas at that time. Cross- leveling involves the Identification and Deployment of Medical Personnel into Theater from the United States or elsewhere from that time on, according to the Army's Web site. The Army's website is: http://www.army.mil/news/press-releases/2013/01/31/backfilling-and-cross-leveled.html. combat support hospitals, including the list of needed medical specialties, should be redesigned to reflect the actual use of combat support hospitals across multiple locations. Task Force 1st Medical Brigade reported that splitting full-sized combat support. hospitals into to recommend that the organizational composition of combat. support hospitals be redesigned. Officials with the U.S. Forces-Iraq Surgeon Office told us in a separate interview that medical doctrine, specifically the organizational design for both personnel and equipment should be overhauled in Iraq. assessed and updated given the current experience in Iraq. The splitting of combat support hospitals and forward surgical teams has gained acceptance over time but should be examined given how counterinsurgency doctrine is implemented in Iraq, officials said. These officials with the Surgeon Office in Iraq also said that the splitting of the combat support hospital and the forward surgical team has gainedacceptance over time. The split of the Combat Support Hospital and the Forward Surgical Team has gained accepted over time, they said. Officials with the Army Medical Department Center and School recently updated the forward surgical team field manual. They noted changes in the number and mix of to ensure use of medical personnel meets requirements. We recognize that the Army continues to capture lessons learned and input from the commanders, and we noted in our report that the army has updated its forward surgicalteam field manual although updates to this field manual are still being considered. The Army is continuing to evolve to provide advanced medical care to save more lives, officials said. specialists that make up a forward surgical team might be necessary if such teams are to operate as smaller stand-alone units. Army planners have adjusted medical personnel requirements for forward surgical teams to account for changes in these smaller nonstandard medical unit reconfigurations. However, the updated manual did not specifically note changes in the number and mix of medical specialists that made up a front surgical team if the team is providing advanced emergency care as a stand- standalone unit. Thus, we still believe the Army would benefit by fully updating the organization of medical units concerning front surgical teams. medical units such as combat support hospitals and area support medical companies. By being in more geographical areas, these critical life-saving medical units are better able to achieve their goal of providing advanced emergency medical care within 60 minutes of injury. Acknowledging the current practice of splitting medical units, the medical brigade that provided oversight over medical units said it helps to increase survival rates. The Army medical officials we spoke with said that they believe splitting and reconfiguring units in theater is necessary and helps. to the emphasis on providing troops access to surgical care within 60 minutes of being injured. Studies show that for those severely injured or wounded, 90 percent do not survive if advanced medical care is not provided. Medical officials in Iraq acknowledged that Army doctrine and the organizational design of medical units were top issues that needed to be updated to better serve the troops in the war zone. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. northern Iraq given the possibility of adverse weather conditions that would prohibit medical evacuation of patients to more advanced medical care facilities. Further, when confronted with a need for additional medical personnel, the theater commanding general can submit a request for forces through DOD’s Global Force Management process. For example, the U.S. military may need more medical personnel in northern Iraq if the weather prevents medical evacuation to other parts of the country. For more information, go to: http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/features/features-top-stories/2014/01/29/iraq-military-receive-more-medical- personnel-in-northern-Iraq-given-possibility-of- adverse-weather- conditions. cover a wider geographical area. For example, as of December 2009 the Task Force 28th Combat Support Hospital in Iraq was split to be at three separate sites in Iraq—Baghdad, Tallil, and Al Kut. Theater medical centers are typically designed to be in one location, but in Iraq they are split to cover a wider area. The U.S. military uses the term theater medical centers to refer to hospitals that provide medical care to theater troops in Iraq and Afghanistan. The term "theater medical centers" is also used in the United States for military hospitals in Afghanistan. medical evacuations in theater. Officials also analyze gaps and risks in the medical care structure under different possible scenarios. Given these lessons learned, officials with the Task Force 1st Medical Brigade told us that they were concerned about outdated policies, guidance, doctrine, and field field practices. For more information, visit the U.S. Army's 1st Battalion, 1st Regiment, 2nd Medical Brigade website. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. A dentist assigned to a brigade combat team in southern Iraq was evacuated out of theater for medical reasons. Given the backlog of needed dental work, commanders expressed concern about losing a dentist. In response, Army Forces Command initiated an effort to identify dentists in theater. To help, go to CNN.com/soulmatestories and follow us on Twitter @cnnstimates and @CNNStimates. To donate to the Army Dentist Fund, visit www.ArmyDentistFund.org. members who coordinate care in theater and directly command medical- only units in theater. The theater surgeon and medical task forces command mostly Army medical facilities. According to a DOD official, the other services maintain and operate additional medical facilities in theater that may be outside the direct command of the medical task force. For example, the Air Force operates a theater hospital in Balad, Iraq but coordinates closely with the task force medical brigade in Iraq. The U.S. Forces-Iraq and United States Forces- Afghanistan. Officials with the Army Medical Command, the Navy Bureau of Medicine and Surgery, and the Air Force Personnel Center talk about their processes for filling in-theater military medical personnel requirements. For a more comprehensive listing of the military's medical requirements, visit the U.S. Army's official website. For more information on the Army's medical needs, visit Army.com/MedicalNeeds. for information on medical needs in the Army, and click here for details on the Navy's Medical Needs. Each theater also has a medical task force. The Task Force 1st Medical Brigade and its successor, the Task Force 807th Medical Brigade in Iraq and the Task force 62nd Medical Command in Afghanistan, have professional staff. They reflect the current practice of splitting medical units such as combat support hospitals. For example, in a December 2009 Mid-Tour Report, the medical unit that provided oversight over medical units in Iraq noted that the organization for capabilities in both locations as expected without three authorized general surgeons. As a result of the personnel gaps, the unit temporarily relocated medical personnel already in theater from other medical units. concerns about splitting area support medical companies and using them in theater in a non-doctrinal fashion. These area supportMedical companies now function as two separate level 2 troop medical clinics when they are staffed to function as one. Finally, the Task Force 1st Medial Brigade report went on to discuss the possibility of using area support Medical Companies in theater. The report concluded with a recommendation that the area medical companies be split into two separate levels of medical care. The Task Force's recommendation was approved. was evacuated out of theater. It was critical that this personnel requirement be filled in a timely manner. Theater officials requested a replacement from U.S. Army Forces Command. The individual identified as a replacement could not deploy for at least 30 days. Task Force 1st Medical Brigade identified an operating room nurse that it could borrow from another unit in theater until the replacement could be found. The nurse was able to be deployed to the Middle East in the next few days, the brigade said. The operation was a success. arrived. After the replacement nurse arrived in theater, the operating room nurse on loan returned to the unit the individual came from. Personnel gaps that occur in theater cannot always be prevented and when gaps do occur, theater commanders assess the risk associated with the gap and decide on an replacement. The replacement nurse was on loan from the unit she came from, and returned to her original unit after a few days. The nurse was back on duty and working as a nurse in the theater operating room. The hospital was able to continue operating as normal. Staffing of medical units is now done in a “very non-doctrinal fashion” and that they had similar.personnel documents to manage staffing rather than staff as indicated in established doctrine and the organization design of these units. Officials with the Task Force 1st Medical Brigade noted to us that staffing of medical. units was now done “in a very non-Doctrine fashion’ and ‘in a similar manner’ to that of other units in the Army. 1st Medical Brigade told us these specialized personnel documents allow for more up-to-date establishment of personnel requirements to address gaps caused by splitting medical units. However, the process is difficult and it came about because current doctrine and organizational design were not sufficient to address the capabilities needed for splitting, the brigade said. 1st Medical brigade told us that it is difficult to split medical units and that the process will take some time to complete, but that it will be worth it in the long run. smaller parts can create medical personnel gaps in certain specialties. The medical brigade’s report also went on to note that personnel with these smaller combat support hospitals are spread so thinly that when personnel take leave or are or wounded does not lead to unnecessary staffing challenges. Gaps in medical capabilities can occur when medical providers do not deploy as expected for Iraq or Afghanistan. Army commanders have used two approaches to fill those gaps, according to medical officials in theater. The Army has used a combination of techniques to fill the gaps. reasons such as resignation, or a medical provider is determined to be medically nondeployable. Medical personnel gaps can also occur when individual medical personnel need to leave the unit for reasons such as an emergency situation at home or if they become seriously sick or injured in theater. According to the U.S. Department of Defense, there are more than 2,000 medical personnel gaps in the military. There are also more than 1,500 medical personnel shortages in the private sector. There is also a shortage of medical personnel in the public sector. a space-available basis, and that they would not turn away any person with injuries that presented a danger to life, limb, or eyesight, regardless of the employment status of an individual. This issue has received continuing congressional interest. For example, in April 2008 the House Armed Services Committee Subcommittee on the Navy and Marine Corps held a hearing on the issue. The hearing was held in Washington, D.C. and lasted for three hours. The panel was chaired by Rep. Tom Coburn, R-Oklahoma.