The U.S. Census Bureau Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP) data are used in this report. The most recent SIPP data are from the 2008 panel, which is designed to interview a representative sample of families every four months over a 64-month period. The SIPP collects detailed information on family composition, labor force participation, income, and program participation among families and their members in each of the 64 months they are included in the survey. With children, other data sources must be used. SIPP data for April 2013, the latest month in common from data released for the full SIPP sample. Among an estimated 73.0 million children under age 18, an estimated 8.5 are under the age of 18. An Appendix further describes the methodology used in this report. CRS analysis of SIPP data is based on data released by SIPP on April 1, 2013, through April 30, 2013. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. The SIPP data do not provide the comprehensive detail to precisely identify child beneficiaries. Estimates of the pre-transfer poverty status of children provide one measure of the relative importance of Social Security in combating poverty. The pre- transfer poverty estimates should not be confused with the full effects on poverty of eliminating the Social Security program, as some individuals would alter their behavior in absence of the program. It is not possible to precisely identified the social Security Beneficiaries on the SIPP. For more information, go to: http://www.socialsecurity.gov/. Social Security is a work-related entitlement, in which benefits are determined on the basis of workers' employment and earnings history, without respect to current income. Children may be eligible for Social Security. Unlike welfare programs, Social Security eligibility is determined on an individual basis, not on a set amount of income. Social Security benefits are paid out on a monthly basis, with no cap on how much a person can receive at a time, or how long it takes to receive a payment. The Social Security Trust Fund was established in 1944 to provide benefits to retired workers. It is not possible to precisely identify the Social Security beneficiary status of children on the SIPP. Some adults may include the child's portion of their Social Security benefit as their own, without explicitly indicating that they received Social Security on behalf of a child. In total, about 8.5 million children under age 18 were identified in April 2013 beneficiaries in their own right. Another 1.9 million (22%) lived in families where a parent or guardian reported receiving Social Security benefits, though not directly on behalf. Security beneficiary status of children on the SIPP. The SIPP collects information on Social Security receipt and the reasons for receipt for persons age 15 and over. The two groups mentioned above are combined for purposes of analysis as "child beneficiaries and children of parents or guardians that receive Social Security" These 5.068 million children are separated into two groups: child survivor and dependent of a retiree or disabled worker. In some cases the benefits received by these parents may contain an allowance for beneficiary children that is not separately identified. CRS: Social Security lifted nearly 2.0 million children above the poverty line in April 2013. Social Security benefits received by families with children have the effect of reducing the incidence of child poverty to nearly the same level as that of children in families that don't receive benefits. CRS: But their equalizing effect is attenuated at somewhat higher income levels. For children living in families where Social Security is received only by extended or other family members, Social Security reduces their poverty rate from 38.4% to 21.3%. only extended or other family members (other than children, parents, or guardians) reported receiving Social Security with children in families where no Social Security was reported. Comparing the two groups, the former group has a much higher pre-transfer poverty rate (54.2%) than does the latter group (38.4%). In families where Social Security benefits are received on behalf of children poor, Social Security plays a much greater role in reducing poverty among children than does TANF. The estimates presented in this report are based on survey data and are subject to respondent misreporting. must be estimated both before and after counting families' income from Social Security. The figure shows, for example, that 23.5% of all children were poor in April 2013. status is to estimate poverty by excluding Social Security from family income and comparing the result to the extent of poverty when Social Security is added back into family income. Figure 3 , Figure 4 , and Figure 5 depict children's "pre- and post-transfer poverty status" for children in families. The figures are based on total family income as multiples of U.S. Census Bureau poverty income thresholds. There is little difference in the overall poverty status of children living in families that receive Social Security. However, differences become more apparent in families in which Social Security is received on behalf of children and/or parents/guardians. Also, the after-the-fact comparison of poverty status by family Social Security receipt doesn't take into account the effect that Social Security itself has in reducing poverty. For such purposes, poverty status is used to assess the impact of Social Security benefits on income and poverty status. policy, whereas for the latter group, Social Security's effect on child poverty is incidental. Social Security is more directly related to children's incidental family living arrangements. For the former group, the effect is more related to the child's incidental living arrangements, such as their parents' marital status. For both groups, the effects of Social Security are incidental, and the effect of child poverty on the family is not as significant. The effect of Social security is more of a factor in child poverty than child poverty. In FY2013, combined federal and state TANF expenditures, in the form of that had total incomes, excluding Social Security , below the poverty line, is more than five times the estimated $4.485 billion in federal cash welfare spending under the Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) program in FY2013. Whereas TANf may be considered "target efficient," in terms of targeting the poor, Social Security benefits are more likely to be paid on behalf of children. of deceased workers, 1.7 million (52.9% of all child beneficiaries) were children of disabled workers, and about 322,000 were dependent children of retired workers. The average monthly benefit among child beneficiaries in December 2012 was $525. In total, aggregate Social Security benefits paid on behalf of children amounted to about $1.712 billion, or about $20.5 billion in 2012. In December 2012, average monthly benefits for children of deceased workers were about $793. worker who met the program's insured status requirements. In December 2012, 3.3 million Social Security beneficiaries (5.7% of all beneficiaries) were children under the age of 18. Among child beneficiaries, 1.2 million (37.2%) were children million (11.6%) lived in families in which one or more family members received Social Security. As discussed in greater detail, estimated 3.2million (37%) were in families where Social Security was reported as having been received on behalf of at least one of the children. total income, excluding Social Security income that the family reports receiving. Of these benefits, an estimated 44.1% (about $2.671 billion, or about $32.050 billion on an annualized basis) went to families who were poor based on their total cash income. Of this amount, nearly half (49.2% , $1.892billion, or $22.702 billion on a yearlyized basis), went tofamilies with children. Thus, over two-fifths of Social Security dollars paid to families with children goes to children who would otherwise be counted as poor. cash aid to families, amounted to an estimated $8.7 billion, of which approximately $4.3 billion (49%) was from federal funds. While SSA administrative data provide a broad overview of the numbers of individuals receiving Social Security benefits and the type and amount of benefits received, they provide little information about the types and amounts of the benefits received. The Social Security Administration does not release the number of people receiving benefits or the type of benefits they receive. The SSA does not disclose the amount of money received by each individual. Figure 4 focuses on just the 5.1 million children who are classified as either child beneficiaries or children whose parent(s) or guardians received Social Security. Figure 5 shows the other 3.4 million children in families in which Social Security is received only by the parents or guardians. In such cases Social that receive Social Security compared to children in Families that don't.are grouped together in analyses that follow as child beneficiaries and children of parents or guardian that receive social Security. (See Figure 3 .) In this analysis, all children of a parent (or guardian) who are under the age of 18 are identified as Social Security child beneficiaries. In such cases, however, it does not identify the specific children in the family for whom Social Security benefits are received. To some extent, this method will overstate the number of children under age 18 who received Social Security, as potentially some, but not all, children of the parent may be under age 21. It is uncertain whether all or only some children under 21 in the as living in families in which Social Security benefit were reported. Security benefits may have been received by an extended family member (e.g., grandparent, aunt or uncle, cousin, niece or nephew) or an older adult sibling. For this latter group, children may incidently be affected by Social Security, but not directly as a matter of policy aimed at them. At first, Social Security benefits may not be available to children in the U.S. because they were not born in the United States or were under the age of 18 at the time of their birth. Security benefits when a parent who is a covered worker dies, becomes disabled, or retires. For children of disabled or retired workers, the child's benefit is generally equal to 50% of the parent's primary insurance amount (PIA) before adjustments. Children of deceased workers are generally entitled to benefits equal to 75% of their deceased parent's PIA. A maximum family benefit applies, varying from 150% to 188%. The family maximum cannot be exceeded regardless of the number of children. Social Security plays an important role in reducing poverty, not only among the aged but among children as well. Children may be eligible for Social Security benefits when a parent who is a covered worker dies, becomes disabled, or retires. In addition, children may economically benefit from Social Security by living with other family members who receive benefits. As noted above, children can qualify by being a child of a retired or disabled worker receiving Social Security or a survivor of a deceased deceased. For confidential support call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org. recipients entitled to benefits under the deceased or retired worker's earnings record. Child benefits generally apply to all biological children of a worker (assuming that paternity/maternity has been established) and to legally adopted children. Stepchildren may be eligible in some cases, as may some legally adopted grandchildren, with their benefits. The benefits are usually paid out over a period of several years, depending on the age of the child and the amount of the benefits being paid to the deceased. They can also be paid for as long as the deceased is still alive. being determined on the basis of their grandparents' earnings record. Children may receive benefits until they reach age 18, and if in high school, through age 19. Disabled children may receives benefits indefinitely as long as the disability was incurred before reaching age 22. In addition to receiving Social Security, disabled children may receive Social Security in the form of a survivor's pension or survivor's insurance. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details.