The Institute for Internal Auditors’ (IIA) international standards for the professional practice of internal auditing were adopted in 2002. Since then, OIOS has begun to develop and implement the key components of effective oversight. However, the office has yet to fully implement them. The IIA standards apply to internal audit activities, not to investigations, monitoring, evaluation, and inspection activities. We applied these standards OIos-wide, as appropriate, in the absence of these activities. OIOS is now at a critical point, particularly given the initiatives to strengthen UN oversight launched as a result of the World Summit in the fall of 2005. The degree to which the UN and OIOS embrace international auditing standards and practices will demonstrate their commitment to addressing the monumental management and oversight tasks that lie ahead. Failure to address these issues could undermine the office’s effectiveness in carrying out its functions as the UN”s main internal oversight body, the authors say. The UN is vulnerable to fraud, waste, abuse, and mismanagement due to a range of weaknesses in existing oversight practices. The General Assembly mandate creating OIOS calls for it to be operationally independent. UN funding arrangements severely limit OIos’s ability to respond to changing circumstances, the authors say. The authors recommend that the UN work with member states to support OI OS’S efforts to more closely adhere to international auditing standards, they say.or recently completed requests are both bicameral and bipartisan. of international standards for non-audit oversight activities. We met with senior State officials in Washington, D.C., and senior officials with the U.S. Missions to the UN in New York, Vienna, and Geneva. At these locations, we also met with the UN Office of Internal Oversight Services management officials and staff;. We discussed the need to improve the transparency and accountability of the UN's internal auditing and auditing programs; and. We also discussed the importance of improving the international community's understanding of the role of the United Nations. OIOS’s independence is impaired by constraints that UN funding arrangements impose. In our April 2006 report concerning OIOS, we recommended that the Secretary of State and the Permanent Representative of the United States to the UN work with member states to support budgetary independence. Both the Department of State (State) and OIos generally agreed with our findings and recommendation. State fully agreed with GAO’S findings that UN member states need to ensure that OI OS has budgetary independence, but said member states needed to do more to ensure the independence of the office. not have adequate resources, they do not have a mechanism in place to determine appropriate staffing levels to help justify budget requests, except for peacekeeping oversight services. For peacekeeping audit services, OIOS does have a metric—endorsed by the General Assembly—that provides one professional auditor for every $100 million in the annual peacekeeping budget. For the CMP, OiOS reported that it has been difficult to support staff increases in oversight areas that lack a comparable metric, according to officials. states that cover normal, recurrent activities such as the core functions of the UN Secretariat. extrabudgetary resources, which come from the budgets for UN peacekeeping missions financed through assessments from member states. voluntary contributions from member countries for a variety of specific projects and activities, and budgets for specific projects. The UN has a budget of about $1.2 billion (US$1.3 billion) for peacekeeping operations and about $2.5 billion for non-peacekeeping operations. The U.N. Secretariat is funded by member states and voluntary contributions. Since 1996, an increasing share of OIOSís total budget is comprised of extrabudgetary resources. The majority of OiOS’s staff (about 69 percent) is funded with extrabbudgetary resources, which increased due to audits and investigations of peacekeeping operations, including issues related to sexual exploitation and abuse. OIos is based in Washington, D.C., and has offices in New York, Los Angeles, San Francisco and Washington, DC. The organization is funded by a combination of its regular budget and its extrab budget, which has increased in nominal terms. its multiple funding sources, OIOS locations worldwide, or its operating divisions to address changing priorities. In addition, the movement of staff positions or funds between regular and extrabudgetary resources is not allowed. For example, one staff position or funds can't be moved between regular or extrab budgetary resources. For more information, visit the Office of Internal Audit's website at: http://www.oios.org/operating-audit-and-investigations. section in the Internal Audit Division may have exhausted its regular budget travel funds. Another section in the same division may have travel funds available that are financed by extrabudgetary peacekeeping resources. However, OIOS would breach UN financial regulations and rules if it moved resources between the two budgets. It would be a breach of UN financial rules and regulations and would be in breach of the UN's own rules on the use of funds. It could also be in contravention of UN regulations on the allocation of funds for peacekeeping operations. State does not believe that multiple funding sources have impeded OIOS’s budgetary flexibility. We found that current UN financial regulations and rules are very restrictive, severely limiting OIos’S ability to respond to changing circumstances and to reallocate funds to emerging or high priority areas when they arise. OiOS formally adopted the new funding model on July 1, 2013. The new funding system was formally adopted on July 21, 2013, by the UN Security Council. The funding system will be rolled out over the next three years. OIOS assigned one staff member to begin researching the CMP on a part-time basis. OIOS’s authority spans all UN activities under the Secretary-General. The office does not have the budgetary independence it requires to carry out its responsibilities effectively. The need for significant reforms in these areas highlights the need for reforms in the UN, says the report. The report concludes that the UN needs to make significant changes to its CMP to ensure that it is fully accountable to the world. that it had extrabudgetary funds from the CMP for one auditor on a short-term basis, but that the level of funding was not sufficient to provide the oversight coverage intended by the General Assembly. To provide additional oversight coverage, OIOS assigned an additional auditor exclusively to the C MP, using funds from that budget. OIos also assigned an extra auditor to be used exclusively to provide oversight of the state's budget. The CMP said it would use the funds to pay for the additional auditor. dependent on UN funds and programs and other UN entities for resources, access, and reimbursement for the services it provides. OIOS negotiates the terms of work and payment for services with the manager of the program it intends to examine, and heads of these entities have the right to deny funding for oversight work. By denying OIos funding, UN entities could avoid OI OS audits or investigations, says the report. The report was published by the International Institute of Social and Economic Research. have been misused. Some fund and program managers have disputed fees charged by OIOS for investigative services rendered. Since 2001, less than half of the entities have paid OIos in full for investigative service it has provided. According to OI OS officials, the office has no authority to enforce payment for services rendered, and there is no appeal process, no supporting administrative structure, and no adverse impact on an agency that does not pay or pays only OI SOS. For example, 40 percent of the $2 million billed by OiOS after it completed its work is currently in dispute. OIOS audited some aspects of the Oil for Food program and identified hundreds of weaknesses and irregularities. OIOS lacked the resources and independence needed the status of these risks or the consequence to the organization if the risks are not addressed. For instance, in February 2005, the Independent Inquiry Committee reported that many of the oil program’s deficiencies were not described in the annual reports submitted to the U.N. The U.S. State Department is responsible for funding UN programs. to provide full and effective oversight of this large, costly, and complex UN effort. As the program was implemented, the Oil for Food program was further weakened by inadequate attention to internal controls, including establishing clear responsibility and authority and identifying and addressing program risks. In addition to oversight, an oversight body should be established to identify and address program risks, according to the report by the UN Food and Agriculture Organization (UNFAO) The UNFAO report was published by the U.N. Food and Agricultural Organization (U.NFAO), a UN agency. and high-risk areas could potentially be excluded from timely examination. For example, allowing the heads of programs the right to deny funding to internal audit activities prevented OIOS from examining high- risk areas in the UN Oil for Food program. billions of dollars were subsequently found to be missing from the UN program. The UN program was later found to have overspent its budget by more than $1.5 billion in the first three years of the program. In the second year, the program was over-spent by nearly $1 billion. OIOS does not have an annual report to assess risks and controls. The General Assembly would have to determine the appropriate vehicle for such a new reporting requirement. The official agreed that OIOS should communicate to senior management on areas where the office has not been able to examine significant risk and control issues. The office has stated that the office does have the ability to assess risk and controls, but that such an assessment does not belong in the annual report in its current form, which focuses largely on the activities of the office. OIOS has adopted a risk management framework to link the office’s annual work plans to risk-based priorities, but it has not fully implemented this framework. By 2008, by 50 percent of their work is based on a systematic risk assessment. To the UN work with member states to support OIOS’S efforts to more closely adhere to international auditing standards, says the report. The report does not provide an overall assessment of the risks facing the UN organization and the office. risk areas facing each entity for which OIOS has oversight authority. As of April 2006, out of 25 entities that comprise major elements of its “oversight universe,’ only three risk assessments had been completed. As a result, “OIOS officials cannot currently provide reasonable assurance that the entities they choose to examine are those that pose the highest risk,” the report says. OIos officials told us they plan to assign risk areas more consistently to audits proposed. framework in 2001 for prioritizing the allocation of resources to those areas that have the greatest exposure to fraud, waste, and abuse. OIOS’s risk management framework includes plans for organization-wide risk assessments to categorize and prioritize risks facing the organization. It also includes client-level risk assessment to identify and prioritize client- level risk. O IOS was founded in 2001 by the same group that created the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland, to address the global financial crisis of the 1990s. In 2003, an OIOS report found that the Procurement Service’s roster contained questionable vendors. As of 2005, the roster was not fully reliable for identifying qualified vendors that could bid on contracts. The UN has not demonstrated a commitment to improving its professional procurement staff through training, says the report. The report was published by the Open International Organization (OIOS) on October 1, 2005. For more information on OIos, visit www.oios.org. OIOS staff have opportunities for training and other professional development. OIOS does not formally require or systematically track staff training to provide reasonable assurance that all staff are maintaining and acquiring professional skills. UN personnel records show that OIos staff took a total of more than $100,000 in training from its regular budget in 2013. OiOS policy manuals list no minimum training requirement, although they gather some information on their use of training funds for their annual training report. The UN does not require staff training, nor does it systematically track training. to the UN Office of Human Resources Management, they do not maintain an office wide database to systematically track all training taken by their staff. In our April 2006 report on OIOS, we also recommended that the Secretary of State and the Permanent Representative of the United States to the UN to the create a database to track training. The UN Office for Human Resources has not responded to our request for comment. We are happy to clarify that the UN does not maintain a database of training taken. We would like to make clear that this is not the case. than 400 training courses offered by the Office of Human Resources Management in 2005. Since 2004, OIOS has subscribed to IIA’s online training service that offers more than 100 courses applicable to auditors. Although OI OS provides these professional development opportunities, it does not formally offer them. OIos does not formalize these opportunities, however, and does not offer them to employees in-person or through external sources. OiOS does not provide these opportunities to employees, however. The rest of the complex was built between 1960 and 1982 and funded through the UN’s regular budget or private donations. The General Assembly endorsed the CMP to renovate the UN headquarters complex and approved funds to further develop the conceptual designs and cost estimate. In December 2002, the General Assembly approved funds for the project. In March 2013, the UN approved a loan to help pay for the renovation of the UN HQ. The cost of the renovation is estimated to be around $1.5 billion. May 2003, we reported that the resulting renovation planning was reasonable, but that additional management controls and oversight were needed. In April 2006, the UN appropriated $23.5 million to finance the renovation’s preconstruction phase and committed $77 million to the project. Since our last report, theUN has completed design development of the renovation. The renovation is expected to be completed by the end of the year or early next year. The UN has committed a total of $77million to the renovation project. The General Assembly has not yet decided whether to approve implementation of the CMP. In a February 2003 resolution, the General Assembly stressed the importance of oversight. The General Assembly requested $1.million to finance the construction of temporary conference space and supplementary office space rental (swing space) The CMP is expected to be implemented by the end of this year or early next year, depending on the outcome of a vote. The C MP will be the first of its kind in the world, and the first to be approved by the UN. The UN headquarters buildings in New York City are in need of renovation. Over the last 50 years there have been no major renovations or upgrades to the buildings or their systems. In September 2005, the headquarters complex was shut down and the staff sent home because a fire broke out in one of the buildings. The UN headquarters complex lacks fire sprinklers, has a deteriorating window structure, and is vulnerable to catastrophic electrical failures. The buildings do not meet current safety, fire and building codes and does not meet UN technology or security requirements. main breaker for electrical power to the top floors of the Secretariat building failed, causing it to fuse to the electrical panel. This failure could have resulted in a major fire. As host country, the United States financed construction of the original complex by providing the UN with a no-interest no-expenditure loan. The U.S. provided the U.N. with a $1 billion loan to help build the complex. The loan was repaid with interest at a rate of 0.5 per cent. Congressional interest in UN matters has been high in recent years. The U.S. conducts UN-related work only in response to specific requests from committees with jurisdiction over UN matters. Many of our ongoing projects are funded through the United States’ membership in the organization. The United States is a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council, which has the power to veto any resolution passed by the UN Security Council that is not in the best interests of the U.N. It also has the ability to veto the Security Council’s resolution on any matter. OIOS reiterated its 2001 recommendation that the UN reduce the committee’s caseload and restructure the committee “to allow competent review of the cases” The UN does not consistently implement its process for helping to ensure that it is conducting business with qualified vendors, OIOS says. As a result, the UN is failing to comply with its own regulations, the report says. The UN is also failing to meet its own standards for dealing with vendors, it adds. The committee is charged with evaluating proposed contracts worth more than $200,000. It advises the Department of Management as to whether the contracts are worth the money. The committee’s increasing workload was the result in part of the complexity of many new contracts and increased scrutiny of proposals in response to recent UN procurement scandals, the committee said in a letter to the UN Secretary-General. The letter was written by the committee's chairman, former U.S. Ambassador to the U.N. John Defterios, and was signed by the UN's secretary-general. contracts are in accordance with UN Financial Regulations and Rules and other UN policies. However, concerns regarding the committee’s structure and workload have led UN auditors to conclude that the committee cannot properly review contract proposals. It may thus recommend contracts for approval that are inappropriate and have not met UN policies, according to the report. The report was published in the journal of the International Accounting Standards Board (IASB), published by the International Institute of Accounting Standards (IISB) in Geneva, Switzerland. its support staff has remained relatively stable. The number of contracts reviewed by the committee has increased by almost 60 percent since 2003. The committee’s chairman and members told us that the committee does not have the resources to keep up with its expanding workload. They said the committee members stated that they do not know how to handle the growing number of requests for information from the public. They also said that they have no idea how to deal with the growing demand for information about the federal government. Other major contributors to this testimony were Phyllis Anderson and Maria Edelstein, Assistant Directors; Joy Labez, Pierre Toureille, Valérie L. Nowak, Jeffrey Baldwin-Bott, Michaela Brown, Joseph Carney, Debbie J. Chung, Kristy Kennedy, Clarette Kim, J.J. Marzullo, and Barbara Shields. This is a work of the U.S. government and is not affiliated with the French government or any of its agencies. subject to copyright protection in the United States. It may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from GAO. However, because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material, permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. For support in the U.S., call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. The UN has not established an independent process to consider vendor protests, despite the drafted by the UN Commission on International Trade Law. The UN’s lack of an independent bid protest process limits the transparency of its procurement process by not providing a means for a vendor to protest the outcome of a contract decision to an independent official or office. While UN procurement has increased sharply in recent years, the size of the UN‘s Headquarters Committee on Contracts and and the Permanent Representative of the United States to the UN work with member states to encourage the UN to establish an independentbid protest mechanism. protest process is a widely endorsed control mechanism that permits vendors to file complaints with an office or official. The General Assembly endorsed the principle of independent bid protests in 1994 when it recommended for adoption by member states a model procurement law. It has been described as a 'model procurement law' for member states to use in their own procurement processes. It is intended to ensure transparency, accountability and transparency in the procurement process, and to prevent waste, fraud and abuse of the system. The process is not intended to be used for political or political reasons. that Procurement Service staff lack knowledge of UN procurement policies. Most procurement staff lack professional certifications attesting to their procurement education, training, and experience. The UN has not established a career path for professional advancement for procurement staff. Doing so could encourage staff to undertake progressive training and work experiences. It has not committed sufficient resources to a comprehensive training and certification program for its procurement staff, UN officials acknowledged. It is not clear if the UN has any plans to increase the number of procurement staff in the future. establishment of a career development path, and other key human capital practices critical to attracting, developing, and retaining a qualified professional workforce. Due to significant control weaknesses in the UN’s procurement process, the UN has relied disproportionately on the actions of its staff to safeguard its resources. Recent studies indicate that the UN is under-resourced and under-prepared for the challenges of the 21st century, according to a report by the International Institute for Fiscal Studies (IIFS) The report also found that UN staff are under-rewarded, under-represented, and over-worked. large and unique endeavor for the UN. Effective internal oversight and management of the procurement process will be necessary for the successful completion of the project. Long-standing weaknesses in the UN’s procurement office have left UN procurement funds highly vulnerable to fraud, waste, and abuse. Many of these weaknesses have been identified and documented by outside experts and the UN's own auditors for more than a decade. Sustained leadership at the UN is key to the successful implementation of the CMP. Experts have called on the UN to correct serious weaknesses in its procurement process. The UN has not updated its procurement manual since January 2004 to reflect current UN procurement policy. As a result, procurement staff may not be aware of changes to procurement procedures that the UN has adopted. To the extent that it relies on current UN processes, implementation of the planned renovation is vulnerable to the procurement weaknesses that we have identified. We have identified problems affecting the UN’s bid protest process, construction projects. These guidelines could be useful in planning and executing CMP procurement. UN has been considering the development of specific ethics guidance for procurement officers for almost a decade. While the Procurement Service has drafted such guidance, the UN has made only limited progress toward adopting it. Such guidance would include a declaration of ethics responsibilities for procurement staff and a code of conduct for vendors. The UN has yet to include guidance for construction procurement into its procurement manual. In June 2005, a UN consultant recommended that the UN develop separate guidelines in the manual for the planning and execution of construction projects. The United Nations hired a consultant to evaluate the internal controls of its procurement operations. One of the consultant’s conclusions was that the and staffing data were reliable. We reviewed the budget documents and discussed the data with relevant officials. We used an internal control framework that is widely accepted in the international audit community and has been adopted by leading accountability organizations. In doing so, we reviewed documents and information prepared by OIOS, the UN Board of Auditors, for the purposes of this testimony. headquarters contract review committee, vender rosters, procurement workforce, ethics guidance for procurement personnel, and procurement manual. In commenting on the official draft of this report, the Department of State stated that it welcomed our report and endorsed its recommendations. The UN did not provide us with written comments. To conduct our study of UN oversight, we reviewed relevant UN and OIOS documents. The report was published in April 2006 and is available on the U.S. State Department’s website. procurement spending has more than tripled to keep pace with a rapidly growing peacekeeping program. The UN Department of Management, through its 70-person UN Procurement Service, is ultimately responsible for developing UN procurement policies. Because the UN is a multilateral institution, our oversight authority does not directly extend to the the UN Joint Inspection Unit, two consulting firms, or the Department of Peacekeeping Operations. We interviewed UN and State officials and conducted structured interviews with the principal procurement officers at each of 19 UN field missions. 1994 recommendation of a high-level panel of international procurement experts that it do so as soon as possible. Such a process would provide reasonable assurance that vendors are treated fairly when bidding. It would also help alert senior UN management to situations involving questions about UN compliance. An independent bid would be a step in the right direction, the UN said in a statement on Monday. The UN said it would make a decision on the independent bid within the next few days. It added that the process would be transparent, fair and transparent. result, the UN may be vulnerable to favoring certain vendors or dealing with unqualified vendors. The UN has long had difficulties in maintaining effective rosters of qualified vendors. In 1994, a high-level group of international procurement experts concluded that the UN’s vendor roster was outdated, inaccurate, and inconsistent across all of its member states. It was also found that the roster was inconsistent and inaccurate across all the UN member states, as well as other international organizations. It has since been updated to include more vendors. the UN will be needed to correct these weaknesses and establish a procurement system capable of fully supporting the UN’s expanding needs. This concludes my testimony. I would be pleased to take your questions. Should you have any questions about this testimony, please contact me at (202) 512-9601 or melitot@gao.gov. I will be happy to answer any questions you may have about the report and its findings. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from. over the past 2 years. A Procurement Service official who helped revise the manual in 2004 stated that the Procurements Service has been unable to allocate resources needed to update the manual since that time. In our April 2006 report on UN procurement, we recommended that the Secretary of State should ask for the manual to be updated. The manual has not been updated since 2004, the official said. The procurement manual was last updated in 2005. It has been updated again in 2008, he said.