2015 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provides areasonable basis for the findings and conclusion based on the audit objectives of the audit. The audit will be completed by the end of the month, and the results will be released in the coming days. The report will be made available to the public at a later date. our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. In addition to the contact named above, W. William Russell (Assistant Director); Beth Reed Fritts; and Suzanne Sterling made significant contributions to this review. Pete Anderson, Virginia Chanley, John Krump, and Roxanna Sun made key contributions to the report. We are happy to share our findings with the public. We hope you will use this information to help with your own audit of your own company. We would like to thank all those who contributed to this report. the GAO website at http://www.gao.gov. Contact points for our Office of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of this report. If you or your staff have any questions about this report, please contact me at (202) 512-4841 or makm@gao,gov. GAO staff who made key GAO recommendations can be reached at (844) 615-4157 or by e-mailing [email protected]. section 2330a of title 10 of the U.S. Code required the Secretary of Defense to establish a data collection system to provide management information on each purchase of services by a military department or defense agency. In 2008, Congress amended the code to require the review of the contracts identified in the inventory to ensure, among other things, that the contracts had been properly managed. In fiscal year 2016, the code requires the secretaries of the military departments and heads of the defense agencies to complete the review. be at risk of becoming inherently governmental due to the manner in which the contractor performs the work, among other things. DOD guidance instructs the secretaries of the military departments and heads of the defense agencies to submit an inventory review certification letter to the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Readiness and Force Management in May 2014. Each component to report in their fiscal year 2013 inventory review certified letters specific actions taken and supporting documentation to demonstrate compliance with the required 10 percent funding reduction for closely associated with inherently governmental and staff. to require the Secretary of Defense to submit an annual inventory of contracted services performed for or on behalf of DOD during the preceding fiscal year. This annual inventory submission is to include, among other things, the number of contractor full time equivalents and the associated direct labor cost for the services provided to the Department of Defense during the fiscal year in which it is being inventoryed. The inventory is expected to be completed by the end of the fiscal second quarter of this year, according to the secretary of defense. for Operations, Office of the Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller) concurred with the findings of our report. We are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees. In addition the report is available at no charge on the Defense Department's website. The report will be made available to the public at a later date, the Pentagon said in a statement. The Defense Department said it will make the report available at a future date for the public to view. The Pentagon said the report will also be available on its website at no cost. Section 955 of the NDAA for fiscal year 2013 required the Secretary of Defense to ensure that the civilian and service contractor workforces are appropriately sized to support and execute the National Military Strategy. Section 955 further further required the secretary of defense to develop an efficiencies plan for those workforces. These positions.these positions. The positions are located in the Air Force, Navy, Marine Corps, Air Force Reserve, Army, and Army National Guard. They are based in Washington, D.C. and Fort Worth, Texas. Office of Personnel and Readiness that outlines the results of the review and any corrective actions to be taken to ensure that contractors are not performing inherently governmental functions. Section 808 of the NDAA for fiscal year 2015 outlines the review's results and corrective actions that will be taken. The review was conducted to ensure the use of contractors for closely associated with inherently governmental. functions. It was also to monitor the use. of contractors in a way that is closely associated. with inherently government functions, such as in the military, law enforcement, health and welfare. activities do not include inherently governmental functions, such as the determination of budget policy. The review should also ensure that to the maximum extent practicable, the activities don't include any closely associated with inherently governmental function. These are those that require discretion in applying government authority. The activities should not include those that may be associated with government functions such as budget policy, the review says. It says the review should ensure that the activities do not included any closelyassociated with inherently government functions, which are those with discretion in application of authority. the inventory of contracted services to measure funding reductions for contracts with closely associated with inherently governmental functions. However, the components’ annual inventory reviews did not include information necessary to measure a funding reduction in these functions, such as comparable obligation data. Further, we found that the to measure the reductions given the lack of data collected through past inventories. We also found that one measure that could be used to determine compliance was the advisory and assistance services budget category which includes many of the types of contractor services. facilitated DOD’s implementation of our recommendation, encouraging DOD to use other data sources, such as advisory and assistance services, to measure compliance with closely associated with inherently governmental and staff augmentation funding reductions. Advisory and assistance service is a budget category that includes many of the types of contractor services that are that are being cut. In April 2015, the DOD Inspector General found that the information included in the inventory was December 2014 recommendation by encouraging DODto use different data sources. The inventory was released in April 2015. considered closely associated with inherently governmental and staff augmentation functions. As we reported in December 2014, the advisory and assistance services budget category is not an exact measurement. However, it may be the best currently available data source to determine submission with Advisory and assistance service obligations for fiscal years 2010 through 2015. While these data have not yet been reported through fiscal year 2015, our analysis of currently available obligation data for advisory services is based on fiscal year 2010-2015 data for Advisory and Assistance Services. guidance lacked clarity in how reductions in staff augmentation funding should be implemented and measured. The guidance noted that these funding reductions were factored into budget requests for fiscal years 2012 and 2013. It did not specify the amounts of these budgeted reductions or the data source that should be used to measure these reductions. It also didn't specify the amount of funding reductions that would be factored in for each fiscal year, or how these reductions would be measured and reported. The department's budget requests were released in May. staff augmentation contracts. We interviewed officials responsible for compiling and reviewing the inventory of contracted services to gain additional insight into the steps taken to implement the reductions. Based on updated guidance from the Comptroller, issued in May 2015, instructing components to rely on the advisory and assistance and assistance from the Department of Defense. We are happy to provide you with any additional information you may have about the reduction in staff augmentation services. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. and assistance services indicate that all of the military departments achieved reductions of greater than 20 percent by fiscal year 2014. As shown in table 2, the Air Force and Navy achieved reductions in advisory and assistance service obligations greater than 30 percent from fiscal years 2010 through 2013. The DOD Comptroller intends to measure a 30 percent reduction from 2010 levels based on former Secretary of Defense Robert Gates’ Efficiencies Initiative which called for DOD to reduce service. The Army achieved a 9 percent reduction by fiscal Year 2013, but achieved a 32 percent reduction in fiscal Year 2014. full 20 percent reduction. Because DOD has efforts underway to address our December 2014 recommendations, we are not making new recommendations in this report. We provided a draft of this report to the Secretary of Defense for review and comment. In DOD’s written comments, reproduced in appendix II, the Director of the Office of the Chief of Staff for the Joint Chiefs of Staff made the following comments: “We are not recommending any changes to our current posture.” “Our current posture is very much in line with what DOD has been doing for the past few years.’ “ support contractors by 10 percent each year from fiscal year 2011 through 2013. Section 808 calls for a total of 20 percent in reductions in fiscal years 2012 and 2013. A Comptroller official said it plans to also include the additional 10 percent reduction in fiscal year 2012 and2013. The cuts would total a total 30 percent reduction from fiscal years 2011 and 2012 to 2013, the official said. The reductions would be in addition to the 20 percent cuts in fiscal 2012 and 2012, and 20 percent reductions in 2013, he said. used to determine if the reduction was achieved. This new measure was adopted after a lack of data hindered DOD’s previous attempts to demonstrate compliance. DOD updated its inventory guidance in May 2014, instructing components to identify the steps taken. However, we found that the supplemental guidance did not provide components with any additional clarification in how reductions in these functions were to be achieved. For example, DOD instructed components to reduce the amount of time it takes to complete a task, but did not explain how this was done. report on actions taken to implement reductions through the fiscal year 2013 inventory review. Only one of 35 components reported all of the information necessary to demonstrate compliance. In May 2015, the Comptroller issued guidance instructing components to submit a separate budget exhibit for the fiscalyear 2017 budget. The Comptroller's office issued guidance in May 2015 to all components that they would need to submit an exhibit for fiscal year 2017 budget, but only one reported on that count to the comptroller. The comptroller issued a guidance to components that would require a separate exhibit. reduction for fiscal year 2011 called for by Secretary Gates’ Efficiencies Initiative. If components are not in compliance with the full 30 percent reduction by fiscal year 2015, a Comptroller official said that the Comptroller’s office plans to enforce the reduction by making adjustments to component funding levels for the 2011 fiscal year. The Comptroller plans to make the adjustments by adjusting funding for each component for the fiscal year, the official said. The cuts are expected to take effect in fiscal year 2012. The departments implemented fiscal controls in fiscal year 2013, to varying degrees, which helped the Air Force and Navy adhere to their targets. However, the Army still exceeded its target by more than $2 billion in fiscalyear 2013. We concluded that significant discrepancies between the for fiscal year 2014 by seeking input when setting spending targets and implementing a waiver request process to allow for adjustments during the year. These steps helped ensure that DOD adhered to the aggregate limit; but adherence to spending targets varied by the military departments. the aggregate spending limit through fiscal year 2015. In fiscal year 2002, Congress enacted military department budget officials. Congress has also enacted legislation to improve the availability of information on DOD’s acquisition of services and to help the department make more strategic decisions about the appropriate workforce mix of military, civilian, and contractor personnel. We reviewed DOD”s fiscal year 2014 section 802 guidance, issued in May 2014, to determine steps taken by the Comptroller’S office to implement the limit. limit does not apply to contract services for military construction, research and development, and services funded for overseas contingency operations. It provides for two adjustments to the limit above fiscal year 2010 budgeted levels. DOD may adjust spending above 2010 levels to account for (1) funding increases associated with contract services that were transferred to the base budget and (2) the cost of additional civilian personnel positions. Unlike the aggregate DOD spending limit, the statutory requirement for guidance on reductions in funding for closely associated with inherently governmental functions and staff augmentation are directed to each component. requires that the efficiencies plan ensures that total funding reductions for the civilian and service contractor workforces are commensurate with reductions in military end strength. We have on-going work assessing DOD’s compliance with section 2330a and section 955. We plan to report the final results of this work in the coming months. We will also report the results of our assessment of DOD's implementation of sections 955 and 2330A and 930B. We are working with the Department of Defense to ensure that DOD is in compliance with both sections. Governmental and staff augmentation functions. All of the military departments achieved funding reductions greater than 20 percent by fiscal year 2014. Section 813 of the NDAA for fiscal year 2015 facilitated DOD’s implementation of our NDAA, the authors say. The authors recommend that DOD identify additional data sources beyond the inventory of contracted services to help ensure that funding reductions called for in the law are implemented. They say DOD concurred with their recommendation, and section 813 was implemented in 2015. year 2012 further reinforced those provisions by requiring DOD to issue guidance instructing components to reduce funding by 10 percent for fiscal years 2012 and 2013 for contracts identified with personnel performing closely associated with inherently governmental and staff augmentation functions. These functions may include personal services or other positions plan to report the final results in 2016. We analyzed certification letters submitted by 35 DOD components for the fiscal year 2013 inventory review to determine what steps and supporting documentation each component provided to demonstrate compliance. We also found that DOD lacked the data necessary to determine if it implemented the required funding reductions. The objectives for this review were to determine the extent to which the Department of Defense (DOD) implemented the requirements of section 808 of the National Defense Authorization Act (NDAA) for fiscal year 2012, as modified by section 802 of the NDAA. The contributions to this report are listed in appendix III. Section 808 limited DOD’s total obligations for contract services in fiscal years 2012 through 2014 to the amount requested for these services in the fiscal year 2010 President’S Budget Request. place at each component, rather than an aggregate reduction across the department. Through subsequent revisions of the law, Congress extended the time period for DOD to implement the full 20 percent reduction for both closely associated with inherently governmental and staff augmentation functions through fiscal year 2015. Fiscal years 2014 and 2015 will see a reduction of 20 percent at each of the three levels of the Department of the Army, the Army National Guard, and the Army Air National Guard. Fiscal year 2015 will also see a 20 percent Reduction in Force at each level. Fiscal years 2012 and 2013 are also referred to as carryover years. Whatever required reductions that DOD did not achieve in those years are required to be taken in 2014 or 2015. In December 2014, we reported on DOD’s implementation of the section 808 limitations in fiscal year 2012. In fiscal year 2013, DOD implemented the limitations in the form of a two-year, $1.2 billion “cap’n’drill’’ program. In 2014 and 2015, DOD will implement the program in a single year, costing an additional $1 billion. the Navy submitted a waiver request in June 2014 requesting $263 million in additional target allocation to account for additional costs, such as ship and facilities maintenance, ship modernization, and audit readiness. These additional steps allowed the Comptroller to ensure that targets were achievable based on components’ input and make during their mid-year execution review. Based on the obligation information available through the mid- year review, the Navy submitted an additional $263million in target allocation. The Comptroller’s office approved the request. The Comptroller’s office set targets for fiscal year 2014 below the spending limit to allow for unexpected costs during the year. This new process allowed the Comptroller to approve adjustments related to specific requests and allocate portions of the reserved amount among the components. The Comptroller received three waiver requests totaling $607 million for fiscalyear 2014. For example, the Office received a request for $1.2 million to cover a cost that was not included in the budget. The Office also received a waiver request of $1 million for a cost-of-living increase. The Air Force Financial Management and Comptroller (FMC) office provided each of its commands with a contract services obligation ceiling through their annual operations and maintenance funding letters. When determining ceiling amounts, FMC instructed costs that may occur during the year. Air Force officials said that FMC did not have to make adjustments to command’s obligation targets for fiscal year 2014. Navy FMC officials said they do not set command spending targets for contract services, but expect commands to stay within their respective budgeted amounts. each command to submit an execution plan for fiscal year 2014 that included a 10 percent reduction in contract services from their respective budget estimates. An FMC official said this amount was withheld to allow the Air Force to respond to potential Congressional reductions and provided a margin for unexpected costs. The Air Force has a budget of $1.2 trillion for fiscal 2014. The U.S. Air Force is the largest military service in the world, followed by the Navy and the Marine Corps, with a combined budget of more than $1 trillion. costs, but did not submit a waiver request to the Comptroller since the fiscal year was ending. To mitigate this issue for fiscal year 2015, the Navy FMC office began monthly monitoring of contract services obligations. This should help identify potential overages as they occur instead of only at the beginning of the year, the FMC says. The Navy F MC office began monitoring ofcontract services obligations in fiscal year 2014, too, but didn't submit a request for a waiver until after the year was over. Navy FMC officials identified two factors that led to the Navy exceeding its target. The Navy FMC office identified an additional $400 million in contract services needed for unanticipated mid-year and end-of-year execution reviews. The remaining $600 million of the $1.07 billion it obligated over its target was attributed to a coding error in its financial system. Navy F MC officials said the financial system does not do what it is supposed to do when it comes to budgeting. Navy financial management officials said they manually corrected these coding problems. Navy FMC officials explained that these payments are coded as contract services to work around the system limitation.allow for coding of progress payments on items, such as ships or aircraft. To make progress payments for these types of items, Navy F MC officials said that they coded them as 'contract services' to workaround the limitation. The Navy said it is working on a fix for the coding problem in the near future, but that it will take some time. errors in the past, but decided to forego the manual corrections in fiscal year 2014. The Navy FMC office requested updates to its financial system in August 2013 to correct this coding issue, but the change has not yet been approved. The change will be made in preparation for audit readiness in fiscalyear 2016, the FMC said in a statement. It is not known if the Navy has made any changes to the financial system to correct the coding issue in past fiscal years, the statement said. For example, in both fiscal years 2012 and 2013, the Comptroller included approximately $248 million in research and development budgeted amounts in the spending limit. The Comptroller office’s calculation of the civilian workforce adjustment was not consistently applied, the report found. The spending limit for fiscal year 2015 was not yet in place for fiscal 2014 implementation, it said. The report also found that by again included $ 248 million inResearch and Development budgeting amounts in its spending limit baseline for fiscal Year 2014. not sufficient to determine whether funding reductions were met and also recommended that DOD clarify how reductions should be reported. DOD obligated $54.6 billion, or $280 million less than the limit on contract services in fiscal year 2014. In response to our December 2014 recommendations, the Comptroller took steps to correct its methodology for calculating the contract services spending limit. After adjusting for these errors, we estimated that DOD obligated  $280million less than  the limit in 2014. The Comptroller’s office improved planning and oversight of contract services to the contract service spending limit for fiscal year2014. adjusting for these errors, we found that DOD obligated $1.72 billion more than the limit in fiscal year 2012. In our December 2014 report, we also found that each of the military departments exceeded their respective Comptroller-provided targets. In total, the Comptroller’s office overstated the spending limit by $890 million for fiscal year 2014. The actual limit should be reduced from $55.8 billion to $54.9 billion, as shown in figure 1. Targets would still be in compliance with the law if total obligations for contract services across the entire department were less than the aggregate limit. DOD identified an aggregate spending limit of $55.75 billion for fiscal year 2014. Section 813 of the NDAA for fiscalyear 2015 extended and 2013. Specifically, we found DOD exceeded the spending limit in fiscal year 2012 and adhered to the limit in 2013. However, we also identified issues with the DOD Comptroller office’s calculation of the spend limit which resulted in an overstated limit. implemented the contract services spending limit in fiscal years 2014. We reviewed relevant laws and DOD guidance, analyzed budget and obligation data from the Office of the Under Secretary of Defense Comptroller. We compared the PRCP obligation data to contract services obligations reported in the Federal Procurement Data System-Next Generation from fiscal years 2010 through 2014 and found that both sources showed a similar downward trend in contract service obligations. Further, we found that the data from PRCP were sufficiently reliable to determine compliance with the spending limit. military departments’ adherence to obligation targets for fiscal year 2013 signaled that improvements could be made to better manage contract services. For fiscal year 2014, the military departments continued to improve their management of contract services obligations, but experienced varied success in adhering to their targets. Standards for Internal Control in the Federal Government call for effective control activities that enforce guidance to obligations in fiscalyear 2014. To identify the steps taken by each military department to implement controls, we interviewed military department budget and financial management officials. The military departments used a variety of controls to manage contract services obligations to ensure compliance with the Comptroller- provided targets. As shown in table 1, the military departments implemented controls such as.help ensure stewardship of government resources. The Army has improved its controls from previous years, with the Army improving its controls in recent years. The military departments have also improved their controls in the past year to ensure that they are in compliance with Comptroller targets, according to the report. The U.S. military has also increased the number of contractors it has signed up to provide services to. The Comptroller’s office plans to assess the military departments and defense agencies reductions in advisory and assistance service obligations when the fiscal year 2017 budget is submitted. compliance with the required funding reductions will not be determined until early fiscal year 2016. However, a Comptroller official agreed that the data as presented in table 2 are consistent with its preliminary analysis indicating that each of theMilitary departments has met the requirements. The Comptroller will make a final decision on the funding reductions in fiscal year 2018. agreed with this recommendation and while the Comptroller’s office has not taken action to implement it, the military departments have improved implementation of fiscal controls as discussed later in this report. We also have ongoing work that will further examine DOD”s planning, programming and budgeting process for contracted services. Based on these steps, we determined that the comptroller's PRCP obligation data were sufficiently reliable for our purposes. To identify steps taken by the DOD to implement fiscal controls, we limited our analysis to implementation efforts by the military department. compared the PRCP obligation data to military department contract services obligations reported in their respective financial systems to identify any obvious errors or differences. When differences were identified, we interviewed knowledgeable budget and financial management officials from the military departments’ and Comptroller’s office to determine the reasons for these differences. We conducted this performance audit from January 2015 through September. We analyzed each military department's obligations for this budget category reported in the Comptroller's PRCP data from fiscal years 2010 through 2014 to determine if reductions had been achieved. 2014 to improve management of the contract services spending limit. The Comptroller’s office sought input from components when setting target amounts. In fiscal year 2014, the Army obligated $254 million more than its adjusted Comptroller target. The Army took additional steps this step was needed because in fiscal years 2012 and 2013 the Comptroller set the Army's spending target based solely on its enacted budget amounts for contract services. However, Army budget officials explained that these budget estimates did not accurately capture the extent to which funds were allocated to contract develop a more realistic contract service spending estimate to use in negotiations. target still left the Army with a shortfall to manage. For example, the Army had already provided spending targets to its commands totaling $11.2 billion for contract services in the operations and maintenance account for fiscal year 2014. The Army was provided a target of $10.1 billion for this account by the Pentagon in fiscal year 2013, but was still short by $1.4 billion by the end of the fiscal year, the Pentagon said in a statement on Monday. The Pentagon said the shortfall was due to a combination of factors, including the fact that the Army was short $1 billion in fiscal 2013. In fiscal year 2014, the Army and Navy exceeded their spending targets. The Air Force obligated $1.45 billion and as a result had underestimated the level of obligations allocated for contracted services. DOD adhered as soliciting contract services budget estimates from commands. The Army Budget Office was able to $10.4 billion on contract services for the operations and maintenance account, or $800 million less than the initial spending targets provided to commands. In fiscal year 2013, the Navy obligated $2.7 billion more than estimated for contract services. Army budget officials attributed a portion of the obligations over its target to coding errors in its financial system. These coding errors include obligations for contract services from overseas contingency operations that are not subject to the spending limit. Army budget officials plan to review the fiscal year 2015 obligation data to correct these errors before submitting its data to the Comptroller’s office. To address this issue, an Army budget official said they monitored contract services obligations during the year and reduced obligations in line with the lower target. services because Army commands do not separately identify contract services budget estimates in their annual budget inputs to the Army Budget Office. Instead, the Army budget office relies on historical budget data to determine contract service budget estimates for inclusion in the President’s budget request. The Army has more than 2,000 contract services employees. The number is expected to rise to more than 3,000 by the end of the fiscal year, according to the Department of the Army. The U.S. Army has a budget of more than $1.2 billion.