The Department of Homeland Security (DHS) leads the cybersecurity coordination for non-military departments and agencies in the federal government. The National Cyber Security Directorate works with private industry on a voluntary basis to promote safe cybersecurity practices. DHS's task is complicated, as cyberspace technology and processes are largely owned and operated by the private sector. The authority of the federalgovernment to exert control over cybersecurity activities may be privacy and security standards for electronic personal health information. DHS is also home to the National Security Agency. duties will include improving federal agencies' computer security and coordinating national cybersecurity awareness campaigns. Some security observers are concerned that the lack of apparent authority of the coordinator will reduce his ability to comprehensively address changes enumerated in the 60-day review. Programs in several departments address various aspects of cybersecurity within their respective areas of responsibility. While every department and agency has an individual and collective role in securing federal cyber enterprises, some organizations have more of a role than others in securing the nation's cyber infrastructure. Some security observers are concerned about the federal government's present ability to first detect and then respond in a coordinated way to a cyber incident of major significance. Agencies may have their own response plans, procedures, and responsible for combating current threats and anticipating future threats. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. or authority to match the scope and scale of the challenge. Federal agencies have overlapping missions and don't coordinate and communicate nearly as well as they should. Cybersecurity is a cross-cutting field that affects many government and that have the knowledge and capacity to focus cybersecurity research and development and to identify and disseminate best practices. The U.S. should work cooperatively with the Department of Energy and other federal agencies to identify areas where federal agencies with jurisdiction may have jurisdiction, the report says. For the Department of Defense, cybersecurity takes on an offensive or defensive national security role. For other government stakeholders, cybersecurity means information security, or securing the information that resides on cyber infrastructure such as telecommunications networks. And coordinate.in real-time and with improved situational awareness. This approach differs from that of the. Department of Homeland Security (DHS), which is more focused on protecting its own networks, processes and. content. It also enables the freedom of movement to fight and win battles in cyberspace. to the National Cyber Security Center, a clearinghouse whose mission is to coordinate information from all agencies to help secure cyber networks and systems. The Department of Defense (DOD) has a number of programs designed to address vulnerabilities and threats to its own networks. The National Cybersecurity Center is a joint effort between the U.S. Department of Justice, the FBI, the Department of Homeland Security, and the National Security Agency. The center is based in Washington, D.C. and is funded by the National Defense Authorization Act. computer network attack and defense principles. The Defense Industrial Base (DIB) initiative provides a vehicle through which DOD and industry partners can better share information on cyber threats and defense practices. DOD also has established a Cybercrime Center (DC3) that assists in criminal, counterintelligence, counterterrorism, and fraud investigations by the Department of Defense. The DIB initiative is also a vehicle for DOD to share information with industry partners about cyber threats, defense practices, and other issues that need to be addressed. Defense Criminal Investigative Organizations (DCIOs) and DOD counterintelligence activities. In addition to setting forensics standards, it provides training and testing laboratories for protection of defense information systems. Common themes often noted by many cybersecurity experts underscore a lack of transparency and dearth of defined departmental roles and responsibilities in addressing the problem of cyber-security. It provides training, testing laboratories, and a range of other services to help the military prepare for and respond to cyber-threats. It also provides a way for the military to learn from each other about how to deal with the problem. non-governmental stakeholders. As such, one of the most basic concerns, but most difficult to address, is that the term itself can carry different connotations for the various entities. For example, the U.S. military views cyberspace as a warfighting domain as well as a force enabler, enhancing troops' ability to operate. For more information, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/30/cybersecurity/cyberspace/index.html. Secretary Gates recently announced the creation of a new sub-unified command under the U.S. Strategic Command. This new command is to coordinate a unified approach to defending and securing military cyber networks. The December 2006 National Military Strategy for Cyberspace Operations (NMS-CO) guides the new command's work. The new command will be based in Washington, D.C. and will be called U.s. Cyber Command (CYBERCOM) It will be under the Strategic Command umbrella. national strategy for securing communications and information infrastructure. Legislation proposed in S. 733 calls upon the President to present a national strategy within one year of the bill's enactment. This bill would also create a national advisory panel to advise the President on national security issues. The bill is on the Senate floor and is expected to be voted on within the next few days. It would also be on the President's desk by the end of the year. It is currently under consideration by the House of Representatives. oversee implementation of the strategic plan and to periodically advise the president on the need for revising the strategy. Some have criticized the provision, which would give the President emergency control over public and private networks in the event of a crisis, and have argued that the bill is vague. The bill is expected to be voted on by the House of Representatives this week. The Senate will vote on the bill in the coming weeks. It is expected that it will be approved by the Senate in the next few days. Some point to the 2003 National Strategy to Secure Cyberspace as a framework for organizing and prioritizing federal cybersecurity efforts, including the private sector. Others note that this document fails to take into account the rapid rate of change in technologies or fails to offer a comprehensive strategy need for a current comprehensive national cybersecurity strategy. Some say that the 2003 policy has not kept pace with the rapidly evolving technologies and threats in cyberspace, and have called for a review of the strategy. The most recent strategy outlined a unified, whole-of-government approach to dealing with cybersecurity. continue to rely on technology as a major component of societal activities. Since 2008, a number of strategy and policy proposals have been offered that may assist in addressing the appropriate balance of relying on emerging technology and network-centric governance. These proposals include safeguarding critical infrastructure and control systems, as well as safeguardingcritical infrastructure and Control Systems in the digital age. For more information, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/29/technology/top-10-technological-issues-in-the-world/story.html. Administration declared that U.S. critical information infrastructures are a strategic national asset in a May 29, 2009, speech by the President. Recognizing the importance of cyberspace over the past few years, both the legislative and executive branches of government have developed cybersecurity legislation and related initiatives, respectively. However, just as just as important as the physical infrastructure is, so too is the digital infrastructure, and the need to protect it is just as critical as the real one. entities that vastly differ from those of other cooperating agencies. The Cyber Incident Annex to the National Response Plan of December 2004 describes many different authorities and policy documents to guide a response, as well as many different organizations that must communicate effectively in the event of a crisis. It also describes how the U.S. government will respond to a cyber-attack on the Internet, including how it will communicate with the public and private sectors. It describes how U.N. agencies will respond, and how they will work together. cyber-related issues from a comprehensive national approach. Such concerns often assert that a continuation of addressing cyber incidents as a myopic individual agency responsibility will eventually lead to increased systemic national vulnerabilities and put the nation at greater risk. It is argued by some that a more strategic approach to cyber issues is in order to protect the nation from the threat of cyber-enabled crime and cyber-espionage. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. the geographic location of the perpetrators of cyber attacks; the evolving integration of mobile technology devices into critical information infrastructure; the introduction of new vulnerabilities to the nation's infrastructure from increasingly sophisticated threats; a poorly coordinated federal-private sector approach to addressing emerging risks; and legal ambiguities with respect to U.S. cyber attacks. The report was published by the Center for Security Policy, a nonprofit organization based in Washington, D.C. It is the first of a two-part series on the state of cyber security. response and offensive actions. Many security observers suggest that an equally daunting group of strategy and policy challenges must be addressed if the U.S. is to be successful. The ever-changing nature of modern technological devices is often noted as a complicating factor in securing the nation's telecommunications and cyber infrastructure. The United States needs to take a more aggressive stance against cyberattacks, security experts say. The U.N. Security Council is expected to meet next week to discuss the threat of cyberattacks. privacy and civil liberty considerations. Recent events such as the April 2007 cyber attacks on Estonia and cyber attacks during the 2008 Georgian incursion have served to increase awareness. Cybersecurity is not just about protecting computers, but also has implications for U.S. national security and economic well-being. The Obama administration is taking steps to address the issue of cyber-security in the United States. The White House is taking measures to counter cyber-attacks in the U.N. and other countries. The Administration's 60-day review's near-term action plan calls for preparing and updating a new national cybersecurity strategy. Others say it is not a comprehensive strategy but is instead a set of recommendations, much like the CSIS Commission report. The plan includes appointing a cybersecurity official to coordinate interagency strategy and policy. It also calls for developing a new cybersecurity.framework to ensure that the U.S. government's initiatives are appropriately integrated, resourced, and coordinated, the report says. President Obama issued the results of the Administration's 60-Day Cyberspace Policy Review (60-day review) The review's goal was to assess U.S. policies and organizational structures for cybersecurity. In order to develop a strategic release of the review, President Obama announced the creation of a new cabinet-level position to coordinate cybersecurity strategy and policy across the federal government. This new "Cyber Coordinator," sometimes referred to as a 'Cyber Czar," would report to the National Security Advisor and the Director of the National Economic Council. A persistent set of issues has stymied significant progress in detecting and deterring existing threats and implementing effective safeguard measures. Issues that appear to continually challenge U.S. cybersecurity efforts include uncertainty of response to emerging challenges in cybersecurity. Some of the apparent gaps discovered may actually be addressed by existing classified programs, which cannot be discussed in this unclassified report. Conceptual and definitional differences among agencies make a unified government strategic approach to cybersecurity a challenge to detecting, identifying, mitigating, and responding to future cyber incidences. Cybersecurity is broadly defined as the protection of critical information infrastructure and its processes and content. Questions of resources and appropriate organizational structures appear to dominate legislative and executive branch efforts and proposals for federal cybersecurity programs. The perceived lack of a current and clearly articulated national strategy remains a concern to some. This report does not discuss reorganizing the executive branch to better address cybersecurity-related issues, nor initiatives and recommendations suggested in CNCI, the CSIS report, and the 60-day review. A Cybersecurity Commission (the Commission) organized by the Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS) was formed in 2008 to provide advice to the new Administration on the creation and maintenance of a comprehensive cybersecurity strategy. In a December 2008 report, the Commission provided findings and recommendations to secure cyberspace. The Commission's report was published in December 2008 and published by CSIS on December 14, 2008. The report was titled "Cybersecurity in the U.S. and the World: A New Cybersecurity Strategy" and deploy intrusion prevention tools. Review and potentially redirect research and funding. Connect current government cyber operations centers. Develop a government-wide cyber intelligence plan. Increase the security of classified networks. Expand cyber education. Define enduring leap-ahead technologies (investing in high-risk, high-reward research and development) and develop new cyber-security tools for the government and the private sector. Develop and test new cyber security tools and software. Develop new cyber technology for the public sector. freedom of speech protections on the Internet while devising cybersecurity procedures. Awareness, research, education, and training —developing a workforce to meet cybersecurity goals, raising citizenry awareness of cybersecurity best practices, and developing more secure technologies. Outreach, collaboration, and policy formation —working across government and with the private sector to share information, ideas, and best practices to meet security goals and meet the needs of the public at all levels of government and private sector. The U.S. Department of Homeland Security is leading the effort to develop a national cybersecurity strategy. an international cybersecurity policy framework. Prepare a cybersecurity incident response plan. Develop a framework for research and development strategies that focus on "game-changing" technologies that enhance security. Build a cybersecurity-based identity management vision and strategy that addresses privacy and civil liberties interests. Some common themes begin to emerge from the report, including the need to build a "cybersecurity infrastructure" that is resilient and resilient to attack. The report was published by the Cybersecurity Policy Institute, a think tank based in Washington, D.C. 12 objectives supporting the initiative's goal of comprehensively addressing the nation's cyber security concerns. These include the following: Move toward managing a single federal enterprise network. Deploy intrinsic detection systems. Develop a single communications system architecture for the federal government with common security standards across the network. The initiative is funded by the National Security Agency, the Department of Homeland Security, and the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NS&T). The initiative's objectives are to develop a single integrated communications system Architecture for the Federal Government. to ensure transformational change). Define enduring deterrent technologies and programs. Develop multi-pronged approaches to supply chain risk management (potential tampering within the production line and the risk associated with computer products and parts made outside the U.S.) 12. Define the role of cybersecurity in private sector domains. To learn more, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/28/technology/cybersecurity-and-security-in-private-sector-top-10. Federal executive branch programs, strategy documents, and reports have been analyzed. Issues are compared to the current statutory framework, new legislative efforts in the 111 th Congress, and executive branch initiatives to identify commonalities and possible gaps. While the issue contained in the applicable legislation and Executive Branch initiatives do not always perfectly align, Table 1 notes corresponding legislation proposed in both the 111th Congress and the 113th Congress. The issues are grouped into broad subject areas to highlight common themes and potential gaps in the programs. This appendix provides an overview list of legislative proposals in the 111 th Congress. Following this is an overview of legislation that was proposed in the 110 th Congress, indicating legislative initiatives extending back into the previous Administration. The appendix also includes a brief summary of the related section.committee jurisdiction. Committee jurisdiction includes the House of Representatives, the Senate, and the House Committee of Substantive Objectives. Committee responsibility includes the House Commons suspensions and the Senate suspends the suspension of the suspended commons continuing resolution. Commission (FCC) to institute and expand the "broadband technologies and opportunities program" S. 177 Strengthening Our Economy Through Small Business Innovation Act of 2009 (referred to Senate committee)—cybersecurity mentioned as a research priority for small businesses. H.R. 1131 Community Protection and Response Act of2009 ( referred to House subcommittee)—includes a would include cyber attack on computer systems as one of the possibilities under "terrorist attack" See under: Section 6—Inclusion of Energy, Security, Transportation, And And Energy. Water Related Research In The List of Topics Deserving Special Consideration As SBIR Research Topics. The bill would extend allocation of funds for research programs related to the Small Business Innovation Research program. Section 6 includes cybersecurity as one of the topics of interest, in particular the research by the Center for Cybersecurity and Information Security. The legislation would extend funding for the program through the end of the year, unless Congress acts to extend the program beyond that time. For more information on the bill, visit: http://www.senate.gov/senate/senators/authorities/passage/SBIR-Legislation.html. with third-party companies. For more information, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/29/technology/top-10-most-cnn-top-stories-of-the-year-2013/story.html?storylink=cpy. Back to Mail Online home. Back To the page you came from. Click here for more information on CNN.com's top 10 stories of the year 2013. Click through the gallery to see more stories from 2013. Cuba and Cuba's Relations With Other Countries" includes "the status and extent of Cuba's cyberwarfare program" as one of the seven subjects to be addressed by the report on Cuba required from the Director of National Intelligence. H.R. 2647 National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2010 Status of bill: or other federal agencies or those whose work product is relevant to national security policy or strategy. See under: Title III—General Intelligence Community Matters; Subtitle D—Congressional Oversight, Plans, and Reports; Section 340 – Cybersecurity Oversight. area of focus appears to be addressing issues related to workforce development, outreach, and collaboration-based initiatives. The proposed S. 733 in its initial version contained provisions for presidential cybersecurity authorities. Rewrites of this legislation reportedly may revise this provision. Such activities could be replaced or supplemented with the inclusion of cybersecurity authorities, according to the bill's sponsor. The bill is expected to be voted on in the next few weeks in the House of Representatives and the Senate, both of which are expected to vote on it soon. plan for response to natural disasters and terrorist events. Section 3123 includes cybersecurity threats as part of the "plan for addressing security risks posed to nuclear weapons complex" P.L. 110-161 ( H.R. 2764 ) Consol. L.C. Consol, L.A. and Washington, D.C., are among the states that have signed on to the plan. The U.S. State Department says the plan includes a "cyber attack'' as one of the scenarios that must be included. th Congress and the 110 th Congress to relevant existing statutory frameworks. Current appropriations bills are shown to illustrate congressional spending priorities. A common theme emerging from a review of the current proposals is the The final section of the appendix summarizes existing statutory foundations in cybersecurity. These lists are not exhaustive, but rather are designed to give a representative overview of cybersecurity related activities in the federal government. This information is current as of September 28, 2009. For the most up-to-date information, please consult the Legislative Information System (LIS) at http://www.congress.gov/ Section 340 would improve congressional oversight of federal cybersecurity programs. S. 1494 would require that the President inform Congress about every cybersecurity program currently in operation. Section 4 would require the Secretary of State to submit to the Senate and House a report describing "any actions taken by the U.S. to work with the governments of foreign countries to improve cybersecurity" Procurement Title XLI would require Congress to approve any federal contracts for cybersecurity equipment or software. The bill is expected to be voted on in the next few weeks. commission would have focused on "strategy for American business, national infrastructure, and United States Government non-military and non-national security related computer systems" Final status : Introduced in House. 44 U.S.C. § 3541 Federal Information Security Management Act of 2002 Status of bill: Introduced in. House. 43rd Congress, passed in December 2001, and signed into law in January 2002. House passed bill in March 2002, and Senate passed it in April 2002. Senate passed bill on December 31, 2002, but it was not signed into effect. Congress may consider drafting legislation that would outline a strategic security framework and priority areas for the Obama Administration to address. Congress might then review the authorization and appropriations legislation for cybersecurity related programs for possible mission duplication and adherence to strategic goals. The Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee, recognizing calls for lawmakers to combine efforts, is to work with the Armed Services, Commerce, Intelligence and Judiciary panels to craft comprehensive cybersecurity legislation. In addition to the options and recommendations contained in the legislative proposals, CNCI, White House 60-Day Cyber Security Review, and the Commission on Cybersecurity for the 44 th Presidency reports. in addressing civil liberties protections. As this legislation is marked up, alternative proposals may be considered. Another area of interest is executive branch organization. As the federal government continues to organize to defend its strategic cyber assets, some Members of Congress have proposed legislation that would create new offices or offices for cyber security in the executive branch of the U.S. government. In this article, we highlight some of the proposals that have been proposed by members of Congress. We also highlight a number of other proposals that are under consideration by the White House. there is no single congressional committee that can claim primary jurisdiction over cyberspace, neither is there a single executive agency or department with sole cybersecurity responsibility or commensurate authorities. As the President stated, "No single official oversees cybersecurity policy across the federal government, and no single agency has the responsibility to do so" There is also no single cybersecurity directorate or directorate of the Department of Homeland Security. There is no one cybersecurity chief for the entire U.S. government. There are no cybersecurity directorates for the State Department, the Treasury, the Defense Department, and the Treasury Department. The report presents the emerging issues in cybersecurity as identified by the Comprehensive National Cybersecurity Initiative (CNCI), the Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS) Report to the 44 th President, and the Obama Administration's 60-day policy review report. It also discusses the military's role in securing federal cyber networks. The report is based on the CNCI, CSIS, and White House 60-Day Cyberspace Policy Review reports. The White House's report is often referred to when discussions arise regarding how best to identify challenges and implement changes. Details of the initiative have been made public through departmental press releases, speeches by executive branch leaders, and analysis offered by individuals who follow cybersecurity- and terrorism-related issues. The Homeland Security Presidential Directive 23 and National Security Presidential directive 54 establishing the CNCI are classified. Reportedly, reportedly, the initiative is aimed at protecting against cyber threats. The initiative is being led by the Department of Homeland Security's Office of Cybersecurity and Information Security, according to a report by the Center for Cybersecurity Studies. the CNCI "establishes the policy, strategy, and guidelines to secure federal systems" Rather than serving as an overarching national strategy document, it is seen as a plan of action for programs and initiatives to be addressed at the operational and tactical level. Given the classified nature of the presidential directives and the secrecy accompanying department and agency implementation activities, the document can be seen as more of a guidebook than a national strategy. It also requires the federal government to integrate many of its technical and organizational capabilities to better address sophisticated threats and vulnerabilities. Few details are known about CNCI-related federal government implementation efforts. According to one media account, Steven Chabinsky, Deputy Director of the Joint Interagency Cyber Task Force for the Office of the Director of National Intelligence, stated at an information technology security conference that there are.activities related to this issues. There are no details on how much money has been spent on the project so far, but it is believed to be in the tens of millions of dollars, according to a media account. positions, or give greater authority and direction to existing positions. It is unclear how proposals such as S. 778 to establish the Office of the National Cybersecurity Advisor fits with the administration's recently proposed Cyber Coordinator. The position would serve the President as the principal advisor for all cybersecurity related matters. It would report to on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs. The bill would establish an Office of. the National cybersecurity Advisor within the Executive Office. of the President. It was introduced by Sen. Marco Rubio, R-Florida. Assistant to the President for Homeland Security and Counterterrorism. Will have "regular access to the president" and will be considered a key member of the national security staff. Will also work closely with the economic team. Position's exact mandate and scope of responsibilities is unclear, but some say it will have a major impact on the U.S. national security team. It will be based in Washington, D.C. and will work with the White House National Security Council and the State Department. the Secretary of Homeland Security, acting through the Assistant Secretary of Cybersecurity, to establish a program awarding competitive grants to institutions of higher education for cybersecurity programs. The grants will be used for professional development programs, associate degree programs in cybersecurity, and the purchase of equipment to provide training in cybersecurity. The program will be administered by the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) in Washington, D.C. NIST is the nation's leading source of information on cybersecurity issues. For more information, visit nist.org. Economic Council. White House announced that the President's new Cybersecurity Coordinator would be Howard Schmidt. Schmidt is an information security expert with many years of experience in government, law enforcement, and industry. According to an e-mail announcement sent to the White House e-mails list by John Brennan, Schmidt is a former member of the U.S. National Security Agency and the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST). Schmidt is also the former chairman of the National Security Council's Homeland Security Advisory Board. Section 4 would require the Secretary of Commerce to implement a system to provide dynamic and real-time cybersecurity status and vulnerability information for all federal government information systems and networks. Section 4.3 would instruct the President to designate a Cybersecurity Advisory Panel. Section 18 would give priority to computer, information science, and engineering research to ensure support is provided to meet cybersecurity challenges. See under: Section 18—Cybersecurity Responsibilities and Authority for more information on how this section would apply to you. the Department of Commerce. See under: Section 5—State and Regional Cybersecurity Enhancement Program; Part A—Creation and Support of Cybersecurity Centers. The section would require the Secretary of Commerce to provide assistance for the creation and support of Regional Cyber security centers. The goal is to promote and implement cybersecurity standards at the state and regional level. The bill would also require the secretary of commerce to support the creation of a National Cybersecurity Center at the U.S. Department of Homeland Security. the state and regional levels. The section would require the National Institute of Standards and Technology to establish measurable security cybersecurity standards for all federal government, government contractor, or grantee critical infrastructure information systems and networks. See under: Section 6—NIST Standards Development and Compliance for more information on this section. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S., call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline on 1-800-273-8255. metrics research, security controls, and software security. See under: Section 7—Licensing and Certification of Cybersecurity Professionals. Section 11 would require the Secretary of Commerce to develop and integrate a national licensing, certification, and periodic recertification program for cybersecurity professionals. Seeunder: Section 11—Federal Cybersecurity Research and Development. The section would require that the secretary of commerce develop andintegrate a national license, certification and recertifications program for cybersecurity professionals. The bill would also require the secretary to develop a national cybersecurity research and development program for the federal government. a "minimally acceptable system configuration requirements consistent with best practices, including checklists developed under section 8(c) of the Cyber Security Research and Development Act ( P.L. 107-305 ; 116 Stat. 2378) by the Director of the National Institute of Standards and Technology" Final status: Referred to Senate Committee after being referred to the House of Representatives for consideration. The bill is expected to be voted on by the Senate in the coming weeks. It was passed by the House in May. H.R. 1910 Chief Technology Officer Act of 2009 (referred to House subcommittee)—to create the Office of the Chief technology Officer. Section 2 would require the Chief Technology officer to assess the impact of information technology and networked information technology systems and applications on cybersecurity and personal privacy. Tied via appropriations or authorization H.R., 2892 Department of Homeland risks within and across transportation modes, including vulnerability of a cyber attack. Section 1 would create the office of the chief technology officer within the Executive Office ofthe President. during the 44 th presidency and to help inform policymaking. The following actions were proposed in the report as areas requiring priority attention: create a comprehensive national cybersecurity strategy; lead from the White House; reinvent public-private partnership; regulate cyberspace; authenticate digital identities; modernize legal authorities; use acquisitions to improve security; and reinvent public and private partnerships. The report was released on Thursday. It was released by the National Security Council on behalf of the President's Cybersecurity Task Force. as one of the President's key management priorities and establish performance metrics. Designate a privacy and civil liberties official in the NSC cybersecurity directorate. Convene appropriate interagency mechanisms to conduct legal analysis of priority cybersecurity issues. Initiate a national cybersecurity public awareness and education campaign. Develop U.S. government positions for cybersecurity experts and experts in the private sector. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. President on steps necessary to mitigate and manage security and privacy risks. CTO would also be responsible for "fact-gathering, analysis, and assessment of the federal government's information technology infrastructures, information technology strategy, and use of information technology" Other responsibilities would be ensuring "the security of the U.S. information technology infrastructure" and "the privacy and security of our information technology systems and systems" for the government's use in the future. For more information on the CTO position, visit the White House's website. to individuals who spend a majority of their work time undertaking technology-related activities. Requiring the National Intelligence Council to produce classified and unclassified annual reports addressing current and emerging cyber-related based threats. The Department of Homeland Security annually to produce cybersecurity risk assessments for all nonfederal government entities with security responsibilities. The assessments could address issues relating to current. and emerging threats, current best security practices, and mitigation and remediation. recommendations, as well as provide a venue for the recipients of this report to submit threat information and requests for assistance. and emerging cyber risks to the nation. Drafting legislation, strategy, and policies that take into account rapidly changing telecommunications and Internet-based technologies. Ensuring risk reduction education and training is a core component for all federal government employee performance assessments, with an advanced course provided by the federal government. For confidential support call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. For support on suicide matters call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org. federal information systems enterprise networks make a concerted strategic approach to network security even more difficult. Another cybersecurity difficulty for the government is balancing the protection of civil liberties and individual privacy protections with the desire for comprehensive security of networks and information. It is difficult to secure information infrastructures and their content without tradeoffs between security and the freedoms associated with the Internet. Many concerned about civil liberties fear that the executive branch will use its national security powers and national defense mandate as justification for encroaching on civil liberties. the definition of "privacy" in the context of the Internet, and a lack of consensus on what sort of government resolution may be necessary as a network security measure. Since 2008, numerous executive branch, legislative, and think tank recommendations and proposals have been offered to address various aspects of cybersecurity. Privacy and civil liberties concerns are not highlighted in recent congressional proposals. There are Internet privacy and non-disclosure policies written into statutory frameworks that may not specifically address cybersecurity, such as the Health Insurance Portability and in legislative action to date. This may suggest to some that existing programs have emphasized securing networks before tackling the attendant issues such as freedom of speech, privacy, and civil liberty protections as they pertain to the Internet. Upon review of the legislation contained in Table 1 , another common common theme is the need to protect the privacy and freedom of the Internet of individuals and businesses. This is a common theme in the legislation that has been enacted to date, and is reflected in the names of the states that have passed legislation so far. privacy without adequate oversight. Others regard security measures, such as network traffic monitoring, as a violation of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Complicating the issue is a lack of consensus on how to proceed with the issue, experts say. "No one shall be subjected to arbitrary interference with his privacy, family, home or correspondence," the U.N. Declaration says. "There is a need to protect the privacy of all people," says U.S. Sen. Cory Booker, D-New Jersey. Defines criminality of security breaches and unauthorized access to data on federal computer systems and certain financial institutions. Protects the privacy of individually identifiable health information in computerized insurance records. 15 U.S.C. § 6801 Financial Services Modernizati on Act of 1999 (Gramm-Leach-Blil ey) Status of bill: P.L. 106-102 , 113 Stat. 1338, enacted November 12, 1999. See under: Disclosure of Nonpublic Personal Information (Financial Privacy Rule). Accountability Act (HIPAA; P.L. 104-191 ) and personal health care information safeguards, or the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act. Civil liberties is an area of concern for both Congress and privacy advocates, but does not appear to be an immediate priority reflected in the bill. The bill would also include financial information for corporations or individuals. It would be the first time Congress has passed a bill that includes a provision to protect the privacy of corporations and individuals. provide consumers with a privacy notice at the time the consumer relationship is established and annually thereafter. The privacy notice must explain the information collected about the consumer, where that information is shared and how it is used. The notice must also explain the option to opt-out of sharing the information, and how that information can be protected. The information must explain how the information is used, how it's protected, and the options to opt out of sharing it. It must explain that the consumer has the right to opt in or out of the information. The Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) has recently adopted new interoperability standards for health care information technology. HHS is responsible for implementing key security standards and guidelines to support the implementation of and compliance with the Federal Information Security Management Act of 2002 (FISMA; P.L. 107-347 ). The agency is also responsible for overseeing the development of new health care technology products and services. For more information, visit HHS.gov/HealthCareInformationTechnology or go to www.HHS.gov. H.R. 4791 would have required agencies to comply with the Federal Agency Data Protection Act. The bill was reported by the Committee on Homeland Security. It would have allowed the director of the Office of Management and Budget to establish information security policies and procedures. It was reported to the Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee. It has not yet been voted on by the full Senate or the House of Representatives. It is expected to be voted on in the coming weeks or months. L.P. 107-347 on December 17, 2002. Contains standards for securing information and information systems within federal agencies. Requires compliance reports be submitted to the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) 18 U.S.C. § 2510 Electronic Communications Privacy Act. See under: Title III of the E-Government Act of 2002 for more information on how to comply with this law and other similar laws in the United States. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. Title I of the ECPA protects wire, oral, and electronic communications while in transit. It sets down requirements for search warrants that are more stringent than those of a search warrant. Title II protects wire and oral communications that are in transit while in the United States. Title III protects communications in the U.S. that are outside of the country of origin or destination and are not subject to search warrants. Title IV protects electronic communications that have been in transit and are in the possession of a third party. Title II of the ECPA, the Stored Communications Act (SCA) protects communication held in electronic storage, most notably messages stored on computers. 18 U.S.C. § 1030 Computer Fraud and Abuse Act of 1984 Status of bill: P.L. 98-473 , 98 Stat. 2190 on October 12, 1984. In other settings, the law applies to messages stored in the cloud or on a mobile phone or other device. The law also applies to emails, instant messages, and other text messages. Section 102 would require TSA to implement a system of risk-based allocation of resources. It would also require the TSA to provide a report that includes "a summary that ranks the risks and benefits" of the agency. The bill was approved by the House of Representatives on Thursday. The Senate is expected to take up the bill next week. The full Senate Appropriations Committee will consider the bill on Friday. The vote is scheduled to begin at 10 a.m. ET on Friday and end at 10 p.m., ET on Saturday. The bill provides authority for the Secretary of Defense to permit private sector employees to enroll in and receive instruction at the Defense Cyber Investigations Training Academy. No more than 200 full-time student positions may be filled at any one time by privatesector employees enrolled under this section. Eligible private sector. employees will be those engaged in providing significant defense related. support to the Department of Defense. The bill was passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate and is expected to be signed into law by the President. the National Academy of Sciences relating to cybersecurity. S. 1391 Department of Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2010 Status of bill: Awaiting conference. The bill provides authority for the Secretary of Defense to permit private sector employees to enroll in and take part in Cyber Security Courses of the Defense Cyber Investigations Training Academy. See under: Title IX—Department of Defense Organization and Management; Subtitle D—Other Matters; Section 932—Instruction of Private Sector Employees in Cyber security Courses. 2010 (awaiting conference)—civilian cybersecurity training authorization. Peripheral cybersecurity related or mentions P.L. 111-5 ( H.R. 1 ) American Recovery and Reinvestment Act, 2009 —under Title XXX Health Information Technology and Quality, section 13001 directs privacy standards for electronic health information. Title VI directs the Commerce Department and the Federal Communications Department to the Federal Trade Commission to provide cybersecurity training to the public and the private sector. The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services provides cybersecurity training for the public. enrolled under this section. Eligible private sector employees will be those engaged in providing significant defense related support to the Department of Defense or other federal agencies. Those whose work product is relevant to national security policy or strategy. In addition to the above section (932), section 1222 "Report on" will be required to be completed by the end of the year. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2008 . Indicates that the annual report on the military power of the People's Republic of China must include "developments in China's asymmetric capabilities" Section 1814 requires the Secretary of Defense to prepare a report on China's cyberwarfare capabilities. The report must include efforts to acquire, develop, and deploy cyberwar Fare capabilities. It must also include "efforts to acquire ... and deploy ... cyber warfare capabilities" The report will be published every year. Under "Procurement—Defense Wide": Major Equipment DISA #027—Cyber Security Initiative $18,188. Under "Operational Systems Development" Defense-wide: # 0301371G Cybersecurity initiative CCP unknown amount (classified) Under "Research, Development, Test & Evaluation, Air Force": Cybersecurity for control networks research $4,000. Under 'RDT&E' Defense- wide: # 0305103E Cyber security initiative $30,400. P.L. 110-5 ( H.J.Res. 20 ) Revised Continuing Appropriations Resolution, 2007 . Provides $43,075,000 for "cybersecurity" activities for DOE. Includes $143,539,000 in FBI salaries and expenses to "address emerging threats in counterterrorism and cybersecurity" P. ll 110-53 ( HR.R. 1 ) Implementing Recommendations of the 9/11 Commission Act of 2007 . Creates an Under Secretary responsible for overseeing critical infrastructure protection, cybersecurity, and other related programs. The bill would allocate $1,700,000 for the Center for Counterterrorism and Cyber Crime, located in Norwich University, Northfield, Vermont. The bill would also create the Joint Program Office for Cyber Operations Capabilities. Under "Cyber security": $122,511. Under “Operational Systems Development" Defense-wide: # 0305103K Cybersecurity initiative $10,080. Under the Energy National Security Programs program: $120,000. The bills were passed as part of the 110 th Congress. H.R. 266 Cybersecurity Education Enhancement Act of 2009 Status of bill: Introduced in House. S. 1438 Fostering a Global Response to Cyber Attacks Act. House version of bill would authorize grants to institutions of higher education for the establishment or expansion of cybersecurity professional development programs. Senate version would authorize the Secretary of Homeland Security to establish a program to award grants for cybersecurity professional training programs. House bill would provide funding for cybersecurity training programs at colleges and universities across the U.S. H.R. 263 Cybersecurity Education Enhancement Act of 2008 would have directed $3,500,000 for State and local cybersecurity training. $4,000,000 would have been for the Power and Cyber Systems Protection, Analysis, and Testing Program at the Idaho National Laboratory. Bills that did not become law include the National Institute of Standards and Technology and the University of California, San Diego. The bill was not passed by the Senate or the House of Representatives, and was not expected to become law. H.R. 3293 provides $607,482,000 for the public health and social services emergency fund. The bill was placed on calendar in the Senate. It would "best support efforts to enhance security of the bulk power electric grid," according to the bill's summary. It also would "support activities related to countering potential threats to the U.S. electrical grid" and "to support activities to enhance the public's understanding of the role of health and human services in the economy" The section would amend the Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act. It would improve federal response efforts after a terrorist strike or other major disaster affecting homeland security. In the section for the definition of a major disaster it would change the language used to define the term. The bill would also change the wording of the language that defines the term "major disaster" It would also make changes to the language in the section that defines "major" and "disaster" The bill is expected to be voted on by Congress in the coming weeks. and privacy of the federal information technology infrastructure and networks" and "coordinating closely with other federal departments and agencies" H.R. 1174 FEMA Independence Act of 2009 Status of bill: Introduced in House—referred to House Subcommittee on Emergency Communications, Preparedness, H.J. Res. 1. The bill was introduced in House on July 31, 2009. It was referred to the Subcommittee on emergency communications, preparedness, and homeland security. It has not yet been heard by the House. Section would create an "Assistant Secretary for Cybersecurity and Communications" as part of an independent FEMA. H.R. 1131 Community Protection and Response Act of 2009 Status of bill: Introduced in House—referred to House Subcommittee on Early Childhood. See under: Title V—Other Offices and Functions; Section 514—Cybersecurity.and Response. See also: Section 513-514, Cybersecurity, and Communications, and Section 515-515, Cyber security, and communications. The bill attempts to improve the cybersecurity of the critical electric infrastructure through added powers and responsibilities for the Secretary of Homeland Security. S. 773 Cybersecurity Act of 2009 was introduced in the House of Representatives and placed on Calendar in the Senate. The bill would provide Congress with information on vulnerabilities and threats to the criticalelectric infrastructure and provide those to Congress as well as to the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission. It would also provide the secretary of homeland security with information about threats to that infrastructure. It has been referred to the House Subcommittee on Emerging Threats, Cybersecurity, and Science and Technology. and protocol to ensure the effective deployment of tested and validated technology and software controls to protect the bulk power electric grid. H.R. 2200 Transportation Security Administration Authorization Act Status of bill: Referred to Senate Committee. "Smart grid technology to enhance the security of the electricity grid," says the bill's sponsor, Sen. Tom Coburn, R-Oklahoma. The bill has been referred to the Senate Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs, which is expected to vote on it this week. potential biological, nuclear, radiological, chemical, and cybersecurity threats to civilian populations. Details on Bills in the 111 th Congress that Address a Cybersecurity-Related Issue. H.R. 2892 Department of Homeland Security Appropriations Act, 2010 Status of bill: Awaiting conference. S. 1436 Energy and Water Development and Related Agencies Appropriations Act,. 2010 Status: Placed on Calendar in Senate. See under: Title III—Department of Energy; Energy Programs; Electricity. cyber attack in the listing of major disaster. H.R. 1174 FEMA Independence Act of 2009 (referred to House subcommittee)—an Assistant Secretary for Cybersecurity is mentioned for an independent FEMA. S. 1436 Energy and Water Development and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 2010 (placed on Calendar in Senate)—for the "purpose of forming and governing a national energy sector cyber organization" S. 2200 Transportation Security Administration Authorization Act (reached to Senate committee after being received from House)—mentions a cyber attack as a security concern. cybersecurity strategy that includes such thigs as a long-term plan of the nation's cybersecurity future as well as a Quadrennial Cyber Review. Bill called for the President to create a "comprehensive national cybersecurity initiative advisory panel" that would be composed of representatives of Congress, the executive branch, and the private sector. The bill would have established the "American Cybersecurity Commission" to investigate the current threats to the cybersecurity of American business and infrastructure from foreign entities. Senate committee). H.R. 266 Cybersecurity Education Enhancement Act of 2009 (referred to House subcommittee)—expansion of professional cybersecurity education programs. S. 778 To establish, within the Executive Office of the President, the Office of. the National Cybersecurity Advisor (reached to Senate committee). S. 921 would establish the National Office for Cyberspace within the. Executive Office. The Director of the NationalCybersecurity Advisor would be the head of the. National Office of Cybersecurity. an assessment on the program's privacy impact. H.R. 2868 Chemical Facility Anti-Terrorism Act of 2009 Status of bill: Introduced in House—referred to House Committee on the Judiciary. See under: Title XXI – Regulations of Security Practices at Chemical Facilities; Section 2101—Definitions. The bill defines "chemical facility security performance standards" and defines " chemical facility security standards" The bill was passed by the House of Representatives in 2009 and passed the Senate in 2010. as including the deterrence of cyber sabotage, "including by preventing unauthorized onsite or remote access to critical process controls" Later in the bill, cybersecurity is mentioned several times alongside physical security as seemingly equally important for the overall security of chemical facilities. S. 921 United States Information and Communications Enhancement is a bill that aims to improve the security of U.S. chemical facilities and other government facilities. It was signed into law by President Barack Obama on July 31, 2013. The bill was passed by the Senate on July 28, 2013, and the House of Representatives on July 30, 2014. Department of Commerce's National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) has primary responsibility for reducing cyber vulnerabilities in the electrical grid. Congress directed NIST to lead the Department of Energy and other agencies in ensuring an interoperable, secure, and open energy infrastructure that will enable all electric resources to contribute to an efficient and reliable electricity network. EISA gave NIST "primary responsibility to reduce cyber vulnerabilities" in the electric grid. The Energy Independence and Security Act of 2007 (EISA; P.L. 110-139 ) gave Nist "primaryresponsibility to" coordinate development of a framework that includes protocols and model standards for information management to achieve interoperability of smart grid devices and systems. Cybersecurity and associated standards are being addressed as part of this Smart Grid Interoperability Framework that is under development. NIST is also tasked to promote the development of the Smart Grid interoperability framework, which will be called the "Smart Grid Interopability Framework" for Smart Grid Devices and Systems. The framework is expected to be completed by the end of the year. Delivery and Energy Reliability. The section would allocate funding for the Department of Energy as it relates to electricity delivery and energy reliability. As part of the funding the Secretary must establish an "independent national energy sector cyber security organization" The Secretary of Homeland Security would be required to initiate several interim measures to protect the system from cyber attack. The Secretary would then produce periodic assessments on the cyber threats to the critical electric infrastructure, including policies and the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission. It would also establish a national energy security organization to institute research, development and deployment priorities. The bill seeks to amend Part II of the Federal Power Act in order to address cybersecurity threats to the reliability of the bulk power system. In addition, the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission would be authorized to respond in cases of imminent cyber security threats. The section also emphasizes ensuring that the Commission protects cybersecurity-related information. See under: Section 3—Protection of Bulk Power System From Cybersecurity Threats. H.R. 2195 to provide additional authorities to adequately protect the critical electric infrastructure against cyber attack. Office for Cyberspace is tasked with developing and implementing a comprehensive national cyberspace strategy. The Office would play a crucial role in deterring cyber attacks and defending the cyber critical infrastructure. H.R. 2165 Bulk Power System Protection Act of 2009 Status of bill : Introduced in House—referred to House Committee. The bill was introduced in House and referred to the House Committee on Energy and Natural Resources. It was passed by the House of Representatives with a vote of 419-3. of the Department. Also, creates R&D program that can "research technologies that mitigate damages in the event of a cyber attack." P.L. 110-139 ( H.R. 6 ) Energy Independence and Security Act of 2007. Mandates that the "smart grid" must incorporate "full cybersecurity" P. l. 110 -181 ( H-R. 4986 ) Energy and Security and Energy Independence Act of2007. Mandate that the 'smart grid' must incorporate 'full cybersecurity'