Conventional transit projects generally follow a “design-bid-build” approach. Project sponsors may be able to benefit from certain efficiencies and service improvements by transferring long-term responsibility of transit operations and maintenance in addition to design and construction to the private sector. DOT’s 2007 Report to Congress on transit public-private partnerships stated that the privatesector may be lessons-learned report following the project”s completion. The project sponsor was able to incorporate 198 design modifications identified by theprivate sector partner during development to improve overall quality of the transit system while remaining on budget. maintain, build-operate-m maintain, design-build-finance-operates, and build-own-own, among others. We conducted, summarized, and analyzed in-depth interviews with project sponsors and private sector participants about their experiences with alternative financing and procurement in transit projects. We reviewed transit project information from DOT, GAO, the Congressional Research or development agreements, planning documents, and documentation related to the financial structure of the projects in addition to academic, corporate, and government reports. able to add value to transit projects through improved management and innovation in a project’s construction, maintenance, and operation. Project sponsors and stakeholders we interviewed stated that alternative approaches promote the use of performance measures (such as train capacity and frequency) rather than specific design details ( such as the type of type of train) for transit projects. We interviewed a number of project sponsors, stakeholders, and transit experts to get their views on alternative approaches to design. We are happy to share our findings with you. entities all develop guidance such as standardized contracts and provide technical assistance to support transit projects that use alternative approaches. According to an advisor for project sponsors, contracts for these partnerships and approaches generally follow a standard model such as a framework for assigned risk between the project sponsor and project’s main risks. Further, by using standardized contracts developed by these entities, project sponsors can reduce transaction costs of implementing transit projects using alternative approaches, the advisors say. The contracts can reduce the time and costs incurred when negotiating a contract, they say. permitting risk to the private sector. The private sector partner spent more than $30 million dollars over a 10-year period and never obtained final approval to proceed with construction. Transit projects that use alternative approaches may also introduce transaction costs to the project sponsor through legal, financial, and administrative fees in addition to higher-priced financing in the future. The project sponsor may lose some control over its ability to modify existing assets or implement plans to accommodate changes over time such as extensions, service changes. such design modifications without additional costs because contracts often specify the use of technical or other specifications. When the long-term responsibilities of transit operations and maintenance are transferred, the private sector potentially has a greater incentive to make efficient design decisions. This is because alternative approaches may help ensure more predictable funding for maintenance and operations. These activities can be subject to unpredictable public sector budget cycles under the conventional design-bid-build approach. Because alternative approaches for transit projects may include operations and Maintenance standards in the contract, theprivate sector might be responsible. years longer than if a bond were used and the private sector were not involved in financing the project. With a longer payment period, project stakeholders told us that the transit agency could conserve funds in the short term to help it construct other new transit projects on time. Additionally, the agency could save money in the long term by not having to pay for the project in the first place, they said. The project is expected to be completed by the end of the year or early next year. In the 1800s, the private sector played a central role in financing early transportation infrastructure development in the United States. Original sections of the New York City Subway were constructed from 1899 to 1904 by a public-private partnership. Another example is the City of Chicago’s “L” transit system, which was built from the 1920s to the 1950s by a private-sector partnership. In the U.S. today, private sector participation and investment in transit is not new. the 1880s through the 1920s and operated by the Chicago Rapid Transit Company, a privately owned firm. The construction of the system was financed by the private sector. In following years, transportation infrastructure development became almost wholly publicly funded. Conditions placed on federal transportation grants-in-aid limited private involvement in federally funded infrastructure projects in the 1930s and 1940s. In the 1950s and 1960s, federal funding of transportation infrastructure projects was almost entirely funded by state and local governments. In 2010, the federal government increased funding for transportation projects to the tune of $1.2 billion. A greater private sector role in transit projects can also potentially offer certain advantages to the public sector. Public transit agencies can borrow more cheaply than the private sector. The effects of the recent economic recession and failed credit markets have stymied private sector’s ability to raise revenues and provide affordable long-term funding for transit projects. The study examined the role of the privatesector in the delivering and financing of U.S. transit projects compared with other countries. It also looked at the benefits and limitations of and the barriers, if any, to greater privatesector involvement. The private sector assumed some risk that actual ridership would not reach forecasted levels. Along with this transfer of risk, the private sector was also given design, build, finance, operate, and maintain a new transit line. Payments to theprivate sector were based on performance and ridership revenue, meaning that the privatesector assumed some risks. The private sector also assumed somerisk thatactual ridership wouldn't reach forecasting levels. The public sector was given a risk-free loan to build the new line. officials said that in many cases, the private sector partner would need the authority to increase or decrease transit fares based on ridership trends. However, raising fares involves political considerations, including equity for low-income transit users, officials told CNN. The private sector would need to assume greater ridership risk, officials said. The proposal is expected to be voted on in the coming weeks. The public hearing is scheduled to take place in early August. The report is expected in the fall. It will be presented to the City Council for consideration. performance. Some projects have also incorporated standards that link to increased ridership to provide incentives for the private sector partner to provide good customer service. For example, Nottingham Express Transit has 20 percent of its payments to the privatesector based on ridership. Additionally, the draft concession agreement for Denver’s’ new light-rail system has a 20 percent ridership incentive. For more information, visit: www.nottinghamexpresstransit.com/passenger-transit/passengers. Quasi-governmental entities provide technical assistance to support transit projects that use alternative approaches. Entities such as Partnerships UK, Partnerships Victoria, and Partnerships BC are often fee-for-service and associated with Treasury Departments on the provincial and national levels. These quasi- governmental Kingdom required the private sector to share any refinancing gains with the project sponsor, the standard contract was subsequently updated. For example, Partnership BC provides project sponsors assistance on conducting a Value for Money assessment. Quasi-governmental entities can further protect the public interest through the benefits they provide. For example, Partnerships UK reviews project proposals for the government. Partnerships Victoria offers training for the province. Without the services provided, project sponsors that plan to or use alternative approaches would not be able to plan and execute their plans. The government officials in the United Kingdom and Canada say these entities create a consistent approach to considering public-private partnerships, such as understanding a that private sector participation in a project is beneficial. another private partner. When a private sector partner finances a project using equity capital, the private sector uses payments received from the project sponsor to repay approach provides more value. Project sponsors can assess if one public-private partnership option is more advantageous than another if it is decided that private participation in a project is beneficial. For example, Bay Area Rapid Transit used a Value for Money analysis in its original iteration of the Oakland Airport. For more information, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/30/transit/how-to-get-more-value-from-a-public-private-partnership. private sector partners, stipends add costs that must be weighed against the benefits they provide. Project sponsors that we interviewed have also encouraged early and sustained interaction with the private sector to test the project’s marketability and whether and in what form private sector participation is advantageous. Such feedback can be helpful in determining whether or not the project is a good fit for the public sector, the authors say. For more information on the project, visit: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/30/science/science-and-technology/science and technology/index.html. project approval process. The alternative approaches we reviewed have protected the public interest in various ways to ensure the public receives the best price for a project and to create incentives for the private sector partner so that the project progresses and operates based on agreed-upon objectives. Project sponsors we are happy to share their views on the alternative approaches to the project approval process with the public in the hope that they will help the project progress and operate in the public's best interests. We are also happy to offer our views on how the project should be funded. public-private partnership approach is in the public interest for a given project. Value for Money tests are often done by comparing the costs of doing a proposed project as a public- private partnership against an estimate of the costs for procuring that project using a public delivery model.value for money is a way to measure the value of public-private partnerships in a given area of business. For more information, visit www.value-for-money.org.uk or www.cnn.com/vfm. public-private partnership is the best project delivery option available. Internationally, the United Kingdom, and British Columbia in Canada, among others, require a Value for Money analysis for all transportation projects over a certain cost threshold. For example, all transport projects in the UK that exceed about $24 million must have a VFM analysis. In the U.S., VFM analyses are required for transportation projects that exceed $20 million. In Canada, VFM is required for projects over $30 million, but not more than $50 million. often publicly available, such as in the United Kingdom, they can lead to more-informed discussions and provide transparency in the selection of the project delivery approach. They can be good planning and communication tools for decision makers. Government officials and consultants that perform financial assessments such as Value for Money can use them to make informed decisions about projects and their funding. The U.S. Department of Energy says it has no plans to change its use of value-for-money assessments in the near future. The agency says it will continue to use value for money assessments to make its decisions. Transit public-private partnerships have been implemented in Australia, Brazil, Canada, France, Hong Kong, Malaysia, the Philippines, South Africa, Thailand, and the United Kingdom. International projects generally require a government subsidy to supplement farebox revenues for construction as well as operations and maintenance. According to World Bank officials, the U.K. and Canada are leading countries for private equity investment in transit. The United Kingdom has the most experience using different public- private partnership models. The U.S. and Australia are the only two countries to have implemented such partnerships. We conducted, summarized, and analyzed in-depth interviews with project sponsors, private sector participants, international stakeholders, and experts regarding the competitive procurement. We also conducted a literature review; summarized and analyzed key benefits, limitations, and that use alternative approaches. We conducted site visits of selected transit public-private partnerships and visited the United Kingdom and Canada, which both had more experience conducting transitPublic-Private Partnerships.or both. We concluded that Canada and the UK were the most appropriate countries to include as part of our review. interviewed have attempted in part to protect the public interest in transit projects that use alternative approaches by ensuring the use of competitive procurement practices. These practices are not unique to alternative approaches and are sometimes used in conventional procurements. Competitive procurement practices are generally required to be used for transit projects, the report says. The report concludes that alternative approaches to transit projects are in the public's best interests and should be considered for further study and consideration. For more information, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/30/transit/features/alternative-approaches-to-transit-project/story.html. ensure that the public sector receives the best bid when using these partnerships and approaches. European Union countries are required to have multiple bidders for procurements. Procurements with only one bidder are less competitive and can result in less attractive bids. For example, although Bay Area Rapid Transit prequalified three, they were only able to secure one bid from a consortium of four. For more information, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/29/technology/top-10-public-sector-procurements-in-europe. its pilot program projects, and will consider private sector due diligence as a substitute for its own. From a public perspective, an important component of analyzing the potential benefits and limitations of greater private sector involvement is consideration of the public interest. No definition of public interest exists at the federal level, nor does federal guidance identify public interest considerations in transportation. Stakeholders include public transit authorities, transit agency employees, mass transit users and members of thepublic who may be affected by ancillary effects. DOT has done comparatively little to equip project sponsors to weigh the potential costs and trade-offs. Project sponsors we interviewed cited a range of potential benefits, such as achieving cost and time savings. Recently, DOT has taken a more integrated approach pilot program, build upon efforts underway in DOT to better equip transit project sponsors in implementing transit projects that use alternative approaches. We provided a draft of this report to DOT for use in this pilot program. We also provide guidance, providing technical assistance, and sponsoring greater use of financial assessments to consider the potential Costs and Trade-offs in transit. for a transit project will develop them on a case-by-case basis because they lack institutional knowledge and a centralized resource for assistance. While DOT has established an office to support project sponsors of highway-related public-private partnerships, DOT does not provide similar support for transit projects. In a previous GAO, the GAO found that the DOT did not provide such support for transporation projects. The GAO also found that DOT provided no support for the development of transit projects in the past. interest in public-private partnerships through the use of quantitative and qualitative public interest assessments. We have also previously reported that more rigorous, up-front analysis could better secure potential benefits and protect the public interest. Since that report, the DOT has done much to promote the benefits, but comparatively little to assist states and localities weigh potential costs and trade-offs of these partnerships. The use of qualitative and quantitative public interest tests and tools before entering into transit public- private partnerships is a good first step. the Department of Transportation’s (DOT) Public-Private Partnership Pilot Program; and how project sponsors and DOT can protect the public interest in transit projects that use alternative approaches. We interviewed FTA and other federal and local officials associated with the projects we selected as well as private sector officials involved with U.S transit public-private partnership arrangements. We also held in-depth interviews with FTA on its steps to protect thepublic interest in federally funded transit projects with greater private sector participation. Congress on transit public- private partnerships and we similarly reported on them in 2008 for highway public-private partnerships. We collected and reviewed descriptions of the projects, copies of the concession and potential limitations of transit projects that use alternative approaches. We conducted, summarized, and analyzed in-depth interviews with domestic project sponsors and private sector participants including private investors, financial and legal advisors, project managers, and contractors. It is even more challenging to conduct transit projects using alternative approaches in the United States, we found. A Value for Money analysis can help lay out the expected benefits, costs, and risks of the project. Not using such tools can potentially allow aspects of the public interest to be overlooked. Some countries have further protected public-private partnerships by requiring them to undergo such analyses. In sum, government officials and consultants noted that Value for money analysis should be considered as a tool rather than the sole factor in assessing whether to do a public- private partnership. The analysis is also a useful management tool for considering up front use data from past projects and their own professional views. tests examine not only the economic value of a project but also other factors that are hard to quantify. In the United Kingdom, Value for Money analysis includes qualitative factors Money analysis, cautioned that the assessments are not without limitations. Officials and consultants told us that these analyses are inherently subjective and rely on assumptions that can introduce bias. Assessments can include the assumption that the public sector will likely have higher construction costs due to a history of high costs in the past, for example. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. such as the viability, desirability, and achievability of the project in addition to the quantitative factors. Provinces such as Canada’s British Columbia and Australia's Victoria also include qualitative factors in their financial assessments, including Value for Money analysis. Government officials stated that including both quantitative and quantitative factors in financial assessments is a good idea. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. all project costs and risks that can occur during a project’s lifetime, which is not always done in a conventional procurement. Project sponsors can also use financial assessments such as Value for Money analysis for other reasons. For example, it can assist in determining which project delivery project costs could have varied from $47 million more to $270 million less than expected, depending on the level of risk. A further example of how project sponsors can use Value for money is to enhance communication about a project.  connector to assess which alternative project delivery approach would be more advantageous. Project sponsors can also use Value for Money to give a range of possible project costs. For example, a sensitivity analysis developed for the Canada Line suggested that design-build-finance-operate- maintain would be a better option. For more information, or to download a copy of the report, visit: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/29/technology/how-to-plan-a-project-and-how-much-it-would-cost-you. of cost overruns. Consultants noted that there is subjectivity in valuing risks as detailed data on the probability of particular project risks occurring are unavailable. In the United Kingdom, an “optimism bias” of 15 percent is added to the public sector comparator in part to account for this, consultants said. The report was published by the International Institute of Fiscal Studies (IIFS) and the European Council on Foreign Relations (ECF) in London. The full report is available on the ICF website. Canada Line’s concession agreement transferred all key construction risks (i.e., cost overruns) to the private sector. The public authority retained risks associated with permitting and other environmental risks such as unknown contaminated soils. For one early highway public- private partnership in California, the project sponsor attempted to transfer environmental risks to the public. The project sponsor failed to do so and the public authority was left with the environmental risks. In the end, the public was left to bear the environmental and construction risks. sector produced several good ideas that were incorporated into the project, such as a shared risk fund to provide an incentive for the private sector to reduce construction delays. Furthermore, the Canada Line project sponsor used a list of essential elements agreed upon by the public agencies funding the project. The Canada Line is a high-speed rail link between Toronto and Vancouver. The line is scheduled to open in 2015 and is expected to cost $1.5 billion to $2 billion to build. It will be the first of its kind in Canada and will connect the city to the rest of Canada. Risk transfer involves assigning responsibility for a project risk in a contract. Project sponsors can transfer a range of key project risks to the private sector. These risks include those related to design, financing, construction performance and schedule, vehicle supply, maintenance, operations, and ridership. By transferring these project risks, the project sponsor creates incentives for the privatesector to keep the project on schedule and on budget. The private sector would be responsible for any excess costs incurred from design errors. The project sponsor can potentially reduce the total cost and duration by transferring multiple project risks. or a significant number of functions in connection with a project. In transferring responsibility and risk for multiple project elements to the private sector partner, the project sponsor often has less control over the procurement. establish a higher threshold of responsibility for private partners compared to traditional procurements in which a private partner is selected based primarily on bid price. Sustained and iterative interaction can refine the project’s scope and terms and determine how best to use private sector partners for the project. The project sponsor may have the opportunity to earn a financial return commensurate with the risk taken. the private sector, thus possibly limiting the ability to find innovative and cost-effective solutions. When a project sponsor specifies the exact number of vehicles for the project, the private sector partners must incorporate that design detail into their scope. Whether or not that exact number is specified, the design detail must be incorporated into the scope, whether or not it is specified by the project sponsor or by the partner. The private sector must include that detail in their scope, even if it is not specified by a sponsor. Project sponsors seek to protect the public interest through an emphasis on performance. Performance specifications focus on desired project performance and not design details. When specifications are focused on performance, bidders can offer a range of design and technology options as well as follow best practices that meet best practices for project delivery. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. Project sponsors conduct a request for qualified bidders to gain more detailed input from the private sector on a project. Bidders can be obtained through bidder information sessions and from consultants. Project sponsors then conduct a Request for Proposals (RFP) to solicit formal bids. RFPs are issued before formal bids are solicited for the project. The RFP is the first step in soliciting formal bids for a project in the U.S. and is usually followed by a formal request for proposals. federal funding. Federal law and regulations generally require federal contracts to be competed unless they fall under specific exceptions to full and open competition. Project sponsors told us that maximizing the use of these competitive procurement practices helps to encourage multiple bidders to value and price projects. For more, go to CNN.com/Impact. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org. In the U.S., call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. not change. If those conditions are not met, the project loses its government funding. This conditional approval occurs after the department reviews projects, in part to address the risk of cost increases. It also provides a signal of project quality to the private sector to help maintain a competitive bidding, the department says. The project is expected to be completed by the end of the year, the government says. It is not known when the project will be completed or when it will be funded. The government says it will provide an update on the project's progress in the coming months. also said that projects with a range of technology options must undergo the environmental review process at the highest possible level of design. In contrast, one project sponsor noted that performance specifications should not be used when conditions of the facility are not ideal. Also said that different technologies can have different effects on the environment, which should be considered in the design process for new facilities. The report was published by the European Commission on Wednesday. It was based on a request for information from the UK Department of Energy and Climate Change. within a set schedule. For example, the Canada Line private sector partner had 400 milestones that it needed to complete and have certified in order to continue to receive timely payments during the project’s construction period. Performance standards for operations and maintenance, also called key performance indicators, cover all aspects of the project. The Canada Line is currently under construction in New York City. The project is expected to be completed by the end of 2015. The cost of the line is estimated to be $1.4 billion. of service including the availability, frequency, and reliability of service and conditions of facilities. For example, the London Underground chose to emphasize key performance indicators in four areas—availability, capability, ambience, and service points. It created performance targets and to tie monthly payments to these based on the private sector partner’s actual service levels. It also chose to create performance targets by creating performance targets for each of the four areas and tying them to monthly payments based on their actual service level. or surrounding environment, for example, are unknown as unforeseen circumstances could occur that would require more specific design specifications. Project sponsors have also sought to use performance standards to protect the public interest. These standards are what the private sector partner must meet to be compensated during the project’s construction, operations, and maintenance phases. If theprivate sector partner does not meet the standards, then it is penalized with no, reduced, or delayed payments, and penalties can escalate if poor performance continues. Standards for construction include delivering a completed project or project element. private sector, with the particularities of local legislation and project specifics written into them. The United Kingdom’s standard contract outlines requirements as well as factors to consider from a project's service commencement through termination. For example, after the government of the United Kingdom, the project will be known as the ‘Government of the UK’. The contract is periodically updated to reflect lessons learned, such as the fact that the project is in the private sector and not the public sector. The project will also be called ‘The Government of the U.K.’ and the contract will be called the “Government of Britain’ The private sector dropped the cost estimate of transferring the remaining environmental risk from $25 million to $9 million. Officials we interviewed also stated that environmental remediation risks may be difficult to transfer to the private sector. It may be inefficient and inappropriate for certain risks to be transferred to theprivate sector due to the additional premium the privatesector charges to address unknown factors. Denver Regional Transportation District originally planned to transfer all environmental remediated risk for its several unknown remediation elements. The cost of transferring this risk has now been reduced to $8 million. For confidential support, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255. Permitting requirements and other environmental risks may become too time-consuming and costly for the private sector to address. The public sector may best be retained by the public sector given its stewardship role within the government. According to officials we interviewed, although the costs and risks associated with environmental issues may be too high for private firms to deal with. To see the full report, visit CNN.com/sustainability. To read the rest of the article, visit the CNN iReport home page. Environmental remediation risk refers to whether the cleanup of hazardous materials and other conditions at a project site leads to increased project costs or schedule delays. It can encompass conditions that are identified as well as those that are not identified. The actual number of passengers achieves forecasted levels. The number of people who board the plane is higher than forecasted. The plane is carrying more passengers than expected at the time of boarding. The passengers are more than double the number that were expected to board at the start of the flight. risk to the private sector partner. According to project sponsors, this transfer of ridership risk was done to induce the concessionaire to increase ridership. As such, the project sponsor decided to transfer limited ridership Risk to thePrivate sector by basing 10 percent of its payments to theprivate sector partner during operations and maintenance on ridership figures. The project sponsor wanted to transfer full Ridership risk to the concessionaires, but learned that private investors would not finance a deal with full ridershiprisk transfer. The Connector project initially tried but ultimately was unable to transfer ridership risk in part because the private sector concessionaire would not have fare-setting authority. This was also the case with the Canada Line, where the agreement was structured to incorporate a limited transfer of ridership. The project's original iteration would have been able to transfer some of the ridership, but not all of it. The Canada Line would have transferred some of it, but only a limited amount. The private sector would have had fare setting authority. which transferred ridership risk but not the ability to set fares. Officials we interviewed stated that the private partner progressively faced financial difficulties due to low ridership revenue, which led to the collapse and ultimate buyback of the partnership by Transport for London. Additionally, if a transit project is built, the public will be responsible for the cost of the project if it is not completed by the end of the decade. If the project is completed, the city will be able to charge a fee for the service. as an extension of an existing system, the private sector partner may not want to operate a single segment of a publicly owned system. According to officials, private investors are reluctant to assume ridership risk of any portion of a system operated by an entity they do not control. These private sector partners may not be willing to take on the full cost of running the system. These public-private partnerships may be less likely to be successful than the public-public partnerships, officials say. These may be more likely to result in a lower ridership rate. Project sponsors can transfer a range of key project risks to the private sector. It may be too costly for project sponsors to transfer certain risks, such as ridership and environmental remediation. Past experience in projects demonstrates the difficulty of transferring these risks. According to officials we interviewed, ridership risk may be difficult to transfer to thePrivate sector if transit project sponsors are reluctant to forfeit full full risk of ridership. Ridership risk refers to whether that are not identified during surveys of a project site. The private sector may want to charge an additional premium to take them on. an error causes delays or additional costs, or causes the project to fail to satisfy legal or other requirements. Ridership risk refers to whether the actual number of passengers on the transit system reaches forecasted levels. However, some risks may not be transferable. Much of the federal government’s share of the cost of the project is in the form of a loan to the city of Toronto. The city is seeking a loan of up to $1.5 billion to help pay for the project. that provide an overview and explanation of risks transferred using such an approach, and a financial feasibility model that can be used to quantitatively compare the use of an alternative approach with the conventional approach to transit projects. In June 2009, the House of Representatives’ Committee on Transportation and the Transportation and Infrastructure Committee released a report on the cost-effectiveness of alternative approaches to mass transit. The report found that the alternative approach was more cost-effective than the conventional one. It also found that it was more feasible. fare-setting authority. For example, Denver Regional Transportation District chose not to transfer ridership risk for its East Corridor and Gold Line pilot projects given that it wanted to retain the right to set fares. Another example is the United Kingdom’s Croydon Tramlink project, where fares are set by a board of directors rather than by a single person, as is the case in the U.S. and U.K. It is not clear if fares will be set by the board in the future. private sector. If the agreed-upon cost, schedule, and risk transference are not met, the government withdraws its funding. United Kingdom Department for Transport officials told us that they have experience withdrawing funding when such conditions have not been met. We also found that other U.S. Department of Transportation modal administrations have also withdrawn funding when these conditions were not met. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. The project sponsor for Manchester Metrolink had to break two existing public-private partnership concession agreements to accommodate extensions to its system. Consultants to the Manchester project told us that breaking a concession agreement can be very expensive and can damage the project sponsor an option to break and buy back the agreement for a set price. In the previously mentioned example, concessions for phase 2 were terminated by the project sponsors to allow for system expansion in a third phase which was not procured as a result of the agreement. The Manchester Metrolink Phase II light rail project was a 17-year concession agreement wherein the private partner had responsibility to design, construct, finance, operate, and maintain this project. The project was designed to expand the MetrolINK System in order to connect two of the city’s existing stations. For more information on the project, visit: www.metrolink.org.uk. for more information about the project or visit: http://www.metro.com/metro-light-rail-project. a design-build alternative approach. Denver Regional Transportation District and the private sector completed the Transportation Expansion project 22 months ahead of schedule and within budget. In the United Kingdom, the three Docklands Light Railway extensions were built using design- build-finance-maintain approaches, and were completed 2 weeks to 2 months before schedule and on budget. The London Underground's Docklands Extension was completed on time and on schedule using a design- Build-Finance-Maintain (DBBM) approach. relationship between the project sponsor and the private sector partner. To accommodate increased ridership, the Docklands Light Railway decided to build platform expansions. However, the privatesector partner was not willing to take on this additional work. The project sponsor had to take the extra steps to accommodate the extra ridership on the train. The private sector partners were also unable to take part in the expansion work, requiring the project sponsors to do the work themselves. The Docklands light railway opened on July 1, 2013. a specified threshold due to circumstances outside the private sector partner’s control. Periodically revisiting terms, or shorter concession periods, can also allow for changes such as system extension. One of the Docklands Light Railway extensions has breakpoints at the years 2013 and 2020 in its concession agreement that give the public sector partner time to make changes to the system. The extension is expected to be completed by the end of the year or early next year, depending on when the breakpoints are set. The private partner provided over one-half of the project’s funding for construction. The public sector terminated the concession to further expand the system. The London Underground maintenance projects included agreements entered into between London Underground and two private sector partners to maintain and upgrade the system's infrastructure, including track, tunnels, and bridges. The maintenance projects were to be carried out over a period of 20 years and cost an estimated £1.5 billion. The project was to be completed by the end of 2015. The Nottingham Express Transit light rail project used a 27-year contract to build trains and stations. In return, the private sector would receive periodic payments based on its performance. One of the two private sector partners subsequently went bankrupt, and the concession agreement was then taken over by Transport for London. For more information on the project, visit nottinghamexpresstransit.org.uk. For further information on TfL, visit www.ftl.gov.uk/transport. a single franchise to operate trains over the entire system. All three extensions were financed in part or full using private equity investment. The Lewisham Extension was the United Kingdom’s first transportation public-private partnership for both project delivery and financing. The Croydon Tramlink light rail project was a 99-year light rail venture. The London to Brighton line was the first light rail line in the world to be fully funded by private investment. It was completed in 2007 and opened to passengers in 2009. For the Croydon Tramlink, the private sector partner contributed 30 percent of project costs. To better protect the public interest, project sponsors have also incorporated clauses into project agreements. In the case of the Canada Line, theprivate sector partner did not miss any of its 400 payment milestones. The project is expected to be completed by the end of 2015. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. The Docklands Light Railway serves a redevelopment area east and southeast of London. Transport for London, the public sector project sponsor, used three separate design-build-finance-maintain concession agreements to construct system extensions. We also examined international mechanisms that were implemented for projects including Croydon Tramlink, Docklands light railway, London Underground, Manchester Metrolink, and Nottingham Express Transit in the United Kingdom and the Canada Line in Vancouver, Canada. We looked at process, robust concession agreements, and Value for Money analyses. the ability to set fares. The project is in the ninth year of its contract. The Canada Line light rail project in the Vancouver area is a 35-year design-build-finance-operate-maintain concession agreement. It was developed to link Vancouver with its international airport and neighboring employment and population centers in anticipation of the light rail system's arrival in the mid-2020s. It is currently in its 9th year of a 35 year design- Build-Finance-Operate-Maintain contract. its costs plus provide a return on investment. Since the private sector partner borrows to finance its costs, it has equity at risk if it does not meet standards. It will be unable to meet its financial obligations from these milestone payments if those standards are not met. This situation is not uncommon in the private-sector finance sector. It is not unusual in the public-private sector, either, as it is often the case in the U.S. and Europe. It's also common in Asia and Africa. can create incentives for the private sector partner to deliver according to the terms of the agreement. At the same time, financial advisors to project sponsors told us that bank lenders protect their investments by ensuring that theprivate sector properly develops a concession agreement and then delivers on it. The project sponsors are seeking to build a new port in the city of Porto Alegre, in the south of the country. The port is expected to be completed by the end of the year, with the first phase of the project expected to begin in early 2015. The bank lender and concessionaire provide additional project oversight through the monitoring of cost overruns and schedule delays, among other issues. According to the Canada Line private sector partner, it provided 17 percent equity in the project. The public interest is further protected by this integration of responsibilities because the bank lenders and concessionaires provide extra project oversight, the government says. The project is expected to be completed by the end of 2015. The cost of the project is estimated to be around $1.5 billion. Refinancing gains refer to savings that occur when the private sector revises its repayment schedule for its equity investment by taking advantage of better financial terms. As we have noted in our report on highway public-private partnerships, theprivate sector can potentially benefit through gains achieved in the public interest. The public interest can be achieved through the use of public funds to finance private sector investments in infrastructure projects. The government can also use public money to fund private sector investment in public infrastructure projects, such as roads and bridges. refinancing their investments and these gains can be substantial. The governments of the United Kingdom as well as Victoria and New South Wales, Australia, require that any refinancing gains achieved by private concessionaires generally be shared with the government. Some foreign governments have recognized the importance of protecting the public and have taken steps to protect the public from privatisation. In the U.S. and Australia, the government has taken action to ensure that the public is protected from the sale of private property. transit asset at the end of the concession when it is transferred back to the project sponsor. These provisions help to minimize disputes. Other advisors to project sponsors told us that a clause specifying the sharing of “refinancing gains” could also help to protect the project. The project sponsor and concessionaire could also share ‘refinanced gains’ between the project and the concessionaire, the advisors said. The deal is expected to be completed in the second half of 2014. Project sponsors that we interviewed noted the importance of having the ability to periodically revisit agreement terms in long-term concessions. For example, Houston Metro’s public-private partnership. According to consultants we interviewed, the terminations could have been avoided if the initial concessions had been shorter. Shorter concession periods are thus being used as a means to revisit terms and rebid if desired. In addition to clauses that allow project sponsors to revisit concession agreement terms, there are clauses that.allow for flexibility under certain circumstances. other clauses that allow for flexibility can also protect the public interest. For example, Denver Regional Transportation District’s draft concession agreement includes clauses specifying both triggers that could lead to default and terms of compensation in case of default as well as termination provisions that detail the condition of the project. For more information, go to: http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-261552/Denver-transit-district-to-sign-contract-with-public.html. The London Underground spent the equivalent of $112 million or approximately 1.1 percent of the concession agreement’s total price to cover legal expenses, financial services, and administrative fees. Officials we interviewed also stated that the conventional project delivery approach may not necessarily require.that the conventional projects delivery approach be used. For more information on the London Underground project, visit: http://www.londonobservatory.co.uk/en/news/features/2013/07/28/london-ubservatory-project-delivery-approach-may-not-necessarily-be-used.html. an option to revisit the contract. Internationally, both of the London Underground’s maintenance 30-year concession agreements are reviewed for scope of work and costs by a public-private partnerships arbiter every 7.5 years. Moreover, the concessionaire has the ability to request an extraordinary review by the arbiter if costs rise above £1.5billion. The London Underground has a contract with a concessionaire that runs for 30 years, with an option to extend it for an extra 10 years. Regional Transportation District East Corridor and Gold Line pilot projects incorporate payment deductions. Low performance, such as delayed trains and littered or unclean railcars, persists. If low performance continues over a period, the project sponsor can terminate the concession agreement and rebid the project to a different contractor. The pilot projects are expected to be completed by the end of the year or early next year, depending on the outcome of the pilot projects. The cost of the projects is estimated to be $1.2 billion. North and Southeast Corridor projects’ concession agreement incorporated this flexibility by including an operations and maintenance agreement for the first 5 years after service begins with the option for renewal. According to a consultant that works on the project, this approach was chosen in part because the project sponsor wanted to be flexible with the contract. The project is expected to be completed by the end of 2015. The first phase of the project is scheduled to be complete by 2016. The second phase is scheduled for 2017. The third phase will be completed in 2018. New capital investment in mass transportation has come through FTA’s New Starts program. FTA must prioritize transit projects for funding by evaluating, rating, and recommending potential projects on the basis of specific financial commitment and project justification criteria. The States given the variation in relevant state laws and local ordinances that project sponsors and other stakeholders must navigate. This is the largest capital grant program for transit projects and that any such projects would be reviewed to protect the public interest (i.e., projects not entirely funded by the private sector) state and local agencies with over $10 billion to help design and construct transit projects throughout the country. FTA distributes billions of dollars of federal funding to transit agencies for the construction of new, large-scale projects. Expanded FTA efforts could facilitate the implementation of transit projects that use alternative approaches and protect the public interest through the use of tools such as standardized contracts, technical assistance, and financial assessments. To facilitate a better understanding of the potential benefits of public-private partnerships, the U.S. DOT has done much to sector role in transit directly to project sponsors. FTA still has the ability as part of its pilot program to further experiment with the use of existing tools that could encourage a greater private sector role. FTA may want to turn to the experiences of these other modal administrations and governments and use existing, long-standing tools to incorporate more flexibility in the New Starts. The aim is to balance the need to protect the public interest with the need for private sector involvement in the development of transit projects. The pilot program is expected to run until the end of the year. FTA uses the evaluation and rating process to process to help facilitate transit projects that use alternative approaches. Without an evaluation plan to assess the results of its pilot program, FTA may also lose some valuable information Congress intended the agency to obtain through the pilot program’s establishment. The New Starts project approval process can be changed to make it easier for the federal government to fund and operate transit systems in the U.S. It can also be streamlined to make the New Starts process more efficient and effective. Infrastructure’s surface transportation reauthorization blueprint proposed that an Office of Expedited Project Delivery be created within FTA. Such support is not currently available for project sponsors of transit projects that use alternative approaches. Because these efforts are either planned or in their early stages, we are retaining our recommendations. Finally, FTA officials provided technical comments, which we incorporated in our draft report. We revised our draftReport to reflect FTA's efforts to provide technical assistance for its staff on how to structure and evaluate alternative approaches to transit projects. Congress authorized FTA to establish the Public-Private Partnership Pilot Program. Pilot program allows FTA approval process for transit projects that use alternative approaches. Congress and FTA have taken steps to streamline New Starts by establishing the pilot program. The pilot program characteristic of a pilot program— flexibility—to gain valuable insight on how to streamlining the New Starts process. It will also facilitate a greater private sector role in transit projects through the use of alternative approaches, the authors say. The authors say the program will provide valuable insight to the private sector in the U.S. FTA could consider these international models and expand its current efforts in transportation public-private partnerships. Incorporate greater flexibility, as warranted, in the Public-Private Partnership Pilot Program than has occurred to date by making greater use of existing tools. If reauthorized, we recommend that the Secretary of Transportation direct the FTA Administrator to take the following actions: To fund these activities within the overall contract price. To support a greater private of alternative approaches in FTA’s Public- private Partnership Program, if reauthorized. bonds issued through the state of Nevada and with contributions from the area resorts and hotels. As previously mentioned, Congress authorized FTA to establish its Public- Private Partnership Pilot Program to demonstrate the advantages and disadvantages of these approaches in transit. As established, the pilot project studies those projects that were funded by bonds issued through Nevada and by contributions from hotels and resorts in the area. The pilot project will also look at the cost-effectiveness of using private-public partnerships in the transit system, including the cost to the state and federal governments. potentially increase private sector bids and that they would still be able to achieve some of the benefits of using an alternative approach without equity capital investment by the private sector. While it may be too early for FTA to grant major streamlining modifications with the other two pilot projects, has not yet illustrated how this can be done. FTA has determined that no pilot project has demonstrated enough of a transfer of risk for it to consider granting major modifications to streamline its New Starts. This is because, on the one hand, the pilot projects have not demonstrated enough risk transfer. to study projects that incorporate greater private sector involvement through alternative project delivery and financing approaches. Projects selected under the pilot program will be and equity capital is invested by the private sector. To date, to date, only one of the pilot projects is expected to be completed by the end of 2014. The pilot program is funded by the U.S. Department of Energy's New Starts program. The program is intended to provide a framework for future New Starts projects in the United States. It will also provide a way to streamline design, construction, and operations and maintenance. A private partner provided one-third of the project’s funding, including private equity capital, in exchange for periodic payments based on performance and ridership. The pilot program is expected to demonstrate potential benefits to using alternative approaches. 2010 Winter Olympics will be held in Sochi, Russia, on February 25-28, 2010. For more information, visit the FTA website or go to: http://www.fta.org/winter-olympics-2010-Winter-Olympics. FTA needs a way to isolate the effects of the pilot program; a data analysis plan for the evaluation design; and a detailed plan to ensure that data collection, entry, and storage are reliable and error-free. Without such an evaluation plan, FTA is limited in its decision making regarding its pilot program, that are directly linked to the program objectives; criteria for determining pilot program performance; and detailed plan for data collection and storage. Beyond its objectives, FTA also needs to ensure the data is reliable and accurate. Congress will be limited in its decision making about the pilot program’s potential broader application. FTA officials told us that they have not yet developed an evaluation plan for its pilot program. The projects are all ongoing, far from completion, and still working through the New Starts of these existing tools in the future to incorporate greater flexibility into the Pilot Program, they said. Further, FTA officials stated that FTA is working to develop a plan to assess the pilot's results and stated they will be working to development one. often rely on the concurrent completion of project phases to meet cost and schedule targets and to accrue savings and other potential benefits. Congress recognized New Starts as a potential barrier, as it authorized FTA to establish a Public-Private Partnership Pilot Program in part to identify ways to streamline the pilot project sponsors. Thus far, FTA has only assessed the Houston Metro pilot project to determine the extent to which FTA could streamlining the New Starts process. It is not clear if any major streamlining modifications of the project approval process could be made. A sound evaluation plan is needed and should incorporate key features including: well-defined, clear, and measurable objectives; measures that are directly linked to the program objectives; criteria for determining pilot program performance. Such as Letters of Intent and Early Systems Work Agreements in order to streamline the New Starts process. Projects for pilot project sponsors should be developed in advance of the pilot program’s start-up, says the White House. The New Starts program is a partnership between the federal government and the private sector. use of a rigorous and systematic evaluation process to distinguish among proposed New Starts investments. However, we and other stakeholders and policymakers have also identified challenges facing the program. Among these challenges is the need to streamline the New Starts project approval process. Our past reviews, for example, found that past reviews had found that New Starts projects had been approved without a thorough and rigorous evaluation process. We are committed to making sure that this does not happen again in the future. We hope that this article has helped you to make a difference in your community. Program and the New Starts Program. We conducted this performance audit from October 2008 through October 2009 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions. The audit was conducted in compliance with the requirements of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services' Office of the Inspector General and the Department of Justice's Office of Inspector General's Office for Civil Rights. The New Starts grant process is closely aligned with the conventional design-bid-build approach. The project sponsor contracts with separate entities for the design and construction of the project. In 2005, eligible for a simplified and accelerated review process that is intended to substantially reduce the time and cost to the sponsors of New Starts projects. This can include major modifications of the requirements and oversight tools. For example, FTA may offer concurrent project approvals into preliminary engineering and final design. For more information on the New Starts process, visit the FTA’s New Starts website. could help to avoid such delays by improving their submissions. For example, Houston Metro’s projects have changed repeatedly, thus requiring multiple submittals. In addition to the costs of delays, the design of the New Starts project approval process is closely aligned with the conventional design- bid-build process, according to the FTA. The New Starts process is similar to that of a traditional design-bid-build project, the FTA says. The FTA says it has no plans to change the design process for New Starts. time it takes for FTA to determine whether a project can advance can be significant. In addition to not yet granting project sponsors any major streamlining modifications to the New Starts process, FTA does not have an evaluation plan to accurately and reliably assess the pilot program’s results, according to the report. The report was commissioned by FTA to identify opportunities for streamlining or simplifying the process. It found that the New starts process is development cycle longer than was previously allowed. The study was conducted by Deloitte. evaluation requirements. On the other hand, the potential challenges posed by the New Starts requirements, including delays and additional costs, may discourage the private sector from assuming enhanced financial responsibility in these alternative approaches. Despite this apparent impasse, FTA sill has the unique opportunity to take advantage of the fundamental changes to the system, according to the FTA's director of policy and strategy. The FTA is currently working on a new plan to improve the system's efficiency and cost-effectiveness. It is expected to be completed by the end of the year. FTA may modify its risk-assessment process, as well as other project reviews. The modification of any of FTA’s New Starts requirements and oversight tools will be on a case-by-case basis if FTA determines enough risk is transferred to a project. The changes will be made on a “case- by-case’ basis,” the agency says. The change could be made as early as next year, the agency said in a news release on Monday. perceived by project sponsors as intensive, lengthy, and burdensome. FTA’s prescribed review times of 30 and 120 days for entry into the preliminary engineering and final design phases, respectively, are apparently arbitrary and actual review times are generally longer. In particular, the study found that project sponsors perceived the review process as intensive and lengthy. The study found in particular that the project sponsors believed that the review was ‘intense and lengthy’ and ‘burdensome’ that FTA required them to submit and resubmit entire project documents to FTA multiple times, which led to delays. FTA officials told us the length of time for reviews depends on a number of factors, most importantly the completeness and accuracy of the project sponsor’s submissions, and that project sponsors were required to submit multiple documents to the agency at the same time to ensure the documents were complete and accurate. The FTA says it is working with the project sponsors to improve the quality of the documents. FTA’s risk-assessment process delayed project development. Consultants to the Dulles Silver Line project sponsor told us that through the New Starts process, FTA has complete control over a project's schedule. FTA officials stated that several factors, including the decision to reexamine a tunnel option, contributed to challenges surrounding the Dulls Silver Line. The New Starts project approval process may also limit other potential benefits, such as the ability to build a high-speed rail link to the East Coast. Gold Line pilot projects. None of the pilot projects has demonstrated a sufficient transfer of risk or financial investment by the private sector. FTA has yet to grant three projects New Starts approval. FTA officials told us that none of the projects has shown a sufficientTransfer of Risk or Financial Investment by theprivate sector to enable FTA to relax its normal New Starts evaluation requirements for such approvals. The three pilot projects are the first to be approved for New Starts. The projects are expected to be completed by the end of 2015. FTA defines alternative approaches, including public-private partnerships, as those that increase the extent of private sector involvement beyond the conventional design- bid-build project delivery approach. These alternative approaches contemplate a single private sector entity being responsible and financially liable for performing all.project responsibility and risk with the public sector. FTA: Public-Private Partnerships are an alternative approach to the traditional design-bid-build approach to project delivery. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. FTA officials have plans to develop an online toolset for employees to help them provide technical assistance to project sponsors on these alternative approaches. This assistance is to include checklists to help determine whether a project should use an alternative approach, risk matrices, and other tools. The FTA also has plans to create a website to help project sponsors with information about alternative approaches to funding. The website will be available on the FTA's website at: http://www.fta.gov/news/press/press-releases/2013/01/30/fTA-to-develop-online-toolset-for-employees-to help-project-sponsors-with-alternative-approaches. existing, long-standing tools, such as Letters of Intent and Early Systems Work Agreements. Other agencies within DOT have used such tools successfully in the past to provide flexibility to their funding and approval processes and to advance and promulgate alternative project finance and delivery approaches. Moreover, some other countries have used these tools to advance their project finance, delivery and funding approaches, including the UK, France, Germany, Italy and the U.S., according to the Department of Transportation. It is unclear whether the DOT will use such tools in the future. Service, and other reports as well as conducted interviews with DOT officials, project sponsors, industry representatives, and academic experts to identify the potential universe of projects. We also selected projects that were either either (alternative project delivery or alternative financing) or both of our established definitions. For more information, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/30/science/science-and-technology/science_and_technology/top-10-alternative-project-delivery-deliveries-in-the-docket. Letters of Intent and Early Systems Work Agreement count against FTA’s available funding for New Starts projects under the current surface transportation authorization. We found that the governments of the of our recommendations.made and that the agreement will promote more-rapid and less-costly completion of the project. For example, FTA officials noted that the agency has, as we reported, made use of tools such as Letters of Intent in the past in order to streamline the New Starts process, and that it will evaluate the potential for greater use. Starts process, such as (1) Letters of Intent that announce FTA’s intention to issue a full funding grant agreement. FTA would in turn agree to obligate a New Starts project’S full federal share from future available budget authority, subject to the availability of appropriations, provided that a project meets all of its requirements. The FTA would then agree to a full grant agreement that would be issued in the form of a letter of intent. The letters of intent would be signed by the FTA and the project would be awarded a full federal grant. The project would then be awarded its full federal funding. available. FTA has employed a contractor to determine whether risk is effectively transferred from the public to private sector for the terms of a full funding grant agreement. Early Systems Work Agreements obligate only a portion of a New Starts project’s federal share for preliminary project activities, such as land acquisition. Over the past 30 years, FTA has made very limited use of these tools by only using them for a small number of New Starts projects, the report says. The report concludes that the federal government should consider using these tools for a larger number of projects. Early Systems Work Agreements require a project to have a record of decision for the environmental review process that must be completed under the National Environmental Policy Act. They also require the Secretary to find that a full funding grant agreement for the project will be.to obligate future funds. For more information on the Early Systems Work Agreement, visit the Early systems work agreement website. For additional information on Early Systems work Agreements, visit the Early systems Work Agreement website. for more information, visit www.early systemsworkagreement.org. DOT and FTA for review and comment. DOT has agreed to consider our recommendations and provided comments through e-mail from FTA officials. In their comments, FTA officials stated that the agency has ongoing and planned efforts as part of its Public-Private Partnership Pilot Program that they believe address the intent of the plan. The agency has also said that it has ongoing efforts in place that it believes address theintent of the pilot program. The pilot program is part of the U.S. Department of Transportation's Public Private Partnership Program. reviewed pertinent federal legislation and regulations, including: Federal Register Notices and guidance for FTA’s Public-Private Partnership Pilot Program and the New Starts Program. To identify the potential benefits of public-private partnerships for fixed Guideway Capital Projects, the DOT conducted a cost-benefit analysis. The report also looked at the costs, benefits, and Efficiencies of Public-private Partnerships for Fixed Guideways Capital Projects and other DOT reports. The study was based on DOT reports and other information from the federal government. that these costs may be reimbursable as eligible expenses (or eligible for credit toward the local match) should FTA approve the project for funding at a later date. FTA can also use Letters of Intent to signal an intention to obligate federal funds at aLater date when funds become available. The cost of the project may be eligible for reimbursement if the project is approved for funding by the Federal Transit Administration (FTA) at a future date. The project may also be eligible to receive credit for local match funding if the FTA approves the project. greater use of these tools could be beneficial. We have previously noted that limitations to FTA making greater use ofThese tools, including Letters of Intent, could be misinterpreted as an obligation of federal funds. Letters of intent only signal FTA’s intention when they only signal the intention to do so. We believe that using these tools is not without risk, and that they should be used with caution and in the best interests of the country. We are committed to making the best use of the tools available to us. a Clear Federal Role. Highway Public-Private Partnerships: More Rigorous Up-Front Analysis Could Better Secure Potential Benefits and Protect the Public Interest. Public Transportation: Improvements Are Needed to More Fully Assess Predicted Impacts of New Starts Projects. Federal-Aid Highways: Increased Reliance on Contractors Can Pose Oversight Challenges for Federal and State Officials. Railroad Bridges and Tunnels: Federal Role in Providing Safety Oversight and Freight Infrastructure Investment Could Be Better Targeted. Starts Process, and Options Exist to Expedite Project Development. GAO-09-784. Washington, D.C.: August 6, 2009. Public Transportation: New Starts Program Challenges and Preliminary Observations on Expediting Project. Development. High Speed Passenger Rail: Future Development Will Depend on Addressing Financial and Other Challenges. Establishing Is Likely for New Starts and Small Starts Programs, but Improvements Needed to the Small Starts Application Process. New Starts Programs. Starts Program Is in a Period of Transition. Washington, D.C.: August 30, 2006. Public Transportation: Preliminary Information on FTA’s Implementation of SAFETEA-LU Changes. GAO-06-910T. Equal Employment Opportunity: DOD’S EEO Pilot Program Under Way, but Improvements Needed to DOD”s Evaluation Plan. DC: June 27, 2006, and May, May, 2007, respectively, for GAO reports on the EEO program. as appropriate. We are sending copies of this report to appropriate congressional committees and DOT. The report also is available at no charge on the GAO Web site. If you or your staff have any questions about this report, please contact me at flemings@gao.gov or (202) 512-2834. The full report can be found at: http://www.gaO.gov/gao-report/report/2013/07/08/07-08-07-07/report.html. Report: Pilot Projects Could Help Test Solutions to Long-standing Concerns with the EEO Complaint Process. GAO-09-712: Better Data Needed to Assess Length of New Public Transportation Lines. Report: Pilot projects could help test solutions to long-standing concerns with EEOcomplaint process. Report by Tina Paek, Amy Rosewarne, Tina Won Sherman, Jim Wozny, and Tina Miller. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from. based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions. In addition to the individual named above, Steve Cohen, Assistant Director; Jay Cherlow; Patrick Dudley; Carol Henn; Bert Japikse; Joanie Lofgren; Maureen Luna-Long; Amanda K. K., and others were involved in the audit. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. and cultural structure to the United States. Given our limited resources, we decided to select only two of the three remaining countries. We ultimately identified Canada and the United Kingdom for our international site visits. Issues discussed in the report related to the interpretation of foreign law, including the U.S. Constitution and the US Declaration of Rights. The report also looked at issues related to foreign law and foreign policy, such as the role of the State Department and U.N. agencies in foreign policy. its project— now design-build-operate-maintain. According to Bay Area Rapid Transit, a contract will be awarded in December 2009. Metropolitan Transit Authority of Harris County (Houston Metro)—North and Southeast Corridor projects are to provide improved access to Houston’s Central and Southeast areas. The project will undergo a new request for qualified bidders and request for proposals process. It is expected that the project will be completed by the end of 2009. It will cost $1.2 billion. the I-595 Corridor Roadway Improvements Project in Broward County. A Value for Money assessment was also completed for the Bay Area Rapid Transit’s Oakland Airport Connector at the request of FTA. In general, Value for money evaluations examine total project costs and benefits and are used to determine if a project is a good investment for the future. The evaluation was conducted by the Florida Department of Transportation's Office of Transportation Planning and Analysis. The project is expected to be completed by the end of 2015. The Oakland Airport Connector project is to be a 3.2-mile system that will connect the Oakland International Airport to the Bay Area Rapid Transit’s Coliseum Station. FTA designated three project sponsors for its Public-Private Partnership Pilot Program in 2007. The project sponsors retain the right to set fares and are unwilling to forfeit fare-setting control. Some project sponsors that have tried to transfer ridership risk while retaining fare- Setting authority have run into difficulties, according to project sponsors and transit experts. This eliminated the South Florida Commuter Rail Upgrades, Hudson-Bergen Light Rail Transit Minimum Operating Segment 1 and Minimum operating Segment 2, and the Bay Area Rapid Transit Extension to San Francisco International Airport. We decided to select all three of the ongoing pilot projects—Bay Area Rapid transit Oakland Airport Connector, Bay AreaRapid Transit Oakland Airport connector, and Bay Arearapid Transit extension to San Fransisco. We also eliminated all three pilot projects from our list of possible projects. United Kingdom and Canada use conditional approvals to help encourage a greater private sector role in transit projects. The United Kingdom’s Department for Transport grants a conditional approval to fund a project before it receives private sector bids. Similarly, Transport Canada officials told us that it makes a formal announcement to state its intent to provide federal funds to a transit project after conducting its initial review of a project and before formally committing funds that allow project sponsors to move forward in development and engaging the public. The U.S. Department of Transportation gives conditional approval after conducting a formal review of the project. The Federal Aviation Administration has granted 90 of these multiyear awards since 1988. The Federal Highway Administration grants early conditional approvals to highway project sponsors seeking Transportation Infrastructure Finance and Innovation Act funds. The FAA uses Letters of Intent in its Airport Improvement Program to establish multiyear funding schedules for projects that officials said allow project sponsors to proceed with greater certainty regarding future federal funding compared to the broader program. It also helps prevent project stops and starts, officials said. It is intended to encourage greater private sector involvement in projects. Pilot programs waived certain aspects of the federal-aid highway procurement provisions. One of these pilot programs is cited by the Federal Highway Administration as having helped pave the way for design-build to become the standard project delivery approach in highway projects. Another pilot program allowed the federal government to waive regulations and policies so project sponsors in two states could contract with the private sector at a much earlier point in the project. The program was part of a larger effort by the U.S. Department of Transportation. private sector bidders to incorporate these funds into their financial plans without having to individually apply as otherwise required. The Federal Highway Administration has also carried out three pilot programs that have allowed projects to move more efficiently through its grant process by modifying some of its requirements. These pilot programs are being piloted by the U.S. Department of Transportation's Highway Administration and the National Transportation Safety Board. The pilot programs will be rolled out across the country over the next few years and are expected to be cost-effective. Federal Highway Administration’s Office of Innovative Program Delivery has been established. The office is intended to offer outreach, professional capacity building, technical assistance, and decision-making tools for highway-related public-private to a greater private sector role in transportation. Congress has taken a greater interest in facilitating alternative approaches as well. Quasi- governmental entities established by foreign governments have better equipped project sponsors to implement alternative approaches, according to the Highway Administration. The Office will provide an easy, single- point of access for project sponsors and other stakeholders. funded projects. More recently, there has been a move back towards policies that encourage more private and public blending of funding, responsibility, and control in transportation projects. The federal government has progressively relaxed restrictions on private participation in highway and transit projects serving public objectives. This change in federal policy has had a positive impact on the economy and the economy of the United States, according to the U.S. Chamber of Commerce and the American Public Transportation Association. It has also had a negative impact on economic growth. GAO: Private Sector Sponsorship of and Investment in Major Projects Has Been Limited. GAO-04-419. Washington, D.C.: March 25, 2004. Highways and Transit: Private sector sponsorship of and investment in major projects has been limited. GAo-04/419.5, 2006. U.S. Department of Transportation: Privatesector Sponsorship and Investment In Major Projects has been Limited. Government Accountability Office: March 25/04, 2004, and March 4/05/06, respectively. points for our Offices of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of this report. Key contributors to this report are listed in appendix II. Our work was focused on transit projects that involve greater private sector participation than is typical in conventional projects. In this report, we focus on projects that are more likely to involve private sector involvement than are typical of conventional transit projects. We also focus on public-private partnerships, which are more common in transit projects than they are in conventional ones. Since 2000, seven New Starts projects were completed using alternative approaches. These projects have focused on delivery, rather than financing, and have used transit projects. The private sector has played a more limited role in the delivery and financing of transit projects than in some other countries. Other barriers beyond the federal approval process affect the use of these approaches, including those beyond the immediate reach of the program such as reduced available private equity capital resulting from the recent economic recession. to address these challenges of the New Starts project. New Starts project approval process is not entirely compatible with transit projects that use alternative approaches in that the process is sequential and phased with approvals granted separately and at certain decision points. According to DOT’s 2007 Report to Congress, the New Starts process poses particular challenges for project sponsors using alternative approaches for their transit projects. The challenges they raised include (1) delays, (2) additional costs, and (3) the loss of other potential benefits, such as enhanced efficiencies and improved quality. of train). This allows the private sector to potentially generate and apply innovative solutions in the design of the transit system, adding value to the project. For example, because Denver Regional Transportation District’s Transportation Expansion Light Rail project (another of the seven New Starts projects) used a design-build approach, a enhanced efficiencies and design improvements, when transit projects use alternative approaches. The New Starts project approval process requires that specific design details be included and that this requirement can prohibit a project sponsor from instead leaving such design specifications to the public. Deloitte study notes that New Starts project sponsors miss the opportunity to use alternative methods. The lack of early commitment of federal funding for the projects suggests that the project sponsors should use other methods, Deloitte says. The study suggests giving three Letters of Intent and four Early Systems Work Agreements to transit projects. It also suggests using design-build and design- build-finance-operate-maintain as alternative methods to get the projects funded and built in a timely manner. Minnesota Metro Transit Hiawatha Corridor and Denver’s Transportation Expansion light rail offered proposal stipends to private sector entities that submitted formal bids. The stipends will help defray the costs of developing proposals. However, while serving as an incentive for potential potential bidders, the stipends are intended to be short-term and not long-term. Proposals submitted include a proposal to build a light rail line from Minneapolis to St. Paul, Minnesota, as well as a plan to extend the line to Denver. include the private sector. All three of FTA’s pilot projects used a request for qualifications to select bidders. Minnesota Metro Transit told us that input from the privatesector was also important to the selection of contractors for the Hiawatha Corridor project. For more information, visit the Federal Transit Administration's website at: www.fta.gov/pipeline/pilots/pilot-pilot-pursuits-and-contracts/ pipline.html. Project sponsors, stakeholders, and transit experts we interviewed told us that potential cost and time savings can be key incentives for using alternative approaches. Minnesota Metro Transit’s Hiawatha Corridor (one of the told us it initially wanted to use the design-bid-build approach for its ongoing Central Corridor project. FTA officials recognize that while additional steps could be taken to facilitate alternative approaches to the New Starts project, they recognize that alternative approaches could be more cost-effective for the public. is really needed. Due to the New Starts requirements, another project sponsor told us that it had been discouraged from using an alterative project delivery approach again. A Minnesota Metro Transit official said the project was a success because of a prior successful experience that included enhanced efficiencies and design improvements. The project was to build a new light-rail line from Minneapolis to St. Paul, Minnesota. The new line was to be completed by the end of the year. The cost of the project is estimated to be $1.2 billion. International Airport (design-build), Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority Largo Metrorail Extension ( design-build) Hudson-Bergen Light Rail Transit Transit Minimum Operating Segment 1 (design.build-operate-maintain) John F. Kennedy Airtrain, Portland MAX Airport Extension, and Las Vegas Monorail projects. We also included 3 eliminated the John F.-Kennedy Airtrain and 3 eliminated 3 eliminated projects from the Largo project. Third, we applied three of four criteria from FTA’s Report to Congress to the remaining projects. district to connect Washington, D.C., metropolitan area’s transit system with one of the area's three major airports. In contrast, international project sponsors have delivered transit projects using a wider range of alternative approaches, including public-private partnerships, beyond the more commonly used design-build in the United States. According to the U.S. Department of Transportation (DOT), the average cost of a transit project is about $1.5 billion. The average cost to build a new transit line in the US is $2.2 billion, according to DOT. delivery and alternative financing. This eliminated the Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority Largo Metrorail Extension. These projects were selected because they are recent examples of ongoing and completed transit projects in the United States that incorporated greater private sector involvement through the use of alternative project delivery or financing approaches. The projects were chosen because they incorporated greaterprivate sector involvement. The project was selected because it incorporated greaterPrivate sector involvement in the project's delivery and financing approaches and was completed by the end of the last decade. completed or had already carried out substantial planning. The potential universe of projects contained 10 completed projects including: Denver Regional Transportation District Transportation Expansion Light Rail (design-build) and South Florida Commuter Rail Upgrades. The universe also included ongoing transit projects as part of the universe: Bay Area Rapid Transit Oakland Airport Connector, and Houston Metro North and Southeast Corridor pilot projects. We determined that we would focus solely on projects that had already been completed or were in the planning stages. For more information on the universe, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/29/technology/top-10-future-transit-commuters-in-the-united-states/top 10-potential universities. two of the remaining three completed projects. Minnesota Metro Transit Hiawatha Corridor and Denver Regional Transportation District Transportation Expansion. DOT’s Report to Congress identified these two projects as having successful collaborations with their respective departments of transportation, including their highway counterparts, which have greater experience than transit in using alternative project projects. The remaining three projects are in Minneapolis, Denver and St. Louis. The projects are scheduled to be completed by the end of the year, according to the Department of Transportation. For more information on the projects, visit the DOT website. risk assessment and providing Letters of No Prejudice earlier than traditionally allowed in the New Starts process to Houston Metro. FTA determined that it would not relax, modify, or waive its risk assessment and financial capacity reviews prior to advancement into final design. Houston Metro officials said that they considered transferring more risk to the private sector to meet FTA’s threshold to waive certain New Starts evaluation requirements. But they decided against doing so because of their concern that private sector assuming certain risks to meet the threshold may be too risky. responsible for the condition of a transit project for longer durations than under the conventional design-bid-build approach. Houston Metro officials said they chose to build its North and Southeast Corridor pilot project using design-build-operate- maintain contract in part to hold the private sector entity responsible for the quality of the project. The project’s warranty terms did not hold the construction firm responsible long enough to cover defects such as faulty track and concrete. As a result, Houston Metro had to file claims to remedy these defects. private sector can bid to provide something different than what was agreed upon under preliminary engineering. Houston Metro’s private sector partner told us it would like to begin some construction activities on the North and Southeast Corridors, but will not be able to begin until a full funding grant agreement is awarded. FTA officials responded that they allowed Houston Metro to carry out someConstruction activities in advance of their receiving a fullfunding grant agreement. Moreover, Houston Metro officials told us that the private sector has to delay its work until the funding process is completed. Denver Regional Transportation District East Corridor and Gold Line pilot projects are to connect the city’s main railway station with its airport. Groundbreaking for the construction of the two projects occurred in July 2009. FTA views these projects as currently having the most private sector potential and thus designated them as their three Public-Private Partnership Pilot Program projects. We also decided, given our limited resources, to select these three projects given their potential for private sector growth and potential for public-private partnerships.and the new partner chose not to provide financing for the project. East Corridor and Gold Line pilot projects’ long-term design-build-finance-operate-maintain concession. This caused the private sector to estimate a $25 million charge for taking on this risk. The municipal bond market in the approach may also contribute to additional project costs borne by the public sector when other alternative approaches are used. Denver Regional Transportation District anticipates spending $15 million in advisory fees for the pilot projects' request for proposals submittals. In addition to transaction costs, public-private partnerships incur added costs when the privatesector provides the financing. The project is using a design- build-finance-operate-maintain approach. The private sector partner will be selected through a competitive proposal process to deliver and operate the project under a long-term agreement. Denver may have more financing flexibility by potentially extending the payments to the private sector over a number of years to, in part, pay for the privatesector’s partial financing for the East Corridor and Gold Line pilot projects. In September 2009, Denver Regional Transportation District released a request for payments tied to operations. up to several months to allow for FTA, Office of Management and Budget, and congressional review of the full funding grant agreement. For example, Denver Regional Transportation District officials anticipate adhering to the sequential and phased New Starts approach to its project in order to accommodate delays from waiting for waiting for the grant agreement to be approved. The project is expected to be completed by the end of the year or early next year, depending on the outcome of the review. The cost of the project is estimated to be $1.2 billion. the reauthorization of the existing transportation bill, the Safe, Accountable, Flexible, Efficient Transportation Equity Act: A Legacy for Users. awarding a full funding grant agreement for the project. However, Denver Regional Transportation District officials told us that following this approach will likely increase the cost of the project, and that the project will be more expensive in the long run. The project is expected to be completed by the end of the year or early next year, according to the FTA. has also stated its amenability to waiving its risk assessment and financial reviews. The project will be approved into the New Starts final design phase while awarding an Early Systems Work Agreement for Denver Regional Transportation District’s East Corridor and East Corridor. The city has also said it will waive the risk assessment, which aims to identify issues that could affect a project's schedule or cost. It will also waive the financial reviews, concurrently approving the project into the Final Design Phase. The City has also stated it will waiving the risk Assessment and Financial Reviews. The East Corridor and Gold Line pilot projects initially had a 700-page design specification document for their commuter rail vehicles. After industry review and feedback that the specifications would lead to customized vehicles that would be expensive and difficult to operate and maintain, the project sponsor responded by creating a 15-page performance specifications document for the vehicles. An advisor noted that the use of design specifications is more challenging with transit projects than in highways and other sectors given the technology issues and environmental concerns. The advisor also noted that design specifications are difficult to use on transit projects due to technology issues. For the East Corridor and Gold Line pilot projects, Denver Regional Transportation District officials also told us that since enough design work will be completed during the New Starts preliminary engineering phase, no additional design work is needed. However, as required by New Starts, they will again prepare the design documentation for the final design and full funding grant agreement approval phases, potentially contributing to schedule delays. FTA officials said that the resubmission of the documentation is necessary because the project will need to be fully funded before construction can begin. have to complete 60 percent of the Central Corridor project’s design to meet New Starts requirements for final design. These requirements are not consistent with alternative approaches where project sponsors look to involve the private sector, according to DOT's 2007 Report to Congress. The project is expected to be completed by the end of the decade or early 2011. The cost of the project is estimated to be $1.2 billion, including $1 billion in state and local tax revenue and $500 million in federal funds. Business District. Issues related to price and risk transference led Houston Metro to switch private partners design- build-finance-operate-maintain agreement to develop the new system. In this project, payments to the private sector partner during operations were based entirely on ridership revenue, but the project sponsor retained the authority to set fares. The private sector. partner faced financial difficulties, and the concession was ultimately bought by Transport. District. No bidders on the project proposed an equity investment. either the design-build or thedesign-build- operate-maintain delivery approach, in which the private sector role is to design and construct the project or to design, construct, operate, and maintain the project. In addition, to date, no completed New Starts projects have been privately financed and therefore, none of these will be privately financed, says the report. The report also says that no New Starts have been completed that have been funded by the public sector, and therefore none of them can be considered New Starts. and local public grants, taxes, and municipal bonds, and defined conventional project delivery to refer to the design-bid-build approach. We defined innovative financing to include loan or credit assistance such as the Transportation Infrastructure Financing and Innovation Act, Private Activity Bonds, Tax Increment Financing, State Infrastructure Banks, Grant Anticipation Notes, and Revenue Bonds. Finally, we defined alternative financing to referring to public-private partnerships that involve private equity capital such as concession agreements and defined alternative approaches as ones that transfer greater risk to the private sector. a detailed financial analysis of the specific arrangements. In order to clearly delineate alternative delivery and financing approaches used in transit, first we identified three categories—traditional, innovative, and alternative. We defined traditional financing to include federal grants (such as New Starts program grants), state grants, and private funding. We also defined innovative funding to include state and local grants, private funding, and a combination of the two. For more, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/30/transit/features/top-10-alternative-funding-accommodations-in-transit. projects have used private equity financing. However, there have been very few examples of completed non-New Starts-funded new fixed-guideway projects that have been privately financed. One project, the Las Vegas Monorail, was financed with tax-exempt revenue. The 4-mile system serving the resort corridor along Las Vegas Boulevard in Nevada was financed by private equity and tax- exempt revenue. It was completed in 2007. The project cost was $1.2 billion. It is the first of several planned projects in Las Vegas that will be completed by 2015. seven completed New Starts projects that used an alternative approach) was completed 12 months ahead of schedule compared to using the conventional design-bid-build approach. This saved an estimated $25 million to $38 million since early completion led to avoided administration costs using the alternative approach. In total, the project saved $35 million in administration costs and $28 million in design and construction costs. The project was completed by the end of the year, compared to the traditional design and bid-build process. schedule. However, the use of alternative approaches does not guarantee cost and schedule benefits. For example, the design-build approach used by the South Florida Commuter Rail Upgrades saved 4 to 6 years by completing all upgrades as a single project, but incurred slightly higher costs than estimated for the conventional project. For more information, go to: http://www.southflorida.com/commuter-rail-upgrades/schedule-benefits-and-costs. officials told us that these additional costs stem from a lack of funding available in a surface transportation authorization period rather than FTA’s New Starts requirements. For the Dulles Silver Line, tax-increment financing funding was a major funding source for the project, contributing up to $400 million to the $2.6 billion project. The project risked losing the tax increment financing funding as it took 5 years to receive a full funding grant agreement, project consultants told us. The Duller Silver Line project consultants said that the project risked lose the tax Increment Financing Funding. The Dulles Silver Line is using the design-build approach with partial funding of the local share coming from area businesses. One ongoing New Starts project did not apply to be part of the pilot program, but is using an alternative approach. Proposals to prequalified teams can be sent to: www.dullesrail.org/pilot-pilot. For more information on the program, go to www.DullesRail.org or call (844) 744-7000. project phase. They also told us that construction activities on the Dulles Silver Line could not begin until the approval of a full funding grant agreement. Design and construction activities cannot be completed at the same time, so some of the time- savings benefits of the design-build approach were lost. The project is expected to be completed by the end of the year or early next year, depending on funding and construction progress. The cost of the project is estimated to be $1.2 billion, with the majority of that money coming from the federal government.