Fishing of Pacific hake primarily takes place off the coasts of northern California, Oregon, Washington, and British Columbia. Fishermen use mid-water trawls and generally fish over the ocean bottom at depths of 100 to 500 meters. Bocaccio rockfish generally inhabit waters off the coast of northern Baja,. Mexico species related to our report from other overfished Pacific groundfish. 18. We revised the report to more clearly describe the distribution of Pacific. hake. Pacific hake, also called Pacific whiting, is generally found off the west coast of North America. It is one of many species of hake distributed in the Atlantic and Pacific rockfish are found in the waters from Santa Catalina Island, California to the Bering Sea. Commercial fishery concentrations are located off the coasts of California and Oregon.darkblotched rockfish, and yelloweye rockfish. Rockfish are long-lived, late-maturing and slow-growing species, making them particularly susceptible to overfishing. almost exclusively inhabit rocky areas from northern Baja, Mexico to the Aleutian Islands, Alaska. Yelloweye rockfish, found in depths ranging from 15 to 550 meters, are caught using both trawl nets and line gear and are highly prized by both commercial and recreational fishermen. Stock assessments for yelloweye rock fish were carried out in the U.S. and Mexico in 2007 and 2008, and the results were published in 2008 and 2009. They were based on a survey of more than 2,000 fishermen in Mexico and Alaska. Canary rockfish inhabit the northeastern Pacific Ocean, from northern Baja, Mexico to the western Gulf of Alaska. Adult canary rock fish are primarily found along the continental shelf, from 46 to 457 meters deep. Figure 2 shows a picture of a bocaccio rockfish. The canary canary has a biomass of 7,133 metric tons. It is found in the Pacific Ocean from Baja to Alaska, and in the Atlantic Ocean from New England to the Hawaiian Islands. Gulf of Mexico Council, covering waters off Texas, Louisiana, Mississippi, Alabama, and the west coast of Florida. Mid-Atlantic Council covers waters off New York, New Jersey, Delaware, Maryland, Virginia, and North Carolina. New England Council covering waters of Maine, New Hampshire, Massachusetts, Rhode Island, and Connecticut. North Pacific Council covered waters off Alaska; Pacific Council covering California, Oregon, and Washington. Western Pacific Council covers Hawaii, American Samoa, Guam, Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands and uninhabited islands. Alaska Center covers the coastal oceans off Alaska and parts of the west coast of the United States. Northeast Center covers waters along the Northeast Continental Shelf from the Gulf of Maine to Cape Hatteras, North Carolina. Northwest Center, covering the northeast Pacific Ocean, primarily waters off the coasts of California, Oregon, Washington, and British Columbia. Pacific Islands Center covering the central and western Pacific Ocean. Southwest Center, primarily covering waters off California and areas throughout the Pacific and Antarctic Oceans. Southeast Center covering waters along continental southeastern United States as well as Puerto Rico. The Magnuson-Stevens Fisheries Conservation and Management Act granted responsibility for managing marine resources to the Secretary of Commerce. The Secretary delegated this responsibility to NMFS, which is part of Commerce’s National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) The act also established eight regional fishery management councils, each responsible for making recommendations. The act was passed by Congress on November 8, 1996. It was signed into law by President George W. Bush on November 11, 1997. It is the first act of its kind in the history. The Magnuson-Stevens Act, as amended by the Sustainable Fisheries Act, also established national standards for fishery conservation and management. These standards deal with preventing overfishing, using scientific information, using fishery resources efficiently, minimizing bycatch, and minimizing administrative costs. The regional councils use these standards. The U.S. Virgin Islands and Puerto Rico have their own regional councils to help manage their fishery. The Virgin Islands have a regional council to help them manage their fisheries. The Puerto Rico regional council has its own regional council. The Pacific Fishery Management Council (Pacific Council) released its initial Fishery management plan for groundfish in 1982. The Pacific Council’s goal is to have long-range plans for managing groundfish fisheries that will promote a stable planning environment for the seafood industry and will maintain the health of the resource and environment. To help achieve these goals, stock management plans are being developed by the Pacific Council to help protect and restore the fishery's long-term health and stability. The council is also working to develop appropriate plans for conserving and managing fisheries under their jurisdiction. to the Secretary of Commerce about managing fisheries in federal waters. Caribbean Council, covering waters off the U.S. Virgin Islands and the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico. The eight fishery management councils—consisting of fishing industry participants, state and federal fishery managers, and other interested parties—and their areas of responsibility include the following: Caribbean Council. The Atlantic Council, the Caribbean Council and the Gulf of Mexico Council. the Pacific Council, which includes the Virgin Islands, Puerto Rico and the United States Virgin Islands. surveys and ecosystem studies, and the greater the accuracy and quality of the data, the more reliable the assessment results. We found that although NMFS does have collection and quality assurance procedures for state-collected non-NMFS data, NMFS doesn't check or have a standard process to verify that these data have been reviewed for reliability. Establish a standard approach that requires that non- NMFS data used in stock assessments be evaluated for its reliability, and continue efforts to implement the task force’s recommendations to improve. using the NMFS data collected from the trawlable areas. However, the abundance in the Trawlable area is not representative of the abundance of species in the untrawlable area. We examined whether and to what extent NMFS has processes and procedures in place to ensure the reliability of data used in the Pacific groundfish stock assessments. bocaccio, canary, and darkblotched assessments were limited because NMFS conducted its surveys in trawlability waters only. For this reason, we did not revise the report.  NMFS reported in 2003 that 77 percent of the survey area was trawlable and 23 percent was untrawlable. Assessors estimated overall biomass using the NMFS data collected from the trawlables area. The National Research Council found that the inclusion of NMFS survey data was the best option for a reliable estimate of abundance. For these reasons, we did not change the report. 39. NOAA also commented that although bottom trawl survey cannot access the roughest habitat, it is useful as an index of relative changes in the overall abundance. data sources, four of the five assessments did not use NMFS survey data or the NMFS data used covered only a portion of the species’ habitats. Yelloweye assessment was based solely on non-NMFS data. Bocaccio, canary, and darkblotched live in both the trawlable and untrawlable for the yelloweye assessment. Northwest Center officials also raised concerns about basing assessments solely on commercial and recreational catch data. Catch data alone are insufficient because fishermen are not randomly sampling. Non-NMFS data assessors use commercial catch data and recreational catch data. Catch data do not provide the species’ relative or absolute biomass, according to NMFS officials. For example, catch data alone is insufficient because fishermen are not randomly sampling the ocean but are fishing areas that they are allowed to fish and they believe to be good fishing areas. A 2002 National Research Council report found that the inclusion of NMFS survey data was the best option for a reliable estimate of abundance because such surveys use an unbiased statistical design. of data, including NMFS data and non-NMFS data, in developing their assessments. Two key pieces of NMFS survey data are the shelf and slope bottom trawl survey and the acoustic survey. Other NMFSData that assessors sometimes use include larval surveys (data for fish in their earliest stage) and recruitment data, for example. For more information, or to download a copy of the report, visit: http://www.fishermanassessment.org/fishermen-assessment-report. have a range of uncertainty to show the amount of variability in the estimates. However, the bocaccio, canary, darkblotched, and yelloweye assessments did not present a measure of uncertainty associated with the biomass estimates. Without uncertainty ranges, it is difficult for regional councils and NMFS to know how much confidence they can have in their biomass estimates, says the report. The report was published by the Natural Resources Defence Council (NRDC) on Wednesday. For more information, visit the NRDC website. different data sources (sensitivity analyses) NMFS expects to use the updated model for all 2005 stock. NMFS officials told us that NMFS is updating the model so that it can compute uncertainty ranges. The updated model is expected to be in place by the end of the year and will be used to estimate biomass for the first time in five years. The model is based on the Stock Synthesis model, which does not calculate uncertainty ranges for biomass. The new model will be available to the public in the fall. previous stock assessments, gathers available data about the species being assessed, runs the data through computer-generated models, and estimates the species’ total biomass. Require that stock assessment reports clearly present the uncertainties in the assessments, such as the margin of error associated with species biomass estimates. Develop a comprehensive plan that integrates the NMFS stock assessment improvement plan with other NMFS plans to ensure that stock Assessment improvement actions and budget and that four of the assessment reports did not present uncertainties associated with the biomass Estimates. metric tons in 2002—more than doubling the previous estimate because of additional and updated data. With such wide variations, it is important to provide uncertainty ranges, otherwise management may make inappropriate decisions. While assessors told us that their stock assessments included some information about differences in estimated biomass when using biomass, they did not say if that information is included in the current estimate of the biomass used in the study. The study was published in the online edition of this magazine, which is published by arrangement with the University of Maryland. Stock assessments form the scientific basis used by regional councils to determine biologically sustainable harvests. They provide estimates of the species population, which NMFS uses to set harvest limits that allow for sustainability and/or recovery. While stock assessment results often change from assessment report to assessment report, the more types of information used in the assessments the more accurate they are. For example, regional councils use stock assessments and other indicators of biological productivity to recommend to NMFS a maximum, or total allowable catch, effectively managing fisheries. The Pacific hake assessor used a mathematical model (AD Model Builder) that could compute uncertainty ranges. NMFS has taken some steps recommended in the Marine Fisheries Stock Assessment Improvement Plan to improve the quantity, quality, and type of data. The improvement plan further states that information derived from ecosystem research and recruitment surveys is essential if assessments are to meet the national standards of “next generation” assessments or Tier 3 status. According to the improvement plan, information from these surveys will be used in the next round of assessments. on the ocean ecosystem, such as water temperature or salinity, plankton composition, or ocean currents. For each stock assessment, a review panel, consisting of NMFS scientists and outside experts, independently reviews the methodology of the assessment and works with the assessor to ensure their comments are adequately addressed. Through 2003, through 2003, the U.S. Geological Survey conducted a stock assessment of the Great Barrier Reef. In 2008, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration released a new stock assessment. NOAA agreed with the report recommendation to continue collecting more types of data for groundfish assessments where reliable data are now lacking. NOAA said that the reliability of stock assessments will be improved if NMFS survey efforts are expanded and additional NMFS fishery data are collected. NMFS said, through its west coast fishery science centers, it participates making decisions about setting harvest levels and developing plans to rebuild overfished stocks. NOAA also commented that quality assurance for non-NMFS data is not absent. and non-NMFS data, we were not implying that non- NMFS organizations could not conduct useful fishery-independent surveys. For these reasons, we did not change the report. 37. We believe the Pacific hake biomass estimates are questionable because the assessment used non-NHFS data that NMFS did not check or subject to standard standards. 38. NMFS generally refers to its data as fisheryindependent data and to non- NHFS data as Fishery-dependent data. We did not simulate NMFS’ stock assessment models. We did not evaluate the mathematical and statistical methodologies used in the models for Pacific hake, bocaccio, canary, darkblotched, and other species. We consulted with the Pacific Fishery Management Council, the Pacific States Marine Fisheries Commission, environmental groups, and industry associations, as well as fishermen and academics. The study was based on data from NMFS, the P.S.M.F.C. and other sources. NOAA: The doubling of estimated bocaccio biomass in 2003 was due to factors that would not be addressed in a standard statistical analysis. For these reasons, we did not change the report. The 2003 assessment estimated 6,506 accounting for dead fish tossed back into the ocean. Although a standard Statistical analysis may have yielded a higher estimate, it was not necessary to change the estimate in this case. The estimate was based on the 2002 stock assessment, which had a lower uncertainty range than the 2003 assessment. Bocaccio, commonly sold at market as “red snapper,’ are commercially fished using trawls, hook-and-line and gillnets. They are formally declared to be “overfished’ in 1999. The 2003 stock assessment estimated that about 1 million of the fish were left in the wild in the U.S., including about 300,000 in Alaska. They live over rocky areas or open areas of the ocean’s floor to about 320 meters. as commercial and recreational catch data collected by state agencies. Data sources include fishing logbooks, dockside samples, and onboard observations, among others. Life history data, such as the age and sex composition of the stock, age at first maturity, fertility, average lifespan, and natural mortality. Ecosystem relationships—data on the relationship between fish, ecosystems, and each other. Stock abundance—surveys of how many fish constitute a stock’s total size or weight. Commercial and recreational fisheries data—the amount and composition of fish caught from a particular stock. between a fish stock and its physical environment. Recruitment research—data on the abundance of juvenile and larval fish (fish at their earliest stage) Synoptic oceanographic sampling— data on the size of a particular stock in the future. Data on the relationship of a fishStock to other species, such as other fish species in the area. Data about the number of fish in a stock, and how many of them are juveniles or larval, which helps scientists forecast size of stock in future. environment within which they exist provides a better understanding of the effects of the ecosystem on the groundfish fisheries. Although research is ongoing to develop ecosystem information, only a limited amount of the data is collected and used in the fish-fisherman's toolkit. The data is needed to make informed ecosystem-based management decisions, according to the study. The study was published in the Journal of Fisheries and Aquaculture, a journal of the Association for the Study of Fish and Wildlife in the United States. stock assessments. For example, ecosystem data are collected during shelf and slope bottom trawl surveys as time and resources allow. However, this information is not widely incorporated into stock assessments. Only the boccacio assessment used ecosystem data. For the five species we reviewed, only the bocco assessment used information on the temperature of the ocean’s surface. The study was published in the Journal of the Royal Society of the Marine Sciences (J.R.S.M). For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. have the most fish; fishing restrictions, such as a total allowable catch, can limit the amount of fish being caught; and catch data have often been inaccurate for a variety of reasons. Although the assessors used several different the ocean, but are fishing areas that they are allowed to fish and they believe have the mostFish. The catch data are often imprecise because dead fish are often tossed back into the ocean after being caught and counted as fish. The data is also often inaccurate because it doesn't account for dead fish that have been thrown back in the ocean. that could have impaired the accuracy of the stock assessments. For example, the assessor for the 2002 yelloweye stock assessment found numerous errors in the recreational catch data. According to another stock assessor, commercial catch data frequently have inconsistencies. California, Oregon, and Washington require fishermen to enter catch and location information into logbooks, but logbooks are often incomplete and inaccurate. While the stock assessment review review is ongoing, we are happy to share our findings with the public in the form of a blog post. Without stock assessments, fishery managers would have limited information about the status of fisheries. Without a comprehensive, integrated improvement plan, funding requests and planned actions to improve the stock assessments may not be of the five questionable for the three reasons we highlighted in our report. We added clarification to the report to show that stock assessments are a key tool for managing fisheries and are important in the recovery and sustainability of the fishery resources. For each species, the assessor reviews reliable assessments for each fishery—typically for a year. Stock assessments provide official estimates in key areas, such as the size of the stock population. We reviewed the stock assessment reports and determined whether they articulated the level of uncertainty in the assessment model estimates. We interviewed an array of government officials and fisheries experts, including the Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife, the Washington Department of fish and Wildlife and the California Department ofFish and Wildlife. For more, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/29/science/fish/fish-assessment-report-california.html. GAO found reliability of stock assessments is questionable for the five species reviewed. NOAA said it was concerned about the report’s conclusion. GAO said it could be misconstrued to infer that the assessments are unreliable for use in managing the west coast groundfish fishery. of implementing the planned and ongoing improvements to Pacific groundfish stock assessments. The report acknowledges that stock assessments are scientifically reviewed and are a key tool for managing fisheries. However, we found the reliability of the assessments to be questionable. designed to (1) provide a comprehensive framework for Pacific groundfish, (2) identify some of the greatest information gaps, and (3) provide guidance for setting priorities on work to fill these gaps. In addition, the updated plan will estimate how much such improvements will cost. Stock assessments are the key to coordinated, jeopardizing successful and timely implementation of assessment improvements, the authors say. They recommend that the Secretary of Commerce require the Director of National Marine Fisheries Service to take the following four actions: Continue efforts to collect more types of data. send copies of this report to the Secretary of Commerce and the Director of the National Marine Fisheries Service. We will also provide copies to others upon request. In addition, the report will be available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staff want a copy of the report, please send it to us at [email protected] or call (800) 615-8255. For confidential support on suicide matters call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. 24 of the 82 species of Pacific groundfish have had a full quantitative stock assessment. Relying on these assessments, NMFS has declared that nine species ofPacific groundfish are overfished. Pacific hake as well as bocaccio rockfish, canary rockfish are among the species we reviewed in this report. If you have any questions about this report, please call me at (202) 512-3841 or Keith Oleson at (415) 904-2218. untrawlable waters. As a result, some rockfish populations may be understated while others may be overstated. According to stock assessors, relying solely on survey data from trawlable waters increases the uncertainty of stock assessments. In contrast, the fifth groundfish species, Pacific hake, lives primarily in mid-water habitat; and so the data is not as reliable as it could be, the authors say. The study was published in the journal of the International Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences. rockfish are harvested commercially using trawl nets and hook-and-line. Canary rockfish are also considered an important species for recreational fishermen. NMFS determined that darkblotched rockfish was overfished in 2000, when the last full stock assessment was conducted; it was updated in 2003. The 2002 stock assessment estimated the canary rock fish biomass at 6,197 metric tons. Figure 4 shows a picture of a dark Blotched Rockfish, a species of yelloweye rockfish. four rockfish species we reviewed, although they were based on the best information available at the time the assessments were conducted. The reliability of the stock assessments we reviewed is questionable because (1) four of the assessments did not have at least one NMFS-collected data source of sufficient scope and four types of rockfish. For these five species you asked us to assess the reliability of NMFS’ stock assessments, (2) identify which relevant recommendations from the stock assessment improvement plan have been implemented and which have not, and (3) identify the estimated costs associated with these recommendations. first conducted in 2001, and NMFS determined that the species was overfished in 2002. The reliability of NMFS’ stock assessments is questionable for the Pacific hake and yelloweye. To identify the relevant recommendations to improve stock assessments that NMFS has implemented and has not implemented, we reviewed agency reports on marine fisheries stock assessments, strategic planning, and data collection. We also interviewed officials from the Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife, the Washington Department of fish and wildlife, and others. for fiscal years 2004 and 2005 that account for both its unfunded needs from fiscal years 2001 through 2003 and items that were unexpectedly funded in fiscal year 2003. The preliminary budget requests do not incorporate any unanticipated problems or data gaps that have been identified, the agency says. The budget requests also do not include items that have not been budgeted for in the past or that were funded unexpectedly in fiscal years 2003 and 2004. The agency says it has no plans to change its funding formula for fiscal year 2004 or 2005. budget requests and funding documents for fiscal years 2001 through 2005 and interviewed National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration officials. We did not evaluate the accuracy of NMFS’ budget requests for specific project items but rather used the amounts NMFS requested for these project items to estimate the total additional costs. We also used the amount NMFS asked for to calculate the cost of the project items for each fiscal year. For more information on the project, go to: http://www.norecoast.gov/project/sea-sea.  NMFS allocated $3.6 million (58 percent of funds the Northwest Center requested) to the Northwest much new money each needs to implement science center programs. According to NMFS officials, it is unrealistic for a science center to request more funds than are available in its appropriation, even if it needs more. NMFS received $20.6million (80 percent of its request) in additional funding to implement improvements for all marine stock assessments. While NMFS’ Northwest Centre requested $6.2 million to implement marine stock assessment improvements. The Northwest Center’s budget requests for fiscal years 2004 and 2005 are preliminary requests submitted before the Northwest Center received its fiscal year 2003 funding. The Northwest Center will likely submit revised budget requests developed since it submitted its preliminary requests. According to NMFS officials, NMFS’ science centers, including the Northwest Centre, primarily make and justify their funding requests in response to how much money Congress appropriates. After Congress passes NM FS’ budget, NM FS asks its science centers to reassess and detail how much improvements would actually cost. $7.7 million to improve the types of data used, including $2.4 million for surveys of untrawlable waters. $3.2 million to collect ecosystem data. $600,000 to enhance the calibration of vessel equipment. $525,00 to develop and implement methods to collect information on stock identification, structure, and movement. $75,000to standardize trawl survey procedures. The Northwest Center did not receive its full funding request, in part, because NMFS did not approve the request. to achieve parity among the science centers in terms of their capability to conduct scientific work. The $8.9 million needed to implement remaining recommended improvements is probably understated. The Northwest Center’s budget requests primarily reflect the amount of money the Center officials believed they could afford to spend on the project. It is not known if the center will ever be able to achieve parity with the other science centers. The center is located on the campus of the University of Washington in Seattle, Washington.  NMFS’ 2001 West Coast Groundfish Research Plan estimated that almost twice as much money would be needed to implement top-priority improvements. NMFS is now updating its plan and cost estimates for improving Pacific groundfish stock assessments. The updated groundfish research plan should be completed in late 2004 and is expected to be used by Wildlife, the California Department of Fish and Game, the Pacific Fishery Management Council, and the Pacific States Marine Fisheries Commission as well as environmental groups, industry associations, fishermen, and academics. developing future stock assessment scientists. Northwest Center staff meet with their constituents, such as representatives from state agencies and the fishing industry, to discuss groundfish management issues. In addition, the Northwest Center organized a series of public meetings to discuss new initiatives that affect the stock assessment program. For example, the Center held public meetings in several communities along the Pacific coast to discuss implementation of the Observer Program. The Observer Program is a program designed to collect information about discarded fish for the non-hake west coast groundfish fleets. scientific staff. Northwest Center officials said they try to meet the training and professional development needs of their scientific staff. However, to date they have focused on developing external training programs, such as the University of Washington graduate program, to develop stock assessment scientists for the future and have yet to develop a program for the stock assessment team, officials said. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org for details. NMFS’ National Sea Grant program to augment a Northwest Center-supported graduate study program at the University of Washington. The program provides fellowships for students interested in marine research, such as stock assessment methodology and marine resource economics. The Northwest Center plans to employ two Sea Grant students during the summer of 2004. While the Northwest Center has implemented some recommendations aimed at improving stock assessments, it has not yet fully implemented many others. These recommendations include collecting additional types of data and improving data quality. Since 1995, the Northwest Center has had lead responsibility for conducting stock assessments on Pacific groundfish. The Northwest Center receives assistance from other NMFS science centers, such as the Southwest Center, which conducted the bocaccio assessment. Stock assessments are the laws and agency reports and interviewed officials from NMFS, including officials from the Northwest Fisheries Science Center. To assess the reliability of the Pacific hake, boc Accio, canary, darkblotched, and yelloweye stock assessments, U.S. territories in the Western Pacific are part of NMFS. NMFS has six regional science centers, which are responsible for generating the scientific information necessary for the conservation, management, and use of each region's marine resources. The six fishery science centers and their areas of responsibility are as follows: Alaska, Arizona, California, Hawaii, New Mexico, Oregon and Washington. The U.S.-Pacific Islands, including Guam and Puerto Rico, are also part of the NMFS and have their own science centers. panels evaluated the assessments, the panels did not evaluate the quality of the raw data used in the assessments. According to a Northwest Center official, several assessors have raised concerns about data quality and accessibility in feedback meetings. In response to these concerns, the Northwest Center has recently begun a review of the data used to conduct the assessments to ensure that it is accurate and accessible. The review is expected to be completed by the end of the year. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. assigning data stewards to each data set used in its assessments. Data stewards are responsible for helping assessors compile relevant data and for conducting quality assurance and quality control checks on the data. The Northwest Center plans to conduct a data quality workshop in July 2004 to formally establish the data quality program. It will be the first of its kind in the U.S. and is expected to be used to improve data quality across the country. The program is funded by the National Institutes of Health, the National Science Foundation, and other agencies. quality data was identified in the improvement plan as an impediment to producing reliable stock assessments. For example, when equipment on different survey vessels are not calibrated, the data are not comparable, and trends may not be accurately determined. The Northwest Center is continuing its efforts to calibrate survey vessel revised the report to include assessment “improvements.” 28. As indicated in our report, we illustrate some of the actions that the Northwest Center took to improve data quantity and did not intend to provide a comprehensive list of all actions. the quantity of the data increases, the assessments become more reliable because the data cover a longer period of time. The Northwest Center has concentrated most of its efforts on implementing improvements in data quantity, such as more frequent surveys. A better sense of trends and variability allow for improved short-term predictions of the status of the species, the center says. The center's goal is to provide a better understanding of the variability inherent in the population distribution and abundance, officials say. It's also trying to improve the quality of data, including more frequent and randomly selected surveys. requests are coordinated. We provided the Department of Commerce with a draft of this report for review and comment. We received a written response from the Under Secretary of Commerce for Oceans and Atmosphere that included comments from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). NOAA generally agreed with the report and agreed with its recommendations. We are happy to share the response with you. We hope you will share it with the rest of the world. We will publish the response in full in the next few days. NOAA also provided technical comments that we incorporated in this report as appropriate. As agreed with your offices, unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier, we plan no further distribution until 7 days from the report date. At that time, we will release the final version of the report. The final version will be released at the end of the next week or so. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. on interagency data committees, to develop quality assurance protocols and to assess the quality of non-NMFS data. NOAA agreed that it is important to ensure that these inter agency data committees continue to highlight the need for standardized quality control procedures for the collection of data. The report was published by the U.S. National Institute of Standards and Technology (NS&T) on November 14, 2013. For more information, visit the NS&T website. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. NOAA said that while much remains to be done, long-term planning efforts and coordination among field and headquarters are ongoing. NOAA’s comments and our detailed responses are presented in the full report, which is available on the National Marine Fisheries Service website at: http://www.nmfs.gov/mfs/mns/mnt/index.html. The full report is available online at:http:www.nmfs.org/mts/mstv/ index.html?title=mntv-index. and methodology section of the report to clearly identify the species and activities covered by the review. 2. We revised theReport to show the publication date. 3. We revise the report accordingly to clearly show that NMFS has not collected enough ecosystem data. 4. The report is updated to show that the report is based on data that has been collected by the NMFS in the last three years, rather than just the first three months of the year as previously stated. The final version of the Report is published here with the revised date. ecosystem research. For this reason, we did not change the report. After reviewing the report we believe no change is required because of subject-verb agreement. We added clarifying language. We believe that table 2 notes ‘a’ and ‘b’ in our report already adequately address this issue. We think that table 1 notes “a” and “b” in ourReport already adequatelyaddress this issue, and we have added a note to table 2 to clarify this. has addressed this issue. By referring to the West Coast Groundfish Research Plan by its complete title, we adequately distinguish between the two reports. For this reason, we did not change the report. We changed “survivability” to “sustainability’ and added fishery “resources” for clarification. NOAA commented on the changes to the report and said it would be “inappropriate’ to change the title of the report at this time. change the report. We revised the punctuation accordingly. The footnote placement and citation are in accordance with GAO guidelines. For this reason, we did not change the report for this reason. We believe that our report is accurate and that we have done the right thing by the public. We are happy to clarify that Pacific hake live in mid-water habitat. We do not believe that the report is inaccurate or that the public has the right to know that the hake are in a mid- water habitat. used in Pacific groundfish stock assessments, but much remains to be done to make the assessments more reliable. The Northwest Center has concentrated most of its efforts on implementing recommendations aimed at obtaining more data. Recommendations aimed at increasing the types of data and improving their quality have not yet been implemented. Northwest Center officials, ecosystem information and coastwide recruitment surveys are two of the most critical data sets needed to ensure continuous improvement of groundfishStock assessments. The report was revised to more explicitly distinguish the five groundfish centers. Northwest Center officials say they are to receive a dedicated research vessel sometime during calendar years 2008 or 2009, at the earliest. The implementation of comprehensive ecosystem research and data collection programs is contingent upon the funding of adedicated research vessel for west coast surveys. Better recruitment information for Pacific groundfish is a priority for Northwest Center officials, who say they hope to have the vessel in place by the end of 2008 or early 2009. The research vessel will be used to conduct shelf and slope bottom trawl surveys on the west coast. Northwest Center works with private commercial fishing vessels to conduct the surveys. Northwest Center officials: Working collaboratively with the fishing industry has afforded fishermen the opportunity to become stakeholders in the data collection process. Extended the geographic range of the groundfish shelf and slope bottom to include both the north and south ends of the Alaska Peninsula, as well as the northern and southern parts of the Alaskan mainland. The goal is to increase the number of fish that can be found on the ground and the slope bottom. footnote 16 to clarify the actions taken by the Southwest Center. 29. The example we provided is not intended to be a comprehensive list of all ecosystem research conducted on the west coast. Instead, it illustrates the type of work the Northwest Center is conducting and the opportunities for improving. 30. The examples we provided are meant to show the types of work that can be done on the West Coast, rather than the extent of the research done on them. 31. It is intended to show that the West coast can do a lot to improve the health of its ecosystems. The Pacific hake acoustic survey was restructured into a single, integrated survey. Officials from the Northwest Center and Canada now jointly conduct all of the acoustic surveys. Increased the frequency of the groundfish shelf and slope bottom trawl survey from triennially to annually. Leveraged available resources by cooperatively working with Canadian officials to plan all survey elements. More frequent acoustic, and shelf, and slopebottom trawl surveys were carried out in the Pacific Ocean from 2003 to 2007. The Northwest Center took several actions in 2003 to improve data quantity. NMFS’ Northwest Center in particular. We made similar revisions, as appropriate, throughout the report. We revised the report to include the year and scope of the task force review. We changed the name of the “bottom” trawl survey to “top’ trawl’s’ survey. We updated the name to ‘top trawl,’ and added ‘bottom’ to the bottom of the list of trawl surveys. We also changed the title of the top trawl study to ’top trawler’ instead of ’bottom trawl. The surveys are now coastwide from Cape Flattery, Washington to the Mexican border, adding over 300 more miles along the southern California coast. Previous surveys ended at Morro Bay, California. Efforts continue to communicate the strategies needed to improve stock assessments and to augment existing programs aimed at therawl.trawl survey. For more information, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/28/science/environment/trawl-survey-trawl.html. Recruitment surveys are limited because existing funds support only yearly surveys in selected areas. To achieve the best early predictions of stock status, these officials said, recruitment surveys should be coastwide and conducted twice a year. According to Northwest Center officials, 13 full-time staff are needed to expand these and other high-priority data collection efforts, such as surveys in untrawlable habitat and expanded acoustic surveys. The lack of funding for recruitment surveys has been cited as one of the reasons for their lack of effectiveness. that the frequency and range of recruitment surveys are limited. The statement does not address untrawlable habitat. We revised the report to clarify that NMFS “generally uses” NMFS’s staff or contracts with outside experts. We also clarified that we wanted to more clearly differentiate between NMFS as a whole and the agency as a part of the National Marine Fisheries Service (NMS) The report was published on November 6, 2013. It is available on the NMS website. The fastest and easiest way to obtain copies of GAO documents at no cost is through the Internet. GAO’s Web site (www.gao.gov) contains abstracts and full- text files of current reports and testimony. The Web site features a search engine to help you locate documents using key words and phrases. You can print these documents in their entirety, including charts and other graphics. Each day, GAO issues a list of newly released reports, testimony, and correspondence. contains links to the full-text document files. To have GAO e-mail this list to you every afternoon, go to www.gao.gov and select “Subscribe to e-mails alerts” under the “Order GAO Products” heading. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. In the U.S., call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. The General Accounting Office is the audit, evaluation and investigative arm of Congress. It exists to support Congress in meeting its constitutional responsibilities and to help improve the performance and accountability of the federal government. The office is based in Washington, D.C., but has offices in New York, Washington, Atlanta and San Francisco. For more information, visit the General accounting office's website at http://www.gao.gov/. For more on this story, visit CNN.com/2013/01/30/general-accounting-office-report. GAO examines the use of public funds; evaluates federal programs and policies. GAO provides analyses, recommendations, and other assistance to help Congress make informed oversight, policy, and funding decisions. The GAO’s commitment to good government is reflected in its core values of accountability, integrity, and transparency. The U.S. House of Representatives has passed a bill that would give the GAO more power to review federal spending. The Senate has also passed a measure that would grant GAO the power to audit the federal government. The vote is expected to take place in the coming weeks. uncertainty in assessments. In a review of the 2002 canary assessment, the stock assessment review panel recommended that standard estimates of uncertainty be included in future assessments. NOAA said it is desirable to have both a quantitative analysis of model uncertainty and an evaluation of the consequences of alternative model scenario. Finally, NOAA agreed with the report recommendation to develop a comprehensive plan that integrates the stock Assessment plan with the other parts of the NOAA budget for the next fiscal year, which starts on July 1, 2015. In this regard, NOAA provided additional comments to show the usefulness of the assessments, even if some of the input data used in the assessments contained errors. We stand by our conclusions that the five stock assessments we reviewed were questionable. For these reason, we did not change the report. NOAA commented that it is more pertinent to focus on the degree of standardization of the survey data than the source. By categorizing data as NMFS data, the data could have impaired the accuracy of the stock assessments. that GAO does not adequately convey the different degrees of precision associated with the stock assessments. GAO’s conclusion that the reliability of the five assessments we reviewed is questionable is questionable and could easily be misconstrued to mean all these assessments are an unreliable basis for management of the west coast. That GAO doesn’t adequately convey that the four stock assessments are not the same and that they are based on different levels of precision. That the four assessments are different and not all of them are the same. not fully address the doubling of an estimate, an assessment without an uncertainty range does not quantify and communicate any of the uncertainty. For this reason, we did not change the report. In addition to the person named above, Leo G. Acosta, Kristine N. Braaten, Allen T. Chan, David Dornisch, and Kristine Braaten also contributed to the report, which was released on Monday. The report was compiled by the Office of Management and Budget, which is housed at the University of California, San Diego. can help ensure that information used to make management decisions is complete and accurate. Lacking a standard process, some assessors reviewed the quality of the raw non-NMFS data, while others did not. Assessors who reviewed for data quality found mistakes that they believed made some of the data unusable or could have impaired the accuracy of the stock assessments. NOAA commented that bocaccio, canary, and darkblotched were not included in the report. For this reason, we did not change the report 38. plans to increase the scope and accuracy of its collected data, as additional funds become available. The National Research Council recommended that NMFS include realistic measures of uncertainty in its stock assessments. NMFS’ 2001 stock assessment improvement plan also recognized the need to better quantify and communicate the data. The data stewards use a variety roles and responsibilities of the data stewards, with the intent of standardizing the data evaluation process. The stock assessment model to provide uncertainty ranges for the 2005 stock assessments will be updated.  Northwest Center officials raised concerns about basing assessments solely on non-NMFS data. Each stock assessment should include at least one source of NMFS-collected data of sufficient scope and accuracy because such surveys are unbiased and scientifically designed. NMFS data were unavailable for this article. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. accuracy; (2) NMFS lacked a standard process for assessing the reliability of non-NMFS data used in all five assessments; and (3) for four of the assessments, the stock assessment reports did not adequately identify the uncertainty of the biomass estimates. (See table 1.) To address these limitations, the Northwest Center has launched a new program to assess the accuracy of biomass estimates in the region. The program is called the Northwest Biomass Estimates Program. It is funded by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. concerns about the lack of NMFS data in rocky, untrawlable habitats are not applicable. NMFS does not have a standard process for evaluating whether the non-NMFS data used in its stock assessments are reliable. We believe that certain internal control activities, such as aStandard process for ensuring data reliability, would be helpful for NMFS. We are happy to provide more information on the data collection process for the next few months. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. as state agencies, commercial and recreational fishing organizations, and individuals to improve the quantity, quality, and type of data collected. Communication —educate constituents about NMFS’ strategies for improving stock assessments. Training —implement comprehensive training and staff development programs for NMFS' analytical and quantitative staff. Finally, the improvement plan recommended that NMFS prepare a comprehensive plan that combines the improvement plans with other complementary plans. A comprehensive plan would allow NMFS to better integrate and coordinate program initiatives for improvingStock assessments. been fully implemented for a variety of reasons, such as staffing and funding limitations. In addition, other program priorities have precluded NMFS from implementing the recommendation to create a comprehensive plan. The improvement plan also recommended that NMFS provide additional training to ensure that qualified NMFS staff are available now and in the future to conduct stock assessments. For example, the plan recommended the development of a comprehensive training program and more professional developmental opportunities for NMFS’ staff. For more information, visit NMFS' website.  NMFS has not acted on the task force recommendation to combine the improvement plan and its complimentary plans into a comprehensive plan. According to the improvement plans, additional types of data will allow for more accurate data collection. The plan also calls for increasing training opportunities for Northwest Center staff. The improvement plans are available online at www.nfs.org/improvement. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. collection surveys, it does not contain the capital and operating costs of the research vessels. Similarly, the staffing requirements for augmenting the social sciences capabilities of NMFS to conduct economic analyses is represented in the sciences plan and not in the stock improvement plan. A NMFS official said that other surveys, such as those conducted by the U.S. Coast Guard, are also not included in the plan. The plan is expected to be completed by the end of the year, the official said. The October 2001 stock assessment improvement plan identified three scenarios (tiers) to consider when analyzing the resources needed to improve stock assessments. The three tiers of assessment improvements are as follows: Tier 1—improve stock assessments using existing data without initiating new data collection programs. Tier 2—conduct baseline monitoring of a number of recommendations to improveStockAssessment.assessments. The recommendations fall into the following four categories: Data collection, planning, partnerships and cooperative research programs with other entities, such interested in stock assessment science. species, which in most cases requires sampling the species at least every 1 to 3 years. Tier 3—implement “next generation’ stock assessments by explicitly incorporating ecosystem considerations, such as multispecies interactions and environmental effects in assessments. The improvement plan also made a list of steps that could be taken to improve the stock assessment process. The plan was also made to improve stock assessments of the species, and to improve overall stock assessment results for the species. For more information on the plan, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/23/science/science-and-environment/features/top-10-improvements-in-stock-assessment-plans.html.