Internet data traffic is exchanged of presence, which are access points to the Internet, and proximity to network access points (NAP), which are points where Internet backbones interconnect. Also considered were the presence of other features, including regional backbone networks, statewide educational or government networks, state Internet Service Provider (ISP) associations, or Native American reservations. The first type of facility, known as a “network access point” (Nap), enables numerous backbone providers to interconnect with each other at a common facility. a fee. Transit payments involve the payment by one backbone provider to another for the mutual exchange of traffic. A NAP facilitates the interconnection of multiple backbone providers. In the early to mid-1990s, the cost of a NAP was estimated to be in the region of $1.5 to $2.5 billion. The cost of an NAP has since dropped to less than $1 to $1 billion, according to the NAP industry body NAP Europe. The NAP market is expected to grow to $10 billion by 2018. place at NAPs as well as at private interconnection points. Currently, there is a segregation of backbone providers into “tiers.” The top tier or “Tier 1” providers generally peer with each other and sell transit to smaller backbone providers. However, we found that smaller providers often peered withEach other. We found that small providers oftenPeered with Each Other. We also found that larger providers often Peered With Each Other and sold transit to each other.  congestion and poor quality of connections led backbone providers to engage in another type of traffic exchange. Private interconnection refers to the exchange of traffic at a place other than a NAP. Of 17 backbone providers with whom we spoke, 15 used both NAPs and private interconnections. Only one company said that it was likely to make greater use of Naps in the future. of packets at some N APs had sometimes reached 50 percent. For example, when a company interconnects at an NAP, it can't send more than one packet at a time. National Science Foundation designed and partially funded four NAPs, each of which was managed by a different company. Since that time, other interconnection points have been constructed, and for purposes of this report, the term "NAPs" refers to approximately 10 major traffic exchange points that host backbone providers. Managed by the U.S. National Science Foundation. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. at private exchange points. Of the 17 companies that we met with, 10 provided estimates of how their mix of private interconnection and NAP use would likely change in the future. Nine of the 10 stated that they either plan less use of NAPs in the next few years or that they plan to use less of them in the coming years. We met with 10 companies to learn about their plans to use more private interconnects. We also met with them to learn more about how they planned to use Naps. different companies, NAPs are not uniform facilities. Differences exist in terms of equipment, software, and data transmission rates. In the first years of their existence, Naps became congested with the rapid rate of growth in Internet traffic. Some NAP technology was not “scalable’ — that is, beyond some level, it was very costly to increase the amount of traffic that could be exchanged at a NAP. If saves on equipment costs and administrative overhead. traffic exchange at a NAP became congested, service quality could be compromised. Two typical problems that congestion causes include latency (delay in the transmission of traffic) and packet loss (when transmitted data are actually lost and never reach their destination) For example, one backbone provider told us that the loss of data could compromise service quality if the traffic exchange at the NAP was too congested to handle the volume of traffic. For more information, go to: http://www.naponline.com/. traffic between the two could be carried mostly by one backbone provider in one direction, but mostly by the other in the opposite direction. In figure 5, backbone provider D is smaller than backbone provider C, with more limited points at which traffic can be brought onto the network. When backbones C and D exchange traffic, C must carry the traffic much farther on the return path before it can hand off the data packets to D. Therefore, C might consider D to be benefiting from C’s network investment and thus, C would be more likely to view D as For backbone A to move traffic to backbone C’s network under peering, it must have a peering agreement directly with backbone C. By the mid to late-1990s, another financial arrangement known as “transit’ emerged. When a backbone provider buys transit from another provider, it obtains access to any other backbone network with which its supplier peers. The illustration in figure 3 shows backbone provider C as a transit customer of backbone provider B and backbone providers B and A as peers. by backbone providers at “private” interconnections. Independent of the type of facility at which backbone providers exchange traffic, two different types of financial arrangements exist among backbone providers for traffic exchanges. In a peering arrangement, two backbone providers agree to exchange traffic destined only for each others’ networks. While peering generally entails traffic exchange between two providers without payment, transit entails payment by one provider to another for carrying traffic. Transit agreements thus constitute a supplier-customer relationship between some backbone providers. There are many Internet backbone providers offering service in the United States. Boardwatch reports 41 backbone providers with a national network. Approximately five to eight of these national providers are considered to be “Tier 1” backbone providers. A Tier 1 backbone provider is considered a backbone provider of the highest quality and most reliable service. The U.S. Internet backbone market is estimated to be worth more than $1.2 billion. It is the second largest in the world, behind only China. provider is defined by Boardwatch as having a network of wide geographic scope, having many IP addresses, having extensive information for traffic routing determinations, and handling a large percentage of transmissions. Unlike telecommunications services, the provision of Internet backbone service is not regulated by governmental communications agencies. Boardwatch defines a provider as a service provider with a large geographic scope and a large number of IP addresses. The definition of a backbone service provider can be found at boardwatch.org/internetbackbone. An ISP’s traffic connects to a backbone to connect to an Internet backbone network. ISPs obtain direct connections to one or more Internet backbone providers. Large businesses often purchase dedicated lines that connect directly to Internet backbone networks. Eighteen of the 24 ISPs and 3 of the 4 backbone providers are based in the U.S., according to a report by the Internet Association of North America (IANA) The report also found that the majority of the backbone providers were based in California, Texas, New York, and Florida. There appears to be ample deployment of fiber optic cable in Internet backbone networks to support high bandwidth services. Capacity continues to be built by backbone providers and others and that backbone networks’ capacity continues to grow, company officials say. The U.S. government says it has no plans to deploy high-speed fiber optic cables in the next few years, but is looking into the possibility of doing so in the future. The government says the move would be a step in the right direction for the future of the Internet. To access the Internet, most residential users dial in to an ISP over a telephone line. For a residential customer, the ISP sends the user’s Internet traffic on to the backbone be less so. Most ISPs and other end users connect to a backbone provider's point of presence through the local telecommunications infrastructure. These systems are typically owned and operated by incumbent telephone companies prior to enactment of the 1996 act. Many of the market participants with access to the Internet are still based in the U.S. contracts that were important to them. An ISP representative noted that many backbone providers are working to increase the speed and decrease the latency of transmissions of their networks. In particular, interviewees stated that incumbent telephone carriers take a long time to provision or provide maintenance on special access services and other high speed access lines. These lines are often used to link businesses (such as an ISP) to an Internet backbone point. A few ISP representatives with whom we met said they receive frequent sales calls from multiple backbone providers. of the 8 end users we interviewed used transport from their location to another location for at least some of their Internet traffic. Sometimes transport was used to move data traffic to a nearby city that was not very far away—perhaps 30 to 50 miles. But in some cases—particularly for some of the most popular sites, such as YouTube and Facebook—the transport was needed to get data to a location that was closer to the end user's home or office. The data was then sent back to the user's location. was cost. Some company officials noted that it generally costs more to purchase transport to a distant location than it does to connect to a backbone at a local point of presence. Two companies specifically mentioned that they had or were planning to move their facilities to more urban locations. Some companies noted that they were moving their facilities or planning to do so in order to save money on transport costs and other costs. The move is expected to begin in the next few months, according to some of the companies. provider’s network at a facility known as a “point of presence.” Backbone providers have points of presence in varied locations, although they concentrate these facilities in more densely-populated areas. Figure 1 depicts two hypothetical Internet backbone networks that link at interconnection points and take traffic to and from residential users through ISPs and directly from large business users. Once on an Internet backbone network, digital data is able to reach distant points of Presence over telecommunications lines. If an ISP or end user is far from a point of presence, it is able from there to access other parts of the network. Many ISPs and end users told us that distant transport was a viable option for obtaining Internet backbone connectivity. Even ISPs and users in more rural areas told us they generally had choice among backbone providers that could receive traffic at varied distant locations. The one disadvantage of distant transport noted by several providers, however, was that it could be difficult to find a backbone provider that could handle the traffic at such a distance. The quality of Internet service is not diminished by transporting traffic across such distances, providers say. market or cause other problems, such as the limited number of Tier 1 providers, the limited choice of providers in rural areas. ISPs and other end users are frustrated by less Internet backbone facilities running through rural areas and fewer points of presence in those areas. As such, purchasers of backbone connectivity in rural area may have fewer choices among providers than their counterparts in more urban locations. One point made by two rural providers is that rural areas sometimes sometimes don't have the same level of service as urban areas. have subsidized networks (e.g., state networks or networks funded, in part, by governmental subsidy) That may actually discourage private backbone companies from entering and thriving in such markets. Despite the view that rural areas have fewer choices among backbone providers, most companies we interviewed in rural areas purchased “transport” services. Most companies we Interviewed in Rural Areas Bought ‘Transport’ Services. Most Companies We Interviewed In Rural Areas Purchased  Transport  Services. two large providers to achieve universal connectivity. We found that it is generally not viewed as economical for a backbone provider to peer with a less geographically dispersed backbone provider. Even if there were equal traffic flows, the larger provider will tend to carry traffic a further distance. More costs are imposed on its infrastructure when it peers with a provider with a smaller or less widely dispersed network. Figures 4 and 5 illustrate this paradigm. In figure 4, backbone providers A and B are of similar size, and in figure 5, they are of same size. exchanging traffic with numerous other providers. When the commercial Internet began, only a few major backbone providers of relatively similar size existed. The similarities among these backbone firms led them to view each other as “peers.” These providers elected to share traffic with each other rather than with other providers, which led to the Internet's early problems. In the past, this has led to some of the biggest problems on the Internet, such as the growth of peer-to-peer networks. of DOJ have noted that in industries such as the Internet backbone market, interconnection among carriers is critical to the quality of service consumers receive. As such, a much larger provider may have less incentive to have good interconnection quality with other providers. Without quality interconnection, customers may have networks, the number of backbone providers’ customers, and traffic flows, and outages. In the absence of adequate information, it is difficult to fully ascertain thequality of service, the reasons for problems, and the extent of market concentration and competition. an incentive to buy service from the largest provider with the best-connected network. This would give the larger provider a competitive advantage, which in turn could cause the market to “tip” More and more users would choose connectivity from the larger network. Risking a monopolization of the industry. Because of the large number of users, the market could tip in favor of the larger service provider. This could lead to a monopoly of the service provider industry in the U.S., experts say. Tier 1 providers, that market segment may be viewed as competitive. A remaining concern regarding the “tiered” segmentation of the market is the potential for the number of Tier 1 providers to decline or for one of these providers to become dominant. For example, the recent economic downturn in the recent downturn in Europe may have affected the Tier 1 market segment in the U.S. It is possible that one of the tier 1 providers could become dominant in this market segment. It could also be that a Tier 1 provider could decline or be dominant in the market. this concern, both agencies have noted that if one of the Tier 1 providers were to grow considerably larger than the rest, there could be competitive concerns. Members of Congress are often concerned about whether telecommunications services reach rural areas. Several representatives of companies we interviewed noted that there are. there are competitive concerns over who can provide the best service to the most people in the most rural parts of the U.S. and the most data at the lowest prices. We are happy to address these concerns. communications sector may portend a further shakeout of backbone providers. Several of the company officials we interviewed expressed concern that there would be consolidation among the Tier 1 providers and thus noted the importance of antitrust oversight of this industry. Moreover, both an FCC Working Paper and the Antitrust Division have noted the need for antitrust oversight in the communications sector. The FCC has issued a working paper on the issue, which can be found at: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/30/telecom/telecommunications-sector-consolidation-and-antitrust. a customer purchasing access to its network than as a peer in traffic exchange. The “tiering” of Internet backbone providers and the dual system of peering and transit agreements have caused controversies. Several of the non-Tier 1 backbone providers with whom we spoke expressed concerns about their inability to peer with the largest providers. We were also told that peering policies should be made public. For example, one provider spoke critically of the quality ofPeering connections and thequality of service provided between peers. of which were Tier 1 providers and some of which were not) said they already had posted or soon would be posting their peering policies on their Web sites. Perhaps most interesting, we found that some non-Tier 1 backbone providers do not want to post their policies on the Web. We also found that many Tier 1 carriers do not like the idea of their customers peering into their networks from other providers' networks. For more information, go to peeringpolicy.org or go to the peeringprivacy.org website. of the market participants we interviewed were particularly concerned about their ability to understand where and why problems have occurred. These company representatives told us that when they contact their backbone provider to report service degradation they are sometimes told that the problem is with another interconnected backbone network. Concerns about the adaptability of the Internet to new services was also expressed to us. These and other concerns underscore the need for adequate information on such items as, for example, the geographic scope of backbone networks, the report says. example, that they receive service level guarantees from their backbone provider. One backbone provider with whom we spoke said collecting remuneration for ‘downtime’ is difficult because they are unable to prove that the problem occurred on the backbone provider’s network. The company said it is working on a solution to the problem. It was not immediately clear if the company would be able to pay for “downtimes’ when a network is nonfunctional or when a problem occurs on the backbones. backbone services for their report on advanced telecommunications capabilities under section 706 of the Telecommunications Act of 1996. DOJ often collects data for merger-specific analyses, but such data are not publicly available. We also found that neither the Bureau nor the Department of Justice release merger-related data to the public. The DOJ and the Bureau of Justice Statistics have not released merger-linked data to public view. We are happy to make that clear to you in this article. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. market as competitive. Most of these providers stated that they have several choices of backbone providers from which to obtain services. Some backbone providers are filling market niches by offering customers additional or unique services to complement their backbone services. Market participants noted the importance of Tier 1 backbone providers and the potential for reduced competition if consolidation were to occur at the Tier 1-provider level. The inability of the Internet backbone market, several issues of concern regarding this market were raised to us during the course of our study. The existence of approximately 40 national backbone providers may not fully reveal the competitiveness of this market. ISPs and other end users indicated to us a general perception that Tier 1 companies are “different” or superior when compared with other backbone providers. The extensive choice of backbone providers enables them to engage in “multihoming”— their minimal control and understanding about how their traffic moves across Internet backbone networks. For example, 17 of the 24 ISPs and all 8 of are all common characteristics of Tier 1 backbone provider. Many ISPs purchase backbone connectivity from at least 1 of the 5 Tier 1 backbone providers identified in a recent FCC Working Paper. 11 ISPs and 3 end users we interviewed explicitly stated that it was important to them to purchase service from a Tier 1 provider. Commonly cited characteristics of importance were a network with a broad geographic scope, many customers, significant capacity, and good peering arrangements with other providers. Most of the ISPs and end users with whom we spoke nonetheless stated that the market is competitive and they have significant choice of provider. backbone connectivity and asked questions that were designed to provide information about the competitiveness of the market. For example, we asked questions about the availability of choice among providers in the market, the viability of purchasing transport to a distant location to connect to a backbone provider, and the length of time it would take to connect with a backbone service provider. We also asked about the cost of connecting to the backbone and the number of people who would need to be connected at the same time in order for the service to work. noted that, coincident with increased choice of backbone providers throughout the country, the price of backbone connectivity had declined significantly in recent years. Representatives of several companies told us that although they were presented with standard contracts by backbone providers, they were able to negotiate terms and conditions in their contracts. They said that they had been able to secure better terms and terms than they had received in the past, and that they would be able to offer better terms in the future. They were also able to charge more for their services. be relieving some of these problems. Despite the view that smaller providers have no choice but to buy transit, some backbone providers with whom we spoke stated that the market is competitive, and transit rates have been decreasing. Second, eight of the backbone providers (some of them smaller) said they would be happy to sell their services to the government if they could get a cut of the transit bill. Some of the smaller providers said they'd be happy with a cut in transit costs if they were able to get a share of the revenue. Some companies expressed concern about slow or limited deployment of high-speed Digital Subscriber Line (DSL) service in residential areas. Some backbone providers and ISPs said that these problems were more severe or more limiting in rural areas. An incumbent local telephone provider we spoke with stated that they are aggressively rolling out DSL service, but that the service is costly to roll out. This carrier also noted that FCC found the percentage of all rural areas may not keep up with demand. Some of those we speak with gave the example of limited DSL deployment in many areas. limited broadband capabilities in local telephone markets could stall certain new applications. Incumbent local telephone companies have stated that the rollout of DSL service is not a bottleneck for the deployment of broadband applications. Concerns were expressed to us that shortcomings in the local telephone market were likely to intensify in the future due, in part, to the increase in demand for broadband applications and content. We found that some companies are optimistic that backbone capacity and technical features would adapt to new needs, but some are not so sure. local lines served by competitors had doubled to approximately 8 percent in 2000. New Internet services, such as video streaming and voice telephone calls over the Internet, are expected to become increasingly common in the coming years. Both Internet backbone networks and local communications infrastructure must have sufficient bandwidth and bandwidth. The U.S. Postal Service is one of the largest providers of voice and video services over the internet. It has more than 1.2 billion subscribers, making it the second largest carrier in the United States. Whom we spoke noted that local telephone markets are, in their view, close to monopolistic. Some companies attempting to compete against incumbent local telephone carriers have recently gone out of business. Based on our interviews with market participants, it appears that a limited choice of local areas are least likely to have competitors to the local carrier, and the incumbents were less likely to roll out DSL in their more rural markets. Incumbent local carriers, on the other hand, have stated that there is considerable competition in the provision of special access service. offering services to address this problem by attempting to bypass incumbent telephone companies’ facilities and bring services directly to customers. However, the majority of these efforts are focused on business customers in urban areas. Instead, representatives expressed concern that the deployment of broadband telephone facilities in residential and rural locations could have a negative impact on the quality of service. For example, we found: Metropolitan fiber rings—fiber optic cables encircling central business districts of urban areas—are solutions such as these hold promise for greater choice for business customers. being constructed as an alternative to using incumbent carrier services. Business customers purchase a direct connection to the fiber ring, which is connected directly to the backbone point of presence. Wireless direct access is also becoming available that will enable a company’s data traffic to bypass local telecommunications infrastructures. While Business customers can purchase adirect connection to a fiber ring and a wireless direct access to a data center, which will enable them to bypass the local telecommunications infrastructure. The network is expected to be completed by the end of 2014. Department of Commerce, and DOJ for their review and comment. FCC and NTIA officials stated that they were in general agreement with the facts presented in the report. Technical comments provided by FCC, NTIA and DOJ officials were incorporated in this report as appropriate. As agreed with your office, unless stated otherwise, this report does not reflect the views of the FCC or NTIA in any way. We are happy to clarify any differences between the FCC and the NTIA on this matter. We have no further comment on this issue. Key contacts and major contributors to this report are listed in appendix IV. We will also make copies available to others upon request. If you have any questions about this report, please call me at 202- 512-2834. To obtain information about the DOJ's Antitrust Division, call 202-512-2833. To get information about DOJ’s Antit antitrust division, go to 202-513-2823 or go to http://www. DOJ.gov/Antitrust. you publicly announce its contents earlier, we plan no further distribution of this report for 14 days after the date of this letter. At that time, we will send copies to interested congressional committees, the Chairman, FCC; the Assistant Secretary of Commerce for Communications and Information, Department of Commerce; the Secretary of the Treasury; and other interested parties. We will also send copies of the report to the FCC, the Department of Justice, the Treasury Department, and other relevant agencies. We are happy to share this information with anyone who would like to see it. to avoid having to go through a disruptive readdressing process. It appears, therefore, that customers’ feelings of being tied to a provider may lessen the effective level of competitiveness in this market. A concern among several market participants we interviewed was the difficulty of guaranteeing customers a given level of satisfaction with their service. We are happy to clarify that this is not the case, and that we are happy for customers to have the choice to switch service providers if they want to. We would also like to make it clear that this does not mean that customers are unhappy with the service they are receiving. We contacted an additional 32 market participants and industry representatives for purposes of conducting interviews to support this study. In some cases, our request for an interview was declined, our telephone contacts were not returned, or we were unable to schedule an interview. In these instances, we were not able to schedule a meeting with the market participants or industry representatives to conduct interviews. We are happy to clarify that we did not request an interview with any of these market participants, but that we would like to interview them. FCC said it believes that the appropriate means to collect information on Internet backbone networks at the present time is through informal and experimental efforts, which are currently under way. Because of the trend towards convergence in the communications marketplace and the nation’s increasing reliance on the Internet, however, FCC and NTIA are concerned about the potential effects of the convergence of communications services. If a more formal data collection program is deemed appropriate, FCC should exercise its authority to establish such a program. We provided a draft of this report to the FCC. found little in the way of official or complete information on the relative size of companies. Neither FCC nor NTIA collect data on the provision of Internet backbone services. However, FCC does solicit public comments on the deployment of underlying telecommunications infrastructure that support the Internet. The report was published by the Internet Policy Institute, an advocacy group based in Washington, D.C., on behalf of the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST). For confidential support, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org. A focus group of the Council will evaluate the effectiveness of the program upon its completion and analysis of trial data. The focus group will make a recommendation on outage reporting of these networks. We were told that, due to the FCC, such as Internet backbone providers.to make such reports to FCC, that such a recommendation may not be made at the time of the study's completion. The program is expected to be rolled out across the U.S. by the end of the year, the Council said. may need to periodically reassess its data collection efforts to evaluate whether they are providing sufficient information about key developments in this industry. FCC should develop a strategy for periodically evaluating whether existing informal and experimental methods of data collection are providing the information needed to monitor the essential characteristics of this industry, the report says. The report concludes that the FCC should reassess data collection to determine whether it is providing enough information about this industry to monitor key developments. The FCC should also assess whether the data collection methods provide enough information to monitor this industry's development. Congress maintained this distinction when it enacted the Telecommunications Act of 1996. No provisions were contained in the 1996 act pertaining to Internet backbone services. The act sought to increase competition in other communications sectors, primarily the local telephone market. However, the act did not include provisions for the Internet backbone Services Act of 1998. The bill was passed in 1998, and the act was signed into law by President Clinton on July 31, 1998. It was the first Internet backbone service to be approved by the U.S. Congress. treatment of these more established communications services and infrastructures under the Communications Act of 1934 has indirectly affected the burgeoning Internet medium. The act provided FCC and states the authority to take actions to encourage the deployment of advanced telecommunications capability. Two types of facilities were affected by the act: two types of communications towers and two type of fiber-optic cables. The law also allowed the FCC to take action to encourage state and local governments to deploy advanced telecommunications capabilities. The legislation was amended by the 1996 act, which was signed by President Bill Clinton. Dating back to the 1960s when data signals began to flow over public telephone networks, FCC determined that “basic services’ would be regulated. “enhanced services”—the data-processing or computer-enhanced functions of data transmissions—was a vibrant and competitive market that should remain free of regulation, the FCC said in the 1970s. The FCC ruled in the 1980s that it would regulate ‘basic services,’ but not ‘enhanced’ services.  DSL rollout is hampered by certain regulations that require incumbents to sell parts of their network (including DSL lines) to entrants at cost-based rates. Legislation is pending in the 107th Congress that would address these issues.and often requires significant reengineering of their networks. These providers also have noted publicly that DSL rollout has been hampered bycertain regulations that requires incumbents. to sell part of theirnetwork (including. DSL lines), at cost based rates. and often require significant re engineering of the networks. concerns, and proponents of this legislation have stated that this will advance the deployment of broadband in residential and rural areas. Opponents of the legislation believe the bill will not foster increased deployment of. broadband services and may stifle competition in the local telephone market. Other bills have been introduced to introduce similar legislation in other parts of the UK, including a bill in the House of Commons and another in the Senate. The bill is expected to be voted on by the end of the year and could be passed as early as next year. by the cost of reengineering parts of the network and existing regulations that require them to sell piece parts of their networks to competitors at cost-based rates. A variety of the company representatives with whom we spoke told us that new services and some services that were traditionally regulated (such as phone service) are being rolled out at a faster rate than previously planned. Some of the services that are traditionally regulated, such as telephone service, are now available at a much lower rate than they were in the past. Neither the U.S. Census Bureau nor the Labor Statistics collects data directly on Internet backbone providers. To investigate the degree of competition, we spoke with an array of buyers and sellers of Internet backbone services. In the case of both of these agencies, aggregate data on services provided by telecommunications providers is collected. For more, go to CNN.com/soulmatestories and follow us on Twitter @Soulmatters and @cnn_soulMatters. For confidential support on suicide matters call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org. from the Federal Communications Commission, the Department of Justice, the Bureau of Labor Statistics, and the Census Bureau. We also interviewed two national Internet industry trade associations and three academics with expertise in this area. For more, go to CNN.com/soulmatestories and follow us on Twitter @cnnstories and @jennifer_cnn. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. backbone providers, ISPs, and other end users—described the Internet backbone market as competitive. Several characteristics were described by market participants, such as increasing choice of providers and lower prices, as evidence of the competitiveness of the market. Officials also described to us factors that may reduce competition in this the choice of local telephone companies providing access to Internet backbone networks may be limited, creating problems for providers of Internet services. We found no official data source that could provide information to allow an empirical investigation of the nature of competition. in the Internet backbone market, and (3) how this market is likely to develop in the future. We gathered information from a variety of sources, including government officials, industry participants, and academics familiar with the functioning of this market. In the selected localities, we conducted 55 semistructured interviews with participants in the internet backbone market between January and June 2001. In addition to the information collected through interviews, we also conducted technical, legal, and regulatory research on the characteristics and competitiveness of theInternet backbone market. To obtain information from a wide variety of participants within the Internet backbone market, we visited locations in 12 states with varying characteristics. We included large and small cities and rural areas from various regions of the country. Other criteria used for selection of areas were proximity to Internet points, and the availability of Internet access in the area. For more information, visit the U.S. Internet Backbone Association's website or go to: http://www.internetbackboneassociation.org/backbone. of content and Web hosting; two state-level ISP associations; one Internet equipment manufacturer; and one incumbent local telephone company. Responses from interviewees were evaluated and general themes were drawn from the aggregated responses. These themes are presented in this report. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. widely shared by the market participants we interviewed for this study and for other studies we have conducted at your request over the past 3 years. There is a strong expectation that traditionally regulated services, such as voice telephone and video services, are already migrating to the Internet and will soon become part of the Internet. There are also expectations that the Internet will become more widely available and used by the public in the coming years. We will share more of our research with you at the end of the year. citizens the world over. The implications of convergence and greater future reliance on the Internet are at present largely unknown. No evidence came to light in the course of this study to suggest that the long-standing hands-off regulatory approach for the Internet has not worked or should be modified. Further, no evidence was found to suggest the current regulatory approach has worked or that it needs to be modified, the study found. The study was published in the journal of the International Journal of Internet Policy and Regulation. seen in the substantial investments made by private sector firms in backbone networks and interconnection facilities. The adaptability of backbone networks for new services, such as Internet-based voice and video services, foretell a trend commonly identified as “convergence” in the broader communications sector. This expectation of greater convergence was seen in the U.S. economy and the increasing importance of the Internet to the economy. These developments are particularly noteworthy in light of the dynamic nature of the internet backbone in the Internet backbone market. in Congress proposing various other approaches and strategies to accelerate the deployment of high-speed data services. In the 6 years since the federal government ended its sponsorship of a key backbone network, the Internet has changed the way people of the world live, work, and play. Its rapid growth is a major reason for its rapid growth in the U.S. and around the world. For more information, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/29/technology/top-10-internet-developments-in-usa-2013/index.html#storylink=cpy. common applications used by residential and business Internet users. advances in technology are changing the very nature of the Internet. In the last half decade, the Internet has evolved from a nascent but promising information tool to a 21st century medium central to commerce and communications for Americans and other people in the U.S. The Internet is now the most important medium for commerce and communication in the world, according to a new report by the World Economic Forum. The report says the Internet is becoming more and more important in the global economy. control and encryption. Companies reduce reliance on backbone service by caching frequently used content on their servers. In addition, companies have emerged that specialize in caching frequently accessed content and storing it in varied geographic locations, thus making it more quickly accessible to customers. Because the Internet is so fast, companies are increasingly using caching to speed up delivery of content to their customers. In particular, they are using it to speed the delivery of video and other content to customers in other parts of the U.S. and the world. is not viewed as conducive to supporting research capabilities of high-speed technologies and other advanced functions. For example, “Internet2’ is a partnership of universities, industry, and government formed to support research and the development of new technologies and capabilities for future deployment within the country. It is aimed at supporting research and development of technologies for use in the future of the nation's internet infrastructure. For more information on Internet2, visit: www.internet2.org and www.ibm.com. of private interconnections that currently exist across the United States, according to one company representative. Despite a variety of technological developments that have improved traffic flow at NAPs, the majority of Internet traffic exchange occurs at private interconnection points. For example, we found that a few providers are building and relying on private data networks—rather than the Internet—for the transmission of voice services. Some companies are building “virtual private networks”— networks configured within a public network for data transmissions that are secured via access. Usually, these private interconnections involve two companies entering into a bilateral agreement to exchange traffic. No third party manages the traffic exchange. The parties interconnect their networks at any feasible location, such as a facility of one of the providers. Because of the private nature of these agreements, the number of interconnects can be very small or very large, depending on the nature of the company. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. One of the initiatives of the current and fifth Network Reliability and Interoperability Council (NRIC V) is a trial program for voluntary reporting of outages by providers. The council is in the process of evaluating and will report on the reliability of “packet- switched” networks. We found that participants in Internet markets have begun to address latency and reliability problems in Internet backbone networks. For example, we found that some Internet service providers are beginning to address the issue of latency in their networks. technical capabilities to support such services. We found that most be provided, both the backbone and the local communications infrastructure must have sufficient bandwidth. Many industry representatives with whom we met told us that latency and the loss of data packets due to traffic congestion is a consequence of the current protocols for transmitting Internet traffic. As transmissions of time-sensitive data packets are time-intensive, we need to make sure that the infrastructure is able to cope with the demands of the time-critical transmissions. We need to ensure that we have the bandwidth to provide these services. such as IP telephony and interactive video require “bounded delays’ These services require very low and uniform delays between sender and receiver in order for the service to be of adequate quality. More broadband content is expected to be transmitted over the Internet. Before such broadband content can be transmitted, it needs to be tested on the Internet before it can be used by users. For more information, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/28/technology/top-10-internet-telephony-services-for-the-web/index.html. as telephone calls) are expected to become more commonly provided over the Internet in the coming years. Many companies are developing technologies to enable voice services to be provided over IP networks. At present, however, many backbone networks are not well designed to provision such ‘time-sensitive’ services. Specifically, real-time services are needed to provide voice services in the real time. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. No official data sources were identified that would provide information on the structure and competitiveness of the Internet backbone market. Transit customers, however, do contract for a specified level of service for such items as “uptime” Companies have emerged to build and provide services over networks that do not rely as much on peering as the backbone. Internet is also examining issues related to interconnection and peering of Internet backbone providers and the sufficiency of the best efforts standard as more time-sensitive services are provided over the Internet. the Internet is a network of interconnected networks with little data available or reported on service disruptions or outages, finding the source, cause, or reason for a problem may be difficult. ISPs and end users expressed frustration that accountability for traffic transmission problems is lacking. Several ISPs noted, for example, that there was no data available on the cause of traffic problems in the U.S. in the past six months. For more, go to CNN.com/soulmatestories and follow us on Twitter @cnnstories. Concerns by some Internet providers about reporting network outages to a governmental agency. Little participation in the program by Internet providers through the first half of 2001. Although the Internet backbone market appears to be competitive, another market that is essential to the functioning of the Internet may not be as well-regulated. The Internet backbone program was launched in 1998. It was intended to help Internet providers report outages and provide information to the government. The program was supposed to be a voluntary program, but it was not widely used. quality for Internet services. We were told that this difficulty is related to the way that the Internet is engineered. Several of those with whom we spoke noted that Internet traffic is exchanged among providers on a “best efforts” basis. However, the Internet was not engineered to enable extremely high quality service at all times—as are telephone networks. The quality of Internet services can be compromised when high levels of traffic flow lead to congestion, they say. We are happy to clarify that this is not the case. applications over the Internet become increasingly common in the future, these problems may become particularly acute. A few of those we interviewed noted that these applications can run well across one backbone network, but when traffic must transverse across more than one network, quality cannot be assured given current routing. The problem is particularly acute when applications must run over multiple networks at the same time, such as on a mobile phone or tablet, for example. For more information on how to use the Internet over other networks, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/29/tech/technology/how-to-use-the-internet-over-other-nations-backbone. GAO’s Web site (www.gao.gov) contains abstracts and full-text files of current reports and testimony. The Web site features a search engine to help you locate documents using key words and phrases. You can print these documents in their entirety, including charts and other graphics. Each day, GAO issues a list of newly released reports, testimony, and correspondence. E-mail this list to you every day for a new list to send to you. The General Accounting Office, the investigative arm of Congress, exists to support Congress in meeting its constitutional responsibilities. GAO examines the use of the federal government for the American people. The agency's mission is to help improve the performance and accountability of theFederal government. For more information, go to GAO.gov. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. In the U.S., call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. GAO’s commitment to good government is reflected in its core values of accountability, integrity, and reliability. GAO evaluates federal programs and policies; and provides analyses, recommendations, and other assistance to help Congress make informed oversight, policy, and funding decisions. The fastest and easiest way to obtain copies of GAO is to go to: http://www.gao.org/news/press-releases/2013/01/30/gao-press-release-2013-01-30.html. afternoon, go to our home page and complete the easy-to-use electronic order form found under “To Order GAO Products” Web site: www.gao.gov/fraudnet/Fraudnet.htm, E-mail: fraudnet@gao, or 1-800-424-5454 (automated answering system) For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. some of the ISPs and end users with whom we spoke also told us that it makes it difficult for smaller entities to switch backbone providers. In particular, if an ISP were to change its backbone provider, it would generally have to relinquish its block of IP addresses and get is configured. Two respondents expressed concern about the loss of customers due to a change in IP addresses. A few also said that it is not uncommon for an ISP to retain a relationship with its original backbone provider—paying for a minimal level of connectivity to that provider. a new block of addresses from the new backbone provider. Several ISPs and end users with whom we spoke told us that changing address space can be time consuming and costly. We found that the degree of difficulty in changing address. space depends on how an individual company’s computer network. is set up. For more information on how to change your address, go to: www.addresschange.com. for more information about changing your address from a backbone provider, or visit: http://www.addresschanging.com/ for more details. of IP addresses from a backbone provider. This method of IP address allocation was adopted number of IP addresses that must be maintained in each router for traffic routing purposes is substantially reduced. If an entity seeking IP addresses cannot utilize a large block of address issued by ARIN, the entity must obtain their addresses from among the allocations made by ARin to their Internet backbone providers. ISPs and end users with whom we spoke expressed concern about method ofIP address allocation. In addition to those named above, Naba Barkakati, John Karikari, Faye Morrison, Lynn Musser, Madhav Panwar, Most ISPs and other end users do not directly obtain their own IP addresses. Instead, they instead receive a block of addresses. Several ISPs and end users with whom we spoke expressed concern about the manner in which Internet addresses are allocated.because of the cost of distant transport. Most ISPs andOther end users—except for fairly large organizations—do not directly obtaining their ownIP addresses, but they instead receives a block. of addresses, which they instead get from the Internet service provider (ISP) for technical efficiency reasons. Allocations made in this manner reduce the number of addresses that need to be maintained for traffic routing purposes. While the method of allocating IP addresses in large blocks enables backbone routers to operate efficiently, it can also lead to congestion in the network. (See app. II for detailed information on IP address allocations). For more information, visit: http://www.ipaddress.org/IP address-allocation-blockage.html. For more details on how to use IP address allocation in your network, visit www.ip address.gov/IPaddress. use, there is concern about the growth in the number of routing tables entries. Historically, IP addresses were organized into three commonly used classes—Classes A, B, and C. For Class A, there are 126 possible network addresses, each with nearly 17 million hosts. Slightly more than 16,000 networks may have a Class B address, each of over 65,000 hosts. Finally, there can be approximately 2 million networks with a Class C address,Each with a maximum of 254 host addresses. of Class C address entries in routing tables and developed a solution known as Classless Inter-Domain Routing (CIDR) CIDR treats multiple contiguous Class C addresses as a single block that requires only one entry in a routing table. This method of IP address allocation was adopted for technical efficiency reasons. It was adopted by the Internet Protocol (IP) network to reduce the number of IP addresses that need to be allocated for each IP address. It is also used for routing purposes, such as to ensure that multiple IP addresses can be used at once. known as “routers” send data packets from one network to another by examining the destination IP address of each packet. In its memory, the router contains a “routing table’ which contains information specifying all of the IP addresses of other networks. The router compares a packet’s destination IP addresses with the information contained in the routing table to determine the network to which the packet should be sent. As more and more network addresses come into use, the need for routers to include an entry for each possible network will increase. An Internet Protocol (IP) address is a number that is typically written as four numbers separated by periods. When information is sent from one network or node to another, the packet of information includes the destination IP address. Because the IP deals with inter-networking, the IP address is based on the concept of a network address and a host address. The network address indicates the network to which a computer is connected, and the host address identifies the specific computer on that network. The IP address uniquely identifies a computer connected to the Internet. signals that were split into separate pieces or “packets” at the transmission point are separately routed over the most efficient available pathway and reassembled at their destination point. The standards that specify most data transmissions are known as the Internet Protocol (IP) Suite. Under part of this protocol, streams of streams of data are routed over a single pathway. The Internet Protocol Suite is a set of standards that govern data transmission in the Internet. It includes the Internet protocol, which is used to transmit and receive data. packets are routed to their destination over the most efficient pathway. Other aspects of the protocol facilitate the routing of packets to their appropriate destination. The 32-bit numeric identifier— or IP address—attached to every packet. Currently, IP addresses for North America are allocated by the American Registry for for the Internet, which is based in Washington, D.C. The Internet is a network of computers that connect to each other via a set of protocols known as the Internet Protocol (IP) addresses.