views on these technologies, we conducted initial scoping interviews with power plant operators, technology vendors, and federal officials. Following this initial round of interviews, we selected a group of 19 stakeholders with expertise in carbon capture and storage (CCS) or technologies to improve coal plant efficiency. This group of stakeholders included representatives from major utilities that are planning or implementing projects that use these technologies. We also asked federal officials that are providing research, development, and demonstration funding for these technologies and asked them a set of standard questions. projects involving advanced coal technologies. To identify stakeholders’ We reviewed key reports including those from the Department of Energy’s (DOE) national laboratories, the National Academy of Sciences, International Energy Agency (IEA), Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Global CCS Institute, National Coal Council, and academic reports. We also looked at reports from the U.S. Geological Survey, National Institute of Standards and Technology, and the National Mining Association. We looked at key reports from U.N. agencies, including the National Energy Agency and Intergovernmental panel on Climate change. utilities officials, and others; congressional and other oversight of the hundreds of millions of dollars DOE is spending on these technologies. policymakers’ ability to assess the maturity of CCS and the resources that might be needed to achieve commercial deployment. Other agencies similarly charged with developing technologies, such as the U.S. Department of Energy and the National Institute of Standards and Technology, will also be looking at the CCS program, the report says. The report will be published in full next month. Using TRLs we developed for these technologies, we found consensus among stakeholders that CCS is less mature than efficiency technologies. We found that DOE’s Office of Fossil Energy does not systematically assess the maturity of key coal technologies as they progress toward commercialization. The lack of such benchmarks or an assessment of the maturity and whether they are achieving planned or desired results limits the ability of DOE to provide a clear picture of these technologies to policymakers, the authors say. The authors say the lack of benchmarks limits DOE's ability to provide an accurate picture to policymakers. and interviewed senior DOE staff on these Visited coal power plants and research facilities in three selected states. We conducted this performance audit from July 2009 through May 2010, in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit, and that we conduct the audit as soon as possible after the audit is complete. We are happy to share the results of our audit with the public, if you would like to see them. For confidential support, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. Technology Readiness Levels (TRLs) are a tool developed by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration. TRLs can play a key role in assessing the maturity of technologies during the contracting process. The agency recently issued a technologies, and researchers from academia or industry that are actively researching these technologies were asked to describe their technologies. The TRL scale is based on a scale we developed, based on Technology Readiness Level (TRL) and the level of maturity of the technology. Technology Readiness Assessment Guide, which lays out three key steps to conducting technology readiness assessments during the contracting process. Identify critical technology elements that are essential to the successful operation of the facility. Assess maturity of these critical technologies using TRLs. Develop a technology maturity plan which identifies activities required for the facility to be ready for use. Develop an assessment plan that outlines the activities that will be undertaken to ensure the facility is ready to be used by the end of the contract. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. to bring technology to desired TRL level. Although use of the Guide is not mandatory, DOE’s Office of Environmental Management uses the Guide as part of managing its procurement activities. The Office of Nuclear Energy has begun using TRLs to measure and communicate risks associated with nuclear technology. The Guide is a result of a GAO recommendation, but it is not required by the Department of Energy or other agencies to use it. It is intended to be a tool to help government agencies manage procurement activities, not a replacement for them. Assistant Secretary concurred with our recommendation, stating that DOE could improve its process for providing a clearer picture of technology maturity. He said DOE planned to conduct a formal TRL assessment of coal technologies in the near future. The Assistant Secretary also provided technical comments, which we have incorporated as part of our recommendation. We have incorporated these technical comments into our recommendation for the DOE to improve its TRL process for coal technology assessment. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. In the absence of an assessment from DOE, we asked stakeholders to gauge the maturity of coal technologies using a scale we developed based on TRLs. Table 2 shows the and used by various federal agencies to rate the extent to which technologies have been demonstrated to work as intended. We consulted with the Electric Power Research Institute (EPRI), which had recently used a similar approach to examine the maturityof coal technologies. For example, they defined TRL 8 as demonstration at more than 25 percent the size of a commercial scale plant. We applied these benchmarks to a coal power plant. TRLs we developed for coal technologies by adapting the NASA TRLs. for EOR use. However, this plant does not produce electricity. plants have already been demonstrated commercially. For example, a number of ultrasupercritical plants ranging from 600 to more than 1,000 MW have been built or are under construction in the U.S. and Europe. For more information on EOR, visit the EOR Project website or go to: http://www.eorproject.org/. IEA estimated that CCS technologies could meet 20 percent of reductions needed to reduce global CO. Cost of meeting this goal would increase if CCS towards using natural gas to meet emissions targets. Switching from coal to natural gas can lead to higher fuel costs and increased exposure to the greater price volatility of natural gas. Most stakeholders told us that C CS would increase.in greenhouse gas emissions. In addition, CCS could allow coal to remain part of the nation’s diverse fuel mix. was not deployed. Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) researchers called CCS the “critical enabling technology” to reduce CO emissions while allowing continued use of coal in the future. In 2009, NAS reported that if CCS technologies are not demonstrated commercially in the next decade, the electricity sector could move more electricity sources to make up for the higher parasitic load associated with CCS. The National Coal Council has also reported temporary declines in reliability during past deployments of new coal technologies. We provided a draft of our report to NAS. demand for water, and could affect the ability of individual plants to operate reliably. Technologies to improve plant efficiency offer potential near-term reductions, but also raise some concerns. According to key reports and stakeholders, the successful deployment of CCS technologies is critical to helping the U.S. meet potential limits for water. The U.N. has issued a call for CCS technology to be deployed in the United States by the end of the decade. For more information on CCS, go to: http://www.npr.org/news/environment/2013/01/27/29/ccs-technologies-to-improve-plant-efficiency-offer-potential-near-term-reductions-but-also-raise-some concerns. use by 73 percent. Some utility officials also said CCS could lead to a decline in the ability of individual plants to operate reliably. A power plant might need to shut down if any of the three components (capture, transport, and storage) of CCS became unavailable. In addition, more power plants could need to be closed if CCS was not available. More power plants would need to close if the CCS wasn't available, utility officials said. The U.S. Department of Energy says CCS is a low-cost, efficient way to produce electricity. Commercial deployment of CCS within 10 to 15 years is possible according to DOE and other stakeholders. There are five IGCC plants in operation around the world, including two in the United States. Commercial deployment is contingent on overcoming a variety of economic, technical, and legal challenges, according to the U.S. Department of Energy. The IGCC plant network is expected to be fully operational by 2015, the DOE says. The U.N. Energy Agency says CCS could be commercially viable within 10 years. electricity prices, and key reports raise similar concerns. MIT estimated that plants with post-combustion capture have 61 percent higher cost of electricity. IGCC plants with pre-combUSTion capture had a 27 percent higher price compared to plants without these technologies. DOE has also raised concerns about CCS and water consumption at a coal plant. Specifically, DOE estimated that post- Combustion Capture technology could almost double water consumption, while pre- combustion capture would increase water consumption. commercial scale power plant, which we defined as 500 megawatts (MW) and emitting about 3 millions tons of carbon dioxide (CO) annually. We based this definition on some of the key reports we reviewed, which used 500 MW as a standard power plant. Such a plant would emit about 3 million tons of CO annually, according to the reports. We defined 500MW as such a plant, and stated that such a power plant would have a carbon dioxide emissions of about 3.5 million tons per year. emit about 3 million tons of CO emissions from a power plant can vary based on a variety of factors. We reviewed available data on the use of key coal technologies compiled by the IEA and the Global CCS. We also reviewed availableData on the Use of Key Coal Technologies compiled by IEA, and compiled by Global C CS. We found that the majority of coal-fired power plants in the U.S. are using CCS technology to reduce CO emissions. The majority of these plants are in the South and West. Neither the proposed rule nor the final rule will address liability for unintended releases of stored CO emissions in lieu of more efficient coal plants. Some higher efficiency plant designs also face technical challenges in that they require more advanced materials than are currently available. For example, some higher efficiency plants require moreadvanced materials than currently available, such as carbon nanotubes. For more information on the proposed and final rules, visit: http://www.pnr.org/news/features/2010/01/31/pipeline-rule-and-final-rules-on-storage- CO-emissions. the prospect of triggering the Clean Air Act’s New Source Review (NSR) requirements. Additional requirements that may apply when a plant makes a major modification, a physical or operational change that would result in a significant net increase in emissions. emissions than efficiency improvements alone but could raise electricity costs, increase electricity costs and increase carbon dioxide emissions. If approved, the plant would be the largest in the U.S. to make such a change. The plant would also be the first in the Southeast to do so. Many technologies to improve plant efficiency have been used and are available for commercial use now, but still face challenges. injection wells can be permitted as Class I (injections of hazardous wastes, industrial nonhazardous wastes, municipal wastewater) or Class V wells. Some wells are not included in other classes, including wells used for non-hazardous waste injection, such as municipal wastewater injection. Injection wells can also be used to dispose of hazardous waste or waste from other sources, including water and sewage. “advanced” ultrasupercritical plants require development of metal alloys to withstand steam temperatures that could be 300 to 500 degrees Fahrenheit higher. From a legal perspective, most stakeholders reported that making efficiency upgrades to the existing fleet of coal power plants was limited by the laws of the United States, according to a report by the Center for Energy and Policy Studies. The report was published by the Centre for Energy & Policy Studies at the University of California, Los Angeles, on November 14, 2013. in experimental technologies such as pilot CO for geologic sequestration. Well operators will only be liable under. endangerment of underground sources of drinking water until the operator meets all the closure and post-closure requirements and EPA approves site closure of the well. According to EPA, once site closure is approved, well operators will not be liable for environmental damage. For confidential support call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. the SDWA if they violate or fail to comply with EPA orders in situations where an imminent and substantial endangerment to health is posed by a contaminant that is in or likely to enter an underground source of drinking water. EPA plans to finalize the geologic sequestration rule in fall. The rule is expected to be implemented by the end of the year or early next year. For more information on the rule, visit the EPA's website or the SDWA's website. for more information about the rule or to sign up for a free e-mail account, visit www.epa.gov/geologicsequestration. to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. We selected this nonprobability sample of states because they contained more than one state. We believe that the evidence obtained provides areasonable basis forOur findings and conclusion based onOur audit objectives and that it is consistent with what we expect to find in our audit of the state of the U.S. The evidence obtained is not sufficient to support our conclusions, but it does provide a basis for the audit. this report to the appropriate congressional committees, Secretary of Energy, Administrator of EPA, and other interested parties. In addition, the report will be available at no charge on GAO’s Web site at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staffs have any questions regarding this report, please contact me at (202) 512-3841 or e-mail me at [email protected] The report will also be available on the GAO Web site. U.S. emissions of COCO2 is the most prevalent greenhouse gas (GHG) program. Contact points for our Offices of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of this report. GAO staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix IV. all U.S.'s emissions of the greenhouse gas are monitored by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) The National Oceanographic and Atmosphere Administration monitors CO2 emissions in the United States. GAO responds to Department of Energy's letter dated June 4, 2010. GAO's comments are based on the Department’s letter to GAO. The report was written by Jon Ludwigson, Chloe Brown, Scott Heacock, Alison O’Neill, Kiki Theodoropoulos, and Jarrod West. Important assistance was also provided by the.Institute for Energy Studies. The Institute for Energy Study is a non-profit organization based in Washington, D.C. to the Secretary of Energy and the Administrator of EPA for review and comment. In addition, we provided selected slides on reliability of electricity supply to NERC for comment. We received written comments from DOE’s Assistant Secretary of the Office of Fossil Energy, which are reproduced in appendix III. The full report will be published in full in the spring of 2015. For confidential support, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. appropriate. In addition, EPA and NERC provided technical comments, which we have incorporated as appropriate. As agreed with your offices, unless you publicly announce the contents of this report earlier, we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date. At that time, we will send copies of the report to your offices. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. Chuck Bausell, Nirmal Chaudhary, Cindy Gilbert, Madhav Panwar, and Jeanette Soares are among the writers on this week's episode of "Behind The Candelabra" The episode airs tonight at 10 p.m. ET on CNN. For more, go to CNN.com/BehindTheCandelabray. For the latest from CNN iReport, visit CNN.co/Cnn.com or follow us on Twitter @cnnireport.