Labor’s Employee Benefits Security Administration (EBSA) could outline the implications of a hedge fund's or fund of funds’ limited transparency on the fiduciary duty of prudent oversight. While EBSA is not tasked with offering guidance to public sector plans, such plans may nonetheless benefit from such guidance. Although Labor generally agreed with our recommendation, we noted that some plans might not have the resources to take actions consistent with the best practices, and thus would be at risk of making imprudent investments in hedge funds. hedge funds and private equity. In 2006, the ERISA Advisory Council recommended that Labor publish guidance about the unique features of hedge funds and matters for consideration in their use by qualified plans. In 2008, we suggested that Labor provide guidance for qualified plans under ERISA on the unique challenges of investing in hedge funds. These challenges can be daunting even for large plan sponsors. We believe that, as we recommended in 2008, the Secretary of Labor should provide guidance regarding investing in Hedge Funds and private Equity specifically designed for qualified plan under ERISA. the fund selection process. In light of these challenges, and as predecessors to this 2011 ERISA Advisory Council have concluded, the Department of Labor (Labor) can play a role in helping to ensure that plans fulfill their Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (ERISA) fiduciary duties when investing in the pension fund industry. The Labor Department has a role to play in making sure that plans meet their ERISA duties, according to the 2011 Advisory Council's findings. The Department of labor has a responsibility to help ensure that pension plans meet the requirements of ERISA. statement include Michael Hartnett, Sharon Hermes, David Lehrer, and Amber Yancey Carroll. This is a work of the U.S. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States. The published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from GAO. However, because this is this is a works of the government, it may not be reproduced in whole or in part without the permission of the Government of the United Kingdom. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. work may contain copyrighted images or other material, and permission from the copyright holder may be necessary. Use this material to help people with reading comprehension and vocabulary. Use the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on CNN.com. Back to the page you came from.  The Daily Discussion: Are you a fan of the Daily Discussion? Share your thoughts. The weekly News Quiz: Is there anything you like about the forum? Send your photos and videos to: mailonlinepictures@daily.co. We reported in 2008 that DB plan investments in hedge funds and private equity have grown, but such investments are generally a small portion of plan assets. This remains the case today. According to a Pensions & Investments survey, the percentage of large plans (as measured by total plan assets) survey by Greenwich Associates found that 22 percent of midsize plans were invested in hedge Funds. 40 percent of the largest plans—those with over $5 billion in total assets—were invested in Hedge Funds. Investments in hedge funds and private equity typically constitute a small share of plan assets. The average allocation to hedge funds among plans with such investments was a little over 5 percent in 2010. Of the 78 large plans that reported hedge fund investments in 2010, 20 had allocations of 10 percent or more.larger percentage of plans were already invested in private equity in 2001. As shown below, a 2010 Pensions & Investments survey shows that larger plans, measured by total plan assets, are more likely to invest in hedge Funds and private Equity. investing in hedge funds grew from 11 percent in 2001 to 60 percent in 2010 (see fig. 1) Over the same time period, the percentage of large plans that invest in private equity grew at a much slower rate (71 percent to 92 percent) This is likely because of the fact that a much larger share of the private equity market is now in the hands of hedge funds and other private equity firms than it was in the early 2000s, when the study was conducted. The study was published in the Journal of Hedge Fund Research. procedures, though one plan sponsor noted the ability to negotiate favorable contract terms is limited when investing in top-performing funds. Due diligence and ongoing monitoring, beyond those required for traditional investments, are also important. For hedge funds, due diligence can be a of initial capital investment. However, investing through a fund of funds does not relieve plan sponsors of their fiduciary duties; accordingly, the plan sponsors must act prudently, the report says. The report says funds of funds can be appropriate if plan sponsors do not have the skills necessary as hedge funds. value of the sponsors’ investment. Because many hedge funds may own thinly traded making careful and deliberate fund selection when investing in hedge funds and private equity. Plan sponsors emphasized defining a clear purpose and strategy for their hedge fund investments. Most of the plans we contacted described one or more specific strategies for the hedge fund stock market. They said in the case of hedge funds, such terms can include fee structure and conditions, degree of transparency, valuation procedures, redemption provisions, and degree of leverage employed. the agency explained that the lack of uniformity among these investments could complicate the development of comprehensive guidance for plan fiduciaries. To date, Labor has not acted on this recommendation. As plan sponsors seek to better ensure adequate return on assets under management, recent trends suggest that investments in alternative investments could be a good idea, the agency said. The Labor Department has not yet issued a guidance on the matter. The agency said it will act on the recommendation when it is received. The proposal is expected to come within the next few months. serve useful purposes in a well-thought-out investment program, offering plan sponsors advantages that may not be as readily available from more traditional investment options. It is equally clear that investments in such assets place demands on plan sponsors that are significantly beyond the demands of more traditional asset. The benefits of investing in these assets can be significant, as well as the risks, according to the report. The report was published by the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants (AICPA) and is based on a survey of more than 1,000 AICPA members. the challenges that such investments pose to small plan sponsors would be beneficial. I would be happy to answer any questions that the council may have. For further questions on this statement, please contact me at (202) 512- 7215. Individuals making key contributions to this report should contact the council at (Washington, D.C.) at 202-512-7215. For more information on this report, visit: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/29/politics/small-plan-investment/index.html. markets, plan officials have limited information on the value of private equity investments until the underlying holdings are sold. In some cases, private equity funds estimate the value. of the fund by comparing the. value of companies in their portfolio with thevalue of comparable publicly traded assets. However, prior to prior.markets, officials have only limited information. on theValue of Private Equity investments. Until the underlying holding is sold, there is no way to know the true value of a private equity fund. Private equity investments have greater variation in performance among funds, particularly among venture capital investments compared with other asset classes such as domestic stocks. Investors must invest with top- performing funds in order to achieve long-term returns in excess of those of the of the private equity investments, according to sources in the investment industry. In the U.S., private equity investors can make up to 30% of their investments in private equity funds. In Europe, private equity can make as much as 50%. In the UK, private Equity can make between 20 and 30%. required for traditional investments. Plan representatives said these steps include regularly reviewing reports on the performance of the underlying investments. In some cases, plans participate on the advisory board of a private equity fund, which provides some of the funding for the plan's investments. For confidential support call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. For support on suicide matters call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch or click here. such concentrated, undiversified funds are highly susceptible to the success or failure of each underlying company and related market sector conditions. Further, hedge funds and private equity funds can also feature relatively costly fee structures compared with those of mutual funds. These fee structures can have a significant impact on limitations, including an additional layer of fees—such as a 1 percent flat fee and a performance fee of 5 to 10 percent of returns—on top of the substantial fees that a fund of funds manager pays to the underlying hedge funds. Investing in a fund of funds provides investors with diversification across multiple funds. A fund of private equity funds can allow plans to invest in a variety of managers, industries, geographies, and year. A private equity fund manager’s strategy typically involves concentrating its holdings in a limited number of underlying companies—generally about 10 to 15 companies, often in the same sector.profits, but can also magnify losses to the fund if the market goes against the fund's expectations. to manage a portfolio of hedge funds. In addition, investing through a fund of funds may provide a plan better access to hedge funds or private equity funds than a plan would be able to obtain through direct investment. Nonetheless, investing in a funds of funds has some drawbacks and is not always the best way to go. To learn more, visit www.hedgefunds.com or call 1-800-273-8255. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. equity managers may use leverage to potentially increase an investment’s return without increasing the amount of capital invested. Although registered investment companies are subject to strict leverage limits, a hedge fund or private equity fund can make relatively unrestricted use of leverage. Leverage can magnify an investment's potential return by as much as 50 per cent, according to a report by the Bank for International Settlements (BIS) BIS says leverage can be used to increase the value of an investment by up to 40 per cent. BIS: Leverage can magnify an investment return by up to 80 per cent or more. The extent to which these smaller plans invest in hedge funds and private equity is unclear. In light of these trends and ongoing public equity market volatility, it is reasonable to expect that the number of plan sponsors making such investments will increase in the future. Our past work indicates that such assets may be of interest to plan sponsors in the near future, but the exact number is not yet known. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. Hedge funds and private equity are relatively illiquid investments. Investors generally cannot easily redeem their investments on demand. Hedge funds often require an initial lockup of a plan’s investment for a year or more. A private equity fund cycle typically follows a greater opportunity for oversight of the fund's operations and new investments, but this involves a significant time commitment and may not be feasible for every private equity investment.. Several plan sponsors address some of the risks and challenges of investing in hedge funds and. private equity by investing in them. After the initial lockup period, hedge funds offer only periodic liquidity. Hedge funds impose such liquidity limits because sudden liquidations could disrupt a carefully calibrated investment strategy. These constraints also pose certain disadvantages to plan sponsors, such as inhibiting a plan’s ability to raise money from outside the hedge fund industry. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. Smaller pension plans may find it particularly difficult to address the various demands of hedge fund investing. Smaller plans may have only one-or two-person staffs, or may lack the resources to hire outside consulting expertise and may be locked out of top-performing funds. Some plans may also lack the ability to conduct the necessary due diligence and monitoring of Hedge Fund investments. To learn more, visit www.pensionpensions.org or call 1-800-273-8255. Pension plan officials take a number of steps in an attempt to mitigate the risks and challenges of investing in hedge funds and private equity. Some larger plans may also lack sufficient expertise. A representative of one pension plan with more than $32 billion in total assets noted that the plan would have to build up its staff in order to conduct the due diligence necessary during the hedge fund trade.trades, and may have particularly grave consequences for the overall position of the hedge funds. The hedge fund industry has been in decline since the financial crisis of 2008. pension plans cited limited transparency as a prime reason they had chosen not to invest in hedge funds. As with hedge funds, valuations of private equity investments are uncertain during the investment’s long duration, which often lasts 10 years or more. Despite these fee structures, pension plan officials cited attaining returns superior to those attained in the stock market as a reason for investing in Hedge funds and private equity. One plan official noted that as long as hedge funds add value net of fees, they should be invested in. a pattern known as the J-curve, which reflects an initial period of negative returns during which investors provide the fund with capital to invest in underlying companies. We reported that pension plans investing in hedge funds are also exposed to operational risks. The J-Curve is a pattern of returns that occur over time as investments mature. It reflects a period when investors give the fund capital and then invest in the underlying companies and then obtain returns over time. It is also a pattern that occurs when the investments mature and the investors invest in them again. For example, pension plans may want to ensure that they will not pay a performance fee unless the value of the hedge fund investment passes a previous peak value. Key contract terms for private equity may also include fee structure and valuation. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. risk—that is, the risk of investment loss because of inadequate or failed internal processes, people, and systems. Operational problems can arise from a number of sources, including inexperienced operations personnel and inadequate internal controls. Lack of compliance standards and enforcement; errors in analyzing, trading, or errors in analyzed, trading or problems with external service providers can also lead to problems for investors. For more information, go to www.investorrelations.com or call 1-800-273-TALK (8255). Many hedge funds engage in active, complex, and sometimes heavily leveraged trading. A failure of operational functions, such as processing or clearing one or more positions, can lead to fraud or loss of money. Most investments can pose some type of operational risk, according to a report by an investment consulting firm. The report was published by the investment consulting company, PwC, on Wednesday, November 14. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. securities and derivatives whose valuation can be complex and subjective. A plan official may not be able to obtain timely information on the value of assets owned by a hedge fund. Further, hedge fund managers may decline to disclose information on asset holdings and the net value of individual assets. For confidential support call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. For support in the UK, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch or click here. largely because the release of such information could compromise their trading strategy. In addition, even if hedge fund managers were to provide detailed positions, these managers may seek to profit through complex and simultaneous positions. These managers can abruptly change their positions and trading tactics in order to achieve a desired outcome. The hedge fund industry is one of the most lucrative in the world, according to a recent report by The Wall Street Journal. The report said that hedge fund profits can be as high as $1.5 billion a year. return as changing market conditions warrant, making it difficult for plans to independently ascertain the value or fully assess the degree of investment risk. The report acknowledged that hedge fund investments are not necessarily suitable for some investors and provided many recommendations for investors selecting and monitoring their Hedge Fund investments. As with hedge fund Investments, plans take additional steps to mitigate the challenges of investing in private equity through extensive and ongoing monitoring, according to the report. It also noted that some hedge funds have improved disclosure and transparency about their operations because of the demands of institutional investors. of ERISA fiduciaries in selecting, valuing, and accounting for hard-to-value assets, of which many hedge funds and private equity funds are composed. In addition, the Investor’s Committee formed by the President's Working Group on Financial Markets published a report in January 2009 on the best practices for hedge fund investors. For more information, go to: www.hedgefundinvestor.com. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org.