A car certified as compliant with U.S. safety, emission, and fuel efficiency standards would be accepted as compliant in the EU. This approach would permit automakers to sell vehicles in either market if they meet either a U.s. standard or a standard accepted in the European Union. It would be called "C omprehensive mutual recognition" and would apply to all vehicles sold in the U.K. and the EU at the same time. It is not clear how it would be implemented in the United States. "Canada will recognise a list of EU car standards and will examine the recognition of further standards" Canadian vehicles can now be certified in Canada for the EU market. This will make it much easier to export cars to Canada, it is said. The agreement is also said to allow Canadian vehicles to be certified for the European market. It is also expected to allow the creation of a Canadian version of the Euro NCAP emissions test system, which would be the first of its kind in the world. the EU, and vice versa. This approach is how the EU certification process works. S elective mutual recognition . This approach would identify certain major standards for which TTIP could provide mutual recognition, rather than providing mutual recognition of all standards. U.S. and European automakers have identified occupant crash protection, which is a key part of the TTIP agreement. The EU and the U.K. have already agreed to a mutual recognition agreement on the safety of vehicles in the event of a TTIP. Since 1970, the EU has used the Whole Vehicle Type Approval system. An automaker must submit the "type" of vehicle it intends to manufacture and sell to the a version of "type approval" However, in the EU, emission standards only apply when the vehicle is produced (conformity of production) Once the vehicle leaves the factory and enters service, the manufacturer has no liability for its continued compliance with emission limits. Surveillance testing, mandatory emissions system warranties, recall campaigns, and recall campaigns are all part of the process. All EU member states enforce the EU standards. Unlike the UNECE standards, the EU system applies to a complete vehicle. Nearly every EU country has either a government agency or designated privately-owned test houses that conduct testing to ensure new models will meet all standards. Once an EU member state approves a new vehicle, it can be marketed throughout the EU. The EU agreed in 2007 that the UNecE regulations would be incorporated into the EU type-approval procedure. Once formal approval is obtained, the automaker then issues a "certificate of conformity" for each vehicle manufactured. UNECE regulations do not cover the whole vehicle, only its parts. WP.29's voting members are limited to government representatives, but automakers, trade associations, and other nongovernmental organizations also vote. A component approved for use in one signatory country will be automatically approved in all others. The new rules apply to vehicle components as well as the vehicle's whole structure. The rules will go into effect on January 1, 2015, and will apply to all signatory countries. a common practice for EU member countries to adopt standards and regulations similar to those issued by UNECE. The member states signed the Single European Act (SEA) in 1985 with a goal of unifying the European Union. Each country retained authority to adjust the UNecE standards as it saw fit. The European Union was established in 2004. The EU is the largest trading bloc in the world, with more than 500 million people living in member states. It has a population of more than 200 million people. originally used by UNECE and by the difficulty of obtaining agreement among so many individual countries. With the recent shift to decision procedures requiring less-than-unanimous agreement within the European Commission, it has been possible for the Commission to adopt more stringent emission standards. A comparison of current emissions standards for the European Union and the United States is shown in the next section of the report. The report was published by the European Council of Ministers (ECM) on November 14, 2013. 1958 agreement on vehicle construction and two related agreements which were adopted by some European countries to promote EU-wide integration of vehicle design, construction and safety. UNECE standards deal with vehicle safety, environmental protection, fuel efficiency, and anti-theft performance. Signatories to the 1958 U.N. agreement commit to mutual recognition of each other's standards and standards for vehicle design and construction in the European Union. The agreement was signed by the European Commission, the European Court of Justice and the European Council of Ministers. Some European automakers "preferred to limit the extension of standards to those that would create obstacles to the invasion of foreign vehicles into their national markets" Over time, the balance shifted to favor more similarity between U.S. and EU standards. Some European automakers still prefer to use the UNECE standards process, but are less dependent on it now than they were in the early 1990s and early 2000s. Some automakers still favor the UNEECE process, though. The U.N. has a standards committee that meets every two years to set new global standards. (3) a final clearance applied to verify that properly maintained vehicles continue to meet the standards after several years of use. Environmental matters were not included in the EU's founding Treaty of Rome. Prior to the mid-1980s, UNECE produced regulations relating to safety, environmental protection, and energy efficiency. It was not until the 1990s that the EU began to regulate environmental matters. The EU's first environmental regulations were published in 1994. The first EU-wide regulation was published in 1998. The United States did not sign the 1958 UNECE agreement because it would require mutual recognition of standards generated outside the United States. After U.S. self-certification began in 1967, the UNecE approach was seen as incompatible with the U. s. process. Because the United states remained outside of the UNEECE meetings, it did not.participate in its meetings. The United States has since self- certified its own standards for the first time in the 1970s. under this chapter.... Certification of a vehicle must be shown by a label or tag permanently fixed to the vehicle ..." The law also makes manufacturers responsible for testing of vehicles and liable for recalls and penalties if they are later found not to meet NHTSA's standards. After a new law is passed, manufacturers will be required to test and certify their vehicles before they can be sold to the public. The law will go into effect on January 1, 2015. It is expected to be signed into law by President Barack Obama. NHTSA buys vehicles from dealers and tests them at its own facilities. If NHTSA determines there is noncompliance, it can encourage the manufacturer to recall the model to correct the problem or can order a recall. In the U.S., the agency has the power to order recalls if it feels there is a risk of safety hazards in the vehicle. In Europe, the agency can order recalls to correct safety problems in certain models of vehicles. In Australia, it has the right to recall vehicles if it finds they are at risk of being unsafe. substantial improvement in the safety characteristics of vehicles. Since it was established, NHTSA has issued dozens of safety standards, and it maintains an extensive database on vehicle crashes. However, the agency neither approves motor vehicles or parts as complying with its standards nor collects information from manufacturers as to compliance. The agency does not have the power to fine or fine manufacturers for not meeting its standards or for not complying with them. It does, however, have the authority to issue fines or penalties for violations of its standards. The law puts the onus for enforcement of federal standards on automakers themselves. It provides that "a manufacturer or distributor of a motor vehicle or motor vehicle equipment shall certify to the distributor or dealer at delivery that the vehicle or equipment complies with applicable motor vehicle safety standards prescribed" The law also requires that manufacturers certify that their products comply with federal safety standards for motor vehicles and other vehicles that are sold to the public in the U.S. The law goes into effect on January 1, 2015. The U.S. signed a 1998 UNECE agreement which establishes global technical regulations (GTRs) GTRs are issued in a UN Global Registry and contracting parties use their own regulatory process to implement them. Unlike the 1958 agreement, there is no requirement for type approval and mutual recognition of approvals. The World Forum for Harmonization of Vehicle Regulations promulgates regulations affecting vehicle safety, environmental protection, energy efficiency, and anti-theft performance. It is a U.N. body with a global approach. side impact protection, child restraint systems, and some emissions standards as priorities for selective mutual recognition. F orward-looking rules . A fourth option would be to forge an agreement on emerging regulations, such as those dealing with electric and fuel cell vehicles, rather than focusing on existing regulations. Under this option, the EU would be able to set its own standards for electric vehicles, fuel cell cars, and other forms of propulsion. The EU would also have the power to impose fines on companies that fail to meet emissions standards. Congress may well be asked to modify the underlying statutes that govern motor vehicle safety, emissions, and fuel efficiency. If the TTIP effort to obtain mutual recognition or harmonization affects agencies' authority or changes the ways in which automotive regulations are developed and implemented, Congress may well have to modify those statutes. U.S. Emission Standards U.N. Emissions.emissions. and Fuel Efficiency Standards are among the laws that could be affected by TTIP. The European Union and the United States are negotiating a trade deal that would harmonize emissions and safety standards. obtaining functional equivalency determinations from regulatory agencies might be difficult. An alternative approach was developed in the 1998 UN agreement on global technical regulations, which created a global registry of processes and common technical standards. This initiative, resulting in the creation of the World Forum for Harmonization of Vehicle Regulations, has led to the development of new standards for vehicle safety and emissions. The new standards are expected to be in place by the end of the year, according to the International Council on Harmonized Vehicle Regulations. conformity and to encourage collaborative testing and certification. The 1996 TransAtlantic Automotive Industry Conference on International Regulatory Harmonization produced a report on the auto sector. NHTSA sent a report to Congress in April 1997 discussing potential harmonization of U.S. and European side of the auto industry. The report included ten principles to guide steps toward convergence. It was released to the public in October 1997 and has since become part of the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) program. convergence of automotive regulations under TTIP. These include the following: H armonization of rules . Harmonization need not mean having identical rules in both regions. From the viewpoint of auto manufacturers, it means minimizing unnecessary differences in regulations so that a "single vehicle standard" can be built to satisfy all. The EU and the U.S. are negotiating a trade deal to harmonize automotive regulations in Europe and the United States. The deal is expected to be completed by the end of 2014. mutual recognition of existing technical standards and the creation of a U.S.-EU process for harmonization of future vehicle regulations. Such steps, an industry alliance has contended, would "increase trade, lower costs, create jobs and improve the international competitiveness of the industry" Many countries, including the United States, have adopted new standards that will be costly for manufacturers to meet. Automakers have responded by creating partnerships to develop more powerful batteries, multispeed transmissions, techniques to improve engine efficiency. has potential drawbacks. The rule-making process is already lengthy, and the need for international coordination could make it even longer. This raises the prospect that technologies may not be developed as quickly as expected. The lack of speed with which governmental agencies can address new technologies and vehicle innovations is one of the drawbacks of the plan. The U.S. and Europe need to work together to make the plan a success, says the U.N.’s Ban Ki-moon, the head of the International Commission on Automotive Research. impact standards. A similar bilateral regulatory initiative has been under way since 2011 with Canada. An EU initiative, the Competitive Automotive Regulatory System for the 21s Century, or CARS 21, has also explored harmonization issues. In 2006, CARs 21 called for gradually replacing some EU laws with UN regulations. More than 40 EU directives have been replaced with corresponding UN regulations since that time. There are different ways in which the U.S. and the EU could address the issue of harmonization. that could reduce accidents may be delayed in reaching the market. EU acknowledges that if vehicle standards become international, there could be less room for legislative scrutiny and for involvement by regional and national governments. New types of headlamps that can illuminate the road better without blinding oncoming drivers may not reach the market in time. If vehicle standards are international, the EU says, there may be less time for legislative and regulatory scrutiny. The EU says this could lead to delays in the development of new technologies. EU establish vehicle safety, fuel efficiency, and emission standards. In the U.S., private standards and state regulation prevailed until the 1960s and 1970s. Since then, Congress has delegated vehicle regulation to federal agencies. In Europe, a system of governmental control over autos was more prevalent, first in each country and later through the EU.. The EU directives passed by the European Parliament have the force of regulations, thereby vesting the legislators with a more direct role in the regulatory process than is the case in the United States. European vehicle regulatory regime now includes both EU directives, and standards promulgated through a United Nations organization. In 1952, the United Nations established the Working Party on the Construction Council and Transport & Environment participate in the EU standard-setting process. European, U.S. and Japanese auto industry groups sought common regulatory ground in 1996, when they proposed that the United States, the EU, Japan, and UNECE harmonize regulation of five vehicle components, including windshield wipers, defoggers, and seat belt assemblies. basis for vehicle approval harmonization across all member states. Initially, European working groups on vehicle safety issues based their work on U.S. standards and practice because the United States had established a federal safety program earlier. It has been suggested that one reason for the slow development of European standards is the lack of a national safety program in the U.K. and other European countries. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. level is led by European Commission's Directorate of Enterprise and Industry. Vehicle safety promotion is also pursued by the European Commission through initiatives such as DG Transport's EU road safety action program and DG Information and Society's E-safety and Intelligent Car initiatives. Programs to address air pollution in the United States are led by the EPA's Air Pollution Prevention and Control program. The European Commission is also involved in the development of the Euro NCAP air quality standard. The Euro NCP air quality standards aim to reduce air pollution by 20 per cent by 2020. In the United States, these include the Insurance Institute for Highway Safety, American National Standards Institute (ANSI), National Safety Council, the Center for Auto Safety, and Advocates for Highway and Auto Safety. In the EU, nonprofit groups such as the European Transport Safety Safety, are responsible for identifying and publicizing new vehicle standards. in the U.S. These include the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) and the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) in Washington, D.C. The International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) develops and publishes international standards for electrical, electronic, and other related technologies. Standards are typically developed through negotiation in technical committees comprising representatives of many countries. ISO has developed nearly 20,000 standards across a range of industries. For example, a 2010 ISO standard addressed automotive crankshaft bearings.services. IEC standards related to motor vehicles concern charging system architecture, lithium batteries, and others. Various other private-sector advocacy groups are engaged. About 10% of NHTSA and EPA standards are based on work SAE has already done. International Organization for Standardization ( ISO) was founded in 1947. ISO develops voluntary international standards for many products and emissions.or emissions. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. The only useful and politically acceptable action Congress might take was to help the states and localities construct more and better roads. The Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE), a professional association founded in 1905, became the primary source of vehicle safety and emission rules for many decades. Regulating interstate commerce is the only way to ensure the safety of the nation's roads and highways. The U.S. government should not regulate interstate commerce, but help states construct better roads, says the U.N. secretary-general. NGOs play a role in the setting of vehicle standards, including these entities. Society of Automotive Engineers ( SAE ) remains involved in developing recommended standards for industry. SAE has issued or updated about 2,000 motor vehicle standards in the past five years. Many address manufacturing processes, not auto safety, says SAE's chief of standards, Mark O'Mara. He says the standards are meant to be a guide for industry, not a safety guide for consumers. The standards are intended to be voluntary, not mandatory, he says. State governments often used SAE recommendations to enact requirements for vehicle equipment. Other SAE standards were adopted directly by manufacturers. The first step toward a nationwide system of vehicle regulation came in 1926, when a voluntary Uniform Vehicle Code was drafted to regulate vehicles. The U.S. National Highway Traffic Safety Administration is the nation's oldest and largest highway safety agency, with more than 100,000 employees. It was established in 1966 and is based in Washington, D.C. The National Highway Transportation Safety Administration was founded in 1974. In 2012, the EU 27 produced more than the United States—16.2 million vehicles compared to 10.3 million. Seventeen of the EU member states manufacture vehicles. Germany is by far the largest auto producer within the EU (see Figure 2 ). The five top countries—Germany, Spain, France, United Kingdom and Czech Republic—manufacture more than 76% of all vehicles produced in the EU. In the U.S., vehicles are manufactured in 15 states. Unlike some consumer goods, such as computers and apparel, most vehicles are sold in the United states. region where they are produced because of local consumer preferences and vehicle standards. In 2012, imports constituted about 20% of U.S. sales, and about 17% of sales in the EU. In some cases, a vehicle that is entirely legal in one country may not be sold in another due to local consumer preference or standards. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. For support in the United States, contact the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline on 1-800-273-8255. jointly develop fuel cell technology. Growing U.S. interest in diesel-powered vehicles. About half of all the passenger cars sold in Europe have diesel engines. Many automakers believe that offering diesels (as well as higher-performing models) is a good move for the U.K. and Europe in the long-term. For more, go to CNN.com/soulmatestories and follow us on Twitter @cnnstories and @louis_jennifer. gasoline, electric, and hybrid vehicles) will be necessary to meet higher U.S. fuel efficiency and greenhouse gas emissions standards currently projected between now and 2025. Having similar standards for diesel engines in the two regions could reduce design and manufacturing costs. The processes by which the United States and the United Kingdom produce diesel engines could be similar to those used in other countries, such as Germany and France. The two countries could also share some of the same technology and know-how to reduce production costs. differing fuel efficiency, safety, and emissions standards, unless the manufacturer is willing to make major investments to bring the vehicle into compliance. Ford Motor Company's ECOnetic high-efficiency diesel engine, made in Great Britain, gets up to 71 miles per gallon (mpg) of fuel. This engine is not sold in the U.S. and is not available for sale in the United States. For example, Ford Motor Co.'s high- efficiency diesel engine is made in Britain and is available for purchase only in the UK. auto manufacturers and their parts suppliers have sought to organize their production on a global basis. The German automaker BMW, as an example, produces sport utility vehicles for markets worldwide from a plant in South Carolina. Greater commonality in regulation would make it easier for automakers and parts makers to produce vehicles worldwide, experts say. The U.S. Department of Justice is considering a proposal that would require automakers to produce their vehicles in a single plant in the United States. The proposal is expected to be announced in the coming months. coordinate production across major markets. Automakers are developing global vehicle platforms that will reduce the number of models sold around the world. This is consistent with individual companies' efforts to reduce costs with new design and production plans, such as the following: Reducing platforms. consolidating suppliers and cutting costs. Reducing production costs by consolidating production and selling more vehicles in one place. Cutting costs by reducing production and marketing costs by selling more cars in a single place in the same market. in North America because it does not comply with U.S. and Canadian emissions standards. Ford has determined that expanding its Mexican engine plant to make a redesigned version of the ECOnetic for North America would cost $350 million. Ford does not believe consumer demand justifies the expenditure. Increasingly, however, it says, consumers are looking for a more fuel-efficient vehicle that can go from 0-60 mph in less than four seconds and that can have a higher top speed of more than 100 mph. For example, the new Jeep Cherokee and Dodge Dart are based on Fiat's Compact Wide platform. The Ford Focus was developed in Europe but is built with similar components in the United States, China, Germany, Russia, and Thailand and sold in 130 countries. Joining forces to meet tightening world emission standards is a key part of the new alliance between the U.S. and Europe. The new alliance is expected to be in place by the end of the year, with the aim of reducing emissions by 20 per cent. The Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP) would seek greater compatibility of U.S. and EU regulations and related standards development processes. TTIP represents another effort to extend these regional templates to encompass a greater share of trade and investment. The full text of the agreement has not been released, but according to an EU statement, the United States and the EU would commit to jointly develop standards covering new issues or technologies. The pending free trade agreement between the EU and Canada may influence the direction of TTIP. Trade in vehicles and parts between the United States and the EU reached $57 billion in 2012. The major U.S. and European motor vehicle manufacturer associations have called for TTIP to provide for better trade rules for the two countries. The EU and United States have been negotiating a trade deal for more than a year. The negotiations are expected to be completed by the end of the year or early 2015. For more information on TTIP, go to: http://www.ttip.org/. facilitating trade, inter alia by promoting transparency in the development and implementation of regulations and good regulatory practices. The formal TTIP negotiations began in July 2013. Motor vehicle safety and emissions standards are areas where the United States could play an important role if a TTIP agreement contains significant provisions related to auto safety, emissions, and fuel economy regulations. Congress established the U.S. government agencies whose regulations are the focus of the negotiations on automobile standards, and it has retained a strong oversight interest in vehicle safety. interest groups . U.S. consumer advocacy groups have raised similar concerns. TTIP "must not limit the United States or the EU (or its member states) from adopting and enforcing standards that provide higher levels of consumer, worker, and environmental protection," the groups wrote in a July 2013 letter to EU leaders. Congress is expected to vote on the deal in the coming weeks. The U.N. Security Council is also expected to approve the deal. The EU and the U. S. are expected to sign off on the agreement in the next few months. In November 2011, President Obama and leaders of the European Union (EU) named a High Level Working Group on Jobs and Growth to recommend steps to broaden transatlantic economic ties. In its final report, issued in February 2013, the working group called for a new bilateral agreement to govern transatlantic relations. The working group's final report was published in November 2013 and called for steps to be taken to expand transatlantic trade and investment. The group's report was issued in November 2011 and issued in December 2012. trade and investment. Such an agreement, the working group urged, should provide for "the promotion of more compatible approaches to current and future regulation and standard-setting" One month later, President Obama notified Congress that the United States would enter into negotiations with the European Union on trade and investment in the U.S. The U.N. working group called for "more compatible approaches" to regulation and standards. It also urged "other means of reducing non-tariff barriers to trade" agreements have been effective in leading to a more globalized auto industry. The 1965 motor vehicle agreement between the U.S. and Canada and the 1994 North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) removed barriers to trade and cross-border trade in autos. These agreements established a more regional motor vehicle industry in the United States, Canada, Mexico and the rest of the world. The agreement also led to the creation of the North American Passenger Car Association (NAPCA) in 1994. The U.S.-EU High-Level Regulatory Cooperation Forum has resulted in agreement on only 13 global technical regulations to date. Simultaneously, there has been a transatlantic dialogue on autos since the mid-1990s. In 1995, President Clinton signed an action plan which sought to move the United States and Europe toward regulatory regulation. The U.K. and France are the only countries in the world that do not have a national auto-regulatory body. The European Union has a national automotive-regulations body, the European Commission. Current non-tariff barriers on vehicles are equivalent to a 26% tariff on vehicle imports. U.S. vehicle and parts exports to the EU could be increased by over 200% if tariffs and other barriers are removed, according to a new report by the International Council on Tariffs and Customs (ICTC) The report was published by the ICTC on Tuesday. It is the first of its kind and is available on the ICC's website. For more information, go to www.ICTC.org. The European Economy Community (renamed the European Community in 1993) and its successor, the EU, have sought to promote a single European market in motor vehicles. Tariffs on cars traded between member states were eliminated in 1968. In 1970, the European community enacted a framework that laid the groundwork for the single market in cars. The European Economic Community (UECE) and the European Economic and Social Community (EEC) were established in 1966 and 1967 respectively. UNECE and the EEC were dissolved in 1993. WP.29 is a subsidiary body of the Inland Transport Committee of the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe (UNECE) WP.29 administers a Working Party 29 or WP.of Vehicles. The objective is to "initiate and pursue actions aimed at the worldwide harmonization or development of technical regulations for vehicles" WP. of Vehicles is based in Geneva, Switzerland, and is led by the European Commission for Transport (ECT) and the European Union (EU), respectively. such a manner as to have serious adverse effects on the automotive manufacturing industry. The committee is not empowering the Secretary to take over the design and manufacturing functions of private industry. It expects that the Secretary will act responsibly and in such a way as to achieve a positive outcome for the automotive industry in the UK. The Committee expects the Secretary of State for Transport to act responsibly, and to do so in a way that does not have a negative impact on the industry. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. 2020.2020. 2020.2020, the year of the next president of the United States, Barack Obama, will be announced on October 1, 2020. Obama will be the first black president of a major U.S. political party to be inaugurated in a presidential election. Obama is expected to win the White House on November 4, 2020, with Hillary Clinton as the Democratic presidential candidate. The election will be held on November 8, 2020 in Washington, D.C. and in Los Angeles, California on November 9, 2020 on November 10, 2020 at 8 p.m. Current EPA emissions standards for vehicles regulate CO. "Tier 2" standards have been in place since 2004. EPA announced proposed Tier 3 standards on March 29, 2013. Anyone wishing to sell an engine or vehicle in the U.S. must meet more stringent " tier 2" emission standards. Under the Tier 2 regulations, the same emission standards apply under the Tier 3 regulations. In addition to exhaust emission standards, regulations address many other emission-related issues. The regulations are first published as proposed rules. They may be withdrawn, approved, or amended before entering into force. than vehicles with smaller engines. Tier 2 emission standards were structured into eight permanent and three temporary certification levels. Manufacturers had a choice to certify particular vehicles to any of the available bins, but were required to certify all vehicles to the same level. The standards were designed to provide flexibility to vehicle manufacturers, the EPA says. It's not clear if the standards will be rolled out to more vehicles in the U.S. in the coming years, the agency says. For more information, go to the EPA's website. Vehicle emissions standards established by the EU and the United States are not directly comparable because of the differences in the testing procedures and approval processes. Both the European and the U.S. systems of compliance are based on and other features of U.s. emissions regulation are not incorporated in the European regulatory structure. The test procedure, in particular the drive cycle that a car has to go through on a roller bench while the car is being tested, is a key difference between the two countries. EPA authority to regulate vehicle emissions is based on the Clean Air Act. As with safety regulations, the United States must demonstrate compliance with the CAA and all applicable EPA regulations. This approval process differs from the self-certification used by NHTSA and is closer to the EU type approval system for safety and emissions regulations. Once EPA sets emission standards for a particular engine and/or vehicle category, the U.S. must comply with the standards set by the EPA for that category. manufacturers must produce engines that meet those standards by a specified date. Conformity is determined under test procedures specified by EPA. The most common testing procedure used by EPA is the Federal Test Procedure, as mandated by the Energy Tax Act of 1978. Tests are based on the Urban Dynamometer, which is used to measure engine power and fuel efficiency in a given engine. The National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) developed the NIST test system, which tests engine power, fuel efficiency, and other parameters. Driving Schedule to reflect typical driving patterns (e.g., city, highway, aggressive, and use of air conditioning) Currently, EPA uses a three-tiered compliance strategy for light-duty vehicles: (1) pre-production evaluation to certify vehicles prior to sale; (2) a production evaluation on the assembly line for early evaluation of production vehicles; and (3) a test drive on the road before the vehicle goes on sale. For more information, visit www.epa.gov. Vehicle exhaust emissions were regulated in Europe beginning in 1970. Directive 70/220/EEC covered CO, NO x , PM, and HC emissions from gasoline-fueled light-duty vehicles. In June 1991, the Council of Ministers of the European Council adopted the Consolidated Emissions Directive (commonly referred to as "Euro 1") under which exhaust emission standards for all passenger cars, including diesels, were certified. The Council of ministers has since adopted several stricter emission standards. Current standards cover CO, NO x , PM, and HC emissions, and differentiate between gasoline and diesel vehicles. Euro 6 standards are scheduled to be implemented in September 2014 (strengthening NO x standards revisions to the Euro 1 standards) EU emission limits for each "Euro" stage are summarized in Table A-2. U.S. Fuel Economy and Greenhouse Gas Standards are listed in the table below. The 2012 CAFE and GHG vehicle standards were published by the EPA in June 2012. The evolution of EU exhaust emission standards for light-duty, gasoline- and diesel-fueled vehicles is traced in Table A-2 of the Appendix. The EU uses the New European Drive Cycle (NEDC) and the United States uses the Federal Test Procedure (FTP) Differences between the two include distance, duration, and vehicle speed, as well as factors such as whether the vehicle must begin at a cold temperature. For diesel vehicles, emissions are currently tested using the European Driving Cycle (ECE 15 + EUDC) 2000 with the Euro 3 standard, the test procedure was modified to eliminate the engine warm-up period before the beginning of emission sampling. Further, the Euro 5/6 implementing legislation introduced a new PM mass emission measurement method which is used in the Euro 6 test procedure. The test procedure has been modified to bring it more in line with the U.S. Federal Test Procedure. For more information on Euro 6 testing, visit Euro 6 Test Procedure and Euro 5 Test Procedure, or go to: http://www.euro6test.org/. between the two regions is challenging because these standards differ greatly in structure, form, and underlying testing methods. For example, the EU and the U.S. test cycles differ in terms of average speed, duration, distance, acceleration and deceleration characteristics, and frequencies of starts and stops. All factors which significantly affect the outcome of a test cycle, and can have a significant impact on a vehicle's performance. For more information, visit the European Automobile Association's website or go to www.europeanautomobile.org. start or whether there is a warm-up period. Some observers have noted that the European emission standards have historically lagged behind the U.S. standards. This lag may be attributed to the complex, consensus-based approach to standard setting, they say. The European Parliament is expected to vote on a bill this week that would require the European Union to set its own emission standards for cars by 2015. The bill would require that the EU set a minimum level of emission control technology required for compliance. setting more complex, as NHTSA and EPA issue separate standards but act in concert. The combined standards call for fleet-average passenger car and light truck GHG emissions of no more than 163 grams per mile by 2025. This translates into a 54.5 mile-per-gallon equivalent. The GHG standards are based on CO 2 emissions-footprint curves, where each vehicle has a different CO2 emissions compliance target. The standards are for both passenger cars and light trucks. standards for GHG emissions in terms of the mass of CO 2 , measured in grams, emitted from a vehicle's tailpipe per kilometer driven (g/km) These standards can be used to estimate fuel economy for vehicles sold in Europe. The first carbon dioxide emission targets for new passenger cars in data returned by the tests. Further, the U.S. standard regulates all theGHG emissions from the vehicle (e.g., CO 2, NO x , CH 4 ) in termsof CO 2 -equivalents; the EU regulates only carbon dioxide emissions. cover only CO 2 emissions; other greenhouse gases are not regulated. Emission limits are set according to the mass of vehicle using a fleet-average limit value curve. As with the other EU regulated vehicle emissions, CO2 emissions are measured over the NEDC test cycle. The United States regulates the United States regulate the U.S. version of the CO 2 limit. For more information on the EU's CO 2 limits, visit: www.europa.gov/co2. selected pollutants (including non-methane organic gases [NMOG], nitrogen oxides [NOx], and particulate matter [PM]) is shown in Figure 3 . For a more detailed survey of the standards in each region, see the Appendix . In the United States, establishing fuel economy standards is a function of direct statutory authority. In the U.S., establishing fuel Economy Standards is a Function of Direct statutory Authority (FAA) FAA: Fuel Economy Standards for Cars and Trucks. pick-up trucks, and covered the four major pollutants (CO, NO x , PM, and HC) Separate sets of standards were defined for each vehicle category, with more relaxed limits for heavier vehicles. The CAAA also required EPA to study the need for a new fuel economy standard for heavy vehicles, such as trucks and SUVs, to reduce CO emissions. The standards were set to go into effect on January 1, 2015. For confidential support call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org. by 71%. Safety, fuel efficiency, and emissions standards differ between the two regions. The United States and the EU have different standards even for an item as region. In general the EU GHG standards return a greater sales-based and fleet-wide emission reduction than those in the United States. Figure 4 represents an estimate of historical and projected fuel economy targets, adjusted for the factors outlined above. In the U.S. and the European Union, the average fuel economy is estimated to be about 20% lower than it was in the 1990s. meet a fleet-average requirement for NO x emissions in any given model year. U.S. emissions standards are shown in Table A-1 . EU standards are based on grams per kilometer. Note that Tables A -1 and A-2 are not strictly comparable because U-S. standards are. based on gram per mile, and EU standards. are based. on gramsper kilometer, and U.N. standards based ongram per mile. U-N. standard is based on kilograms per mile; EU standard is grams per km; and so on. Under the Tier 2 regulation, the same emission standards apply to all vehicle weight categories. Since light-duty emission standards are expressed in grams of pollutants per mile, vehicles with large engines (such light trucks or SUVs) were required to use more advanced emission control technologies. The same emission limits apply. to all vehicles regardless of the fuel they use. The limit is the same for cars, minivans, light- duty trucks, and SUVs, and for all other vehicles with the same weight. This measurement procedure allows heavier cars to have higher emissions than lighter cars while preserving the overall fleet average. As a result, each manufacturer will have its own fleet-wide standard which reflects the vehicles it chooses to produce. For a summary of the 2012 CAFE and GHG vehicle standards, see the CAFE/GHG Vehicle Standards for 2012, published by NEDC on March 31, 2012. For the 2012 GHG/CAFE Vehicle Standards, see GHG for 2012 and CAFE for 2011, published on April 1, 2012, by NECD on March 1, 2013. to the mass of a vehicle, whereas the United States sets fleet-average standards based on the vehicle "footprint" Finally, the EU and United States use varying definitions of vehicle categories and weight classes, with proposed targets based on projected sales of vehicles in different size and/or weight classes within each country. The EU and U.S. use varying Definitions of Vehicle categories and Weight Classes, while the EU uses a definition based on a vehicle's size and weight, and the U. S. uses a definitions based on its mass. target for any given vehicle depends on its track width (the horizontal distance between the tires) and its wheelbase (the distance from the front to the rear axles) No specific vehicle must meet a specific target, but a manufacturer's fleet average must be below the sales-weighted average of the targets. For example, a car with a track width of 2.5 inches can have a wheelbase of 3.0 inches. For a car that has a trackwidth of 3 inches, the wheelbase can be 3.5 feet. Conservation Act of 1975 (EPCA) established Corporate Average Fuel Economy (CAFE) standards for new passenger vehicles starting with model year (MY) 1978. From 1975 to 1988, the average fuel economy of new automobiles increased 81%, from 15.8 to 28.6 mpg. EPCA prohibited states from issuing their own fuel efficiency standards. E PCA was passed by Congress in 1975 and signed into law by President Nixon in 1978. It was the first law of its kind in the United States. Congress granted NHTSA broader authority to establish and modify CAFE standards. The most significant recent change in fuel economy standards took place outside of the previous channel of congressional action. In 2009, the Obama Administration, some state regulators, and the auto industry crafted a federal program to boost fuel economy. The goal is to get to 50.35 mpg by 2020, up from 40.5 mpg in 2012. The Obama Administration has said it wants to reach the goal by 2025. The auto industry wants to hit 50.5 by 2020. from Congress, with NHTSA administering the congressionally established standards. The U.S. first issued vehicle fuel economy standards in response to the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) oil embargo of 1973. The embargo caused imported crude oil prices to rise by 300% in 1974. In the Energy Policy and In the energy policy and policy of the United States, the EPA is responsible for setting the standards for fuel economy in cars and light trucks. For more, go to: http://www.nhtsa.gov/energy. Before 2007, NHTSA had very little authority to modify passenger car standards without congressional direction. Energy Independence and Security Act of 2007 (EISA) raised fuel economy standards of passenger vehicles, light trucks, and sport utility vehicles to a combined average of at least 50 miles per gallon. The new standards will take effect on January 1, 2014. For more information on the new standards, go to: http://www.nhtsa.gov/passenger-vehicle-standards. implement new light duty vehicle fuel efficiency standards linked to greenhouse gas (GHG) emission standards. This agreement grew out of the fuel efficiency Standards passed by Congress in 2007, and a Supreme Court decision confirming federal authority to regulate greenhouse gas emissions of vehicles under the CAA. GHG emission standards will be linked to the new standards for light duty vehicles. The agreement will take effect on January 1, 2015. It will apply to light duty cars and light duty trucks built after December 31, 2015, and to all vehicles built after April 1, 2016. enacted in California and subsequently adopted by 13 other states and the District of Columbia. The agreement enabled automakers to manufacture vehicles that are in compliance with both federal and state requirements under the Clean Air Act as well as the CAFE standards. The combined CAFE/GHG standards have made standard for all new vehicles in the U.S. and around the world. For more, go to CNN.com/soulmatestories and follow us on Twitter @SoulMatters and @CNNOpinion. The Clean Air Act Amendments (CAAA) of 1990 ( P.L. 101-549 ) established standards to limit tailpipe emissions from new motor vehicles effective in 1994. These Tier 1 standards applied to all new light-duty vehicles, such as passenger cars, light- duty trucks, sport utility vehicles (SUVs), minivans, and minibuses. The standards were intended to reduce the amount of tailpipe pollution from new cars and trucks by up to 30% by the end of the decade. program flexibilities include Air Conditioning Improvement Credits, Advanced Technology Credits, Off-Cycle Innovative Technology Credits and Early Credits. CAFE and GHG emission certification is typically based on fuel economy and emission data provided by vehicle manufacturers after two laboratory test cycles dictated by EPA. This year's credits will be available for the first time on January 1, 2015. The program will also be available on a two-year, three-year and five-year basis in 2016 and 2017. The credits can be applied to a range of vehicle types. The regulation also includes a system of averaging, banking, and trading (ABT) of credits, based on a manufacturer's fleet average CO 2 performance. Credit trading is allowed among all vehicles a manufacturer produces, both cars and light trucks, as well as between companies. The EU GHG Standards and Implementation The EU does not have a set of GHG standards for light trucks and cars, but does have a series of standards for cars and other vehicles. The European Commission has a standard for light vehicles, but not light trucks. CAFE values are generally higher than typical fuel efficiency in real-world operation. This discrepancy reflects the fact that the EPA 2-cycle test is not wholly representative of vehicle operation patterns and technology. The EU does not set fuel economy standards for vehicles directly in terms of fuel consumption for a given distance traveled. Instead, it sets the fuel economy standard for a city, town, or rural area for the city or town to be met in a given period of time. For more information on the EU's fuel economy rules, go to: http://www.fueleconomy.org/. fuel efficiency of each manufacturer's new-vehicle fleet through the CAFE standards. The EU does not directly regulate vehicle fuel efficiency, although regulation of GHG emissions pushes manufacturers to achieve greater fuel efficiency. Comparing vehicle GHG and/or fuel economy standards depending on its "footprint" value, related to the size of the vehicle—an approach first introduced in the reformed CAFE (2008-2011) standards for light trucks. EU fleet-average CO 2 emission targets as required by EU Regulation (EC) No 443/2009 are 130 g/km to be reached by 2015. Europe were set in 1998-99 through voluntary agreements between the European Commission and the automotive industry. These agreements targeted fleet-average CO 2 emissions of 140 g/km by 2008-09. After 2004 the manufacturers failed to meet their targets through voluntary actions. In response, the Commission developed a mandatory CO 2 emission reduction program, and CO2 emission targets for new passenger cars were adopted in April 2009. The regulation established a fleet- average CO 2 target of 130 g/ km by 2015 and defined a long-term target of 95 g. CO 2 /km by 2020. The standards include incentives for vehicles with CO 2 emissions below 50 g/km and for those running on a mixture of 85% ethanol (E85) Certain flexibilities are available for manufacturers, including credits for technology innovations, pooling between manufacturers, and exemptions for low-volume manufacturers. The regulations are expected to come into force by 2020, with a deadline of December 31, 2015. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. figures because the EPA allows additional CO 2 credits for air conditioning improvements and other flexibilities. In addition to the fleet-average CO 2 emission targets, the rule also includes emission caps for tailpipe nitrous oxide and methane emissions (N 2 O: 0.010 g/mile and CH 4 : 0.030g/mile) The EPA allows extra CO 2 Credits for air Conditioning Improvements and other Flexibilities. The rule also allows emission caps. for Tailpipe Nitrous Oxide and Methane Emissions. simple as a seat belt. Some of these differences may reflect past efforts to protect domestic vehicle industries against foreign competition. Others may result from different legal traditions or divergent views as to the best way to achieve goals such as cleaner air and reduced oil consumption. Past auto industry efforts may also be to blame for some of the differences between the U.S. and other countries in the auto industry. The U.K. is the largest car market in the world, followed by Germany, France and Italy. They believed that these five components were functionally equivalent, although each was slightly different. The regulatory bodies did not agree to any changes, however, because the data-driven review process made it difficult to prove functional equivalency of even a standard component such as a seat belt. This experience suggested that it was time to make changes to the design of the seat belt, the authors said. They added that it would be a good idea to make the seatbelt more comfortable for passengers, as well as safer for them. must have a role. It is obvious the 50 states cannot individually set standards for the automobiles that come into those 50 States from a mass production industry. Curtailing auto-related highway deaths was a major impetus. As passed unanimously by both houses of Congress and signed by President Johnson, the law was passed unanimously and signed into law by President Lyndon Johnson. The law was signed on November 22, 1964. It was signed by the President on November 23, 1964, and signed onto a joint resolution by the Houses of Congress. The bill was passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate. based primarily on testimonies by the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare (HEW) and the automotive industry about the potential problems that would be created for vehicle manufacturers by divergent state standards. Congress strengthened federal authority in 1967 by explicitly preempting states from adopting or enforcing new motor vehicle emission standards. In 1967, Congress passed a bill that preempted states from enforcing or adopting new motor vehicles emission rules. The law was signed into law on August 1, 1967. The bill was passed with a vote of 98-0. In the early decades of the automobile, U.S. vehicles were lightly regulated by a combination of state and private sector standards. While one industry magazine called for national motor vehicle standards as early as 1902, it did so mainly to reassure would-be buyers of the structural changes.in the United States. In the early 1950s, the National Motor Vehicle Standards Board was formed to set national standards for motor vehicles. It was later replaced by the National Automobile Manufacturers Association (NMA) in the 1970s. integrity these new, little-understood machines. Regulating either driver conduct or vehicle design at the national level did not conform to existing political ideas about the appropriate federal division of responsibilities or to contemporary jurisprudential understandings of the federal government's constitutional power to protect the public, one author said. "It's not a good idea to try to regulate the behavior of people who are driving cars," he said. 'It's a bad idea to attempt to regulate what people are doing on the road," he added. By 1946, 30 of the then 48 states (plus the District of Columbia) had adopted the Uniform Vehicle Code. Among other things, the code specified the types of lighting, reflectors, brakes, mirrors, and tires that cars should have. These ideas were widely accepted by the states and were adopted by the federal government in the 1950s and 1960s. The code was designed to. replace the many different state rules. for cars, trucks, and buses. It was created by the U.S. Department of Justice in 1945. the Secretary of Commerce (later changed to the Secretary of Transportation when that agency was established in 1967) to issue safety standards for all motor vehicles beginning in January 1967. A National Traffic Safety Agency was established to carry out the provisions. It was renamed the National Highway Traffic Safety Safety Agency in 1970. The agency was later renamed the Department of Highway and Transportation. It is now known as the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) and the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) The NTSB issued the standards in 1967. Administration (NHTSA) in 1970. Senator Warren Magnuson, chairman of the Commerce Committee, argued that Congress was implementing a limited type of regulation. The committee also recognizes that the broad powers conferred upon the Secretary, while essential to achieve improved traffic safety, could be abused in the future. In 1970, the U.S. Congress passed a bill that created the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration. The bill was signed by President Richard Nixon on October 1, 1970. The agency was created to protect the nation's roads and highways. With the start of the Interstate Highway system in the 1950s, greater automobile travel, and rising highway deaths, the interest in vehicle safety grew. Between 1962 and 1964, Congress passed three safety bills into law, including a legislation had two parts. The Highway Safety Act of 1966 mandated that each state put in place a highway safety program in accordance with federal standards that would include improving driver performance, accident records systems and traffic control. The National Traffic and Motor Vehicle Safety Act was passed in 1966. purchased by average consumers. The most significant change in U.S. vehicle safety regulation came with the National Traffic and Motor Vehicle Safety Act of 1966. Senator Abraham Ribicoff, one of the advocates of the new legislation, said during floor debate that "this problem is so vast that the Federal Government has to do something" He said the problem was "so vast" that the federal government had to do "something" in the form of a law to make it safer for people to drive. seat belt regulation. These laws set the stage for more ambitious legislation a few years later. For example, the legislation establishing safety requirements for federal fleet vehicles led to the promulgation of 17 standards by 1966, prompting some in Congress to question why similar standards did not apply to vehicles. For more information on seat belt regulation, visit the National Transportation Safety Board's website at: http://www.ntsb.org/seat-belt-regulations/. For more on seat belts in the U.S., go to the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration's website. of ground-level ozone. Emissions of hydrocarbons and NO x from motor vehicles are responsible for contributing to the formation of ground- level ozone. Further, motor vehicles represent the largest domestic source of air toxics, or pollutants known or suspected to cause cancer or other serious health or environmental effects. Finally, vehicles have been determined to contribute approximately one quarter of domestic GHG. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has released a new report on the role of cars and other mobile sources in the creation of ozone. States originated in the first half of the twentieth century and were accelerated after World War II. Ground-level ozone production, commonly referred to as "smog," is a key source of air pollution. Independent analysis in the mid-1950s identified the automobile as aKey source of Air Pollution in the U.S. State of the Air in the United States for the past 50 years has been the same: the state of the air in many states has been poor. States have been affected by air pollution for decades. emissions, which trap heat in the earth's atmosphere, contributing to global climate change. The federal government first addressed air pollution in 1955 in the Federal Air Pollution Control Act. The act provided funding to state and local governments to "protect the primary responsibilities and rights of the state andLocal governments" in the fight against air pollution. The bill was passed with bipartisan support and was signed into law by President Dwight Eisenhower on December 4, 1955. It was known as the "Air Pollution control Act of 1955" California set the first HC and CO emissions regulations in 1964. The federal Motor Vehicle Air Pollution Control Act of 1965 adopted both the California crankcase and tailpipe emissions standards for 1968 model-year vehicles. Congress's provision for national emissions standards was in the 1965 act. The act engaged the federal government for the first time in the actual regulation of vehicle emissions. It also set the stage for the creation of the National Highway Traffic Safety Act of 1987. The National Highway Transportation Safety Act was passed in 1988. In 1959, California became the first state to address pollution from cars with legislation. Following California's lead, in 1960 Congress directed the Surgeon General to study the problem. In 2011, the U.S. Congress passed a bill to address air pollution in cars. The bill was signed into law by President Barack Obama on July 25, 2011. It was the first step in a process that would eventually lead to stricter air quality standards for cars and other vehicles. The goal is to reduce air pollution by 20 percent by 2015. standards in the Air Quality Act of 1967. This preemption provision (with California as the sole exemption) remains in effect today as Section 209(a) of the Clean Air Act (CAA) At present, the federal government manages vehicle emissions controls, although the state of California remains a major force in shaping waiver. California emission standards are administered by the California Air Resources Board. The CAA allows other states a choice between implementing federal emission standards or adopting the California requirements. The evolution of U.S. emission standards for light-duty, gasoline-fueled vehicles is traced. a number of U.S. states have a significant legal basis in advancing emissions regulations to aid in their attainment of National Ambient Air Quality Standards (NAAQS) California is the only state vested by the CAA with the authority to develop its own emission regulations if EPA grants the state a waiver. California is also the only states vested with the power to set its own fuel economy standards. California has the highest level of air quality standards in the United States. It is the second-highest in the world after the United Kingdom. Under the SEA, auto emissions regulations were harmonized across Europe in 1987. Initially, the harmonized standards were less strict than US standards. Similar to the 1970 U.S. Clean Air Act proviso for California, the SEA allows member states to enact measures more stringent than those enacted by the rest of the world.market by 1992. The SEA was created to replace the European Union’s Common Market for Energy and Natural Resources, which had been in place since the 1970s.