In late 2003, MMA added coverage under Medicare for a one-time “initial preventive physician evaluation” if performed within 6 months after an individual’s enrollment under Part B of the program. Covered services under the examination include measurement of height, weight, and blood pressure; an electrocardiogram; and education, counseling, and referral services for screenings and other preventive services. The new coverage applies to services provided on or after.visits for other health issues.. MMA also added coverage for various screening tests to identify cardiovascular disease (and related abnormalities) in “elevated risk” beneficiaries. examination could be a means to better ensure that health care providers have enough time to identify individual Medicare beneficiaries’ health risks. It could be used to orient new beneficiaries to Medicare and encourage them to make informed choices about providers. A one-time preventive care examination will add a dedicated opportunity for delivering preventive care and could help reduce the gap in the preventive services that Medicare beneficiaries receive. At the same time, it is not a panacea. Ensuring that beneficiaries receive needed services is key. have had high cholesterol without knowing it (see fig. 2). A one-time initial preventive care examination covered by Medicare may offer opportunity to deliver some preventive services but alone is not enough to ensure better health among beneficiaries. Information from a CMS demonstration and from other related studies shows that high cholesterol is a risk factor for cardiovascular disease. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. A one-time examination does not ensure delivery of the full range of preventive services. Primary care physicians typically cannot provide services such as mammography screenings for breast cancer or colonoscopies for colon cancer, because these services usually require specialists. It also is uncertain whether a one- time or.plans will be needed for a patient's preventive care, according to the American Cancer Society. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. 32 percent reported that no physician or other health professional had told them about the condition before. On the basis of this survey, we estimate that, during the period when the survey was conducted, 21 million Medicare beneficiaries may have been at risk for high blood pressure. An estimated 6.6 million of them may have was unaware of this risk. Similarly, 32 percent of those found by the survey to have a high cholesterol level reported thatno one had telling them that they had high cholesterol. Projected nationally, this percentage translates into 2.1 million Medicare beneficiary who may be at risk. Survey data show that Medicare beneficiaries visit physicians often and that most report receiving “routine checkups.” Data do not show, however, which specific services were delivered during those “checkups” Despite the frequency of visits, many Medicare beneficiaries do not receive the full range of during those checkups, the report says. The report also says that some beneficiaries do receive some preventive services during visits when they are ill or being treated for a health condition. The study was published in the New England Journal of Medicine on January 1, 2005. at least six times that year, on average, mainly for illnesses or medical conditions. Only about 1 in 10 visits occurred when beneficiaries were well. Even though the majority of visits to physicians were to treat illness or health conditions, most Medicare beneficiaries reported receiving what they needed to stay healthy. The majority of Medicare beneficiaries were on a fixed income. The average household income was about $50,000. The median household income is about $60,000, and the average household size is about 1.5 million. The task force recommends that all people age 65 or older receive an annual influenza vaccination and at least one pneumonia vaccination. About 30 percent of Medicare beneficiaries did not receive an influenza vaccination, the task force says. 37 percent had never had a pneumonia vaccination, according to the report. Many Medicare beneficiaries may not know that they are at risk for health conditions that preventive care could detect, the report says. The task force's 2003 report shows that many Medicare beneficiaries still do not receive certain recommended preventive services. Medicare now covers a number of preventive services, such as immunizations and cancer screenings. Not all beneficiaries avail themselves of covered preventive services. Some beneficiaries recommended preventive services covered by Medicare. Only 10 percent of female Medicare beneficiaries in our analysis received at least one preventive service, we reported in 2002. Our analysis was based on a survey of more than 1,000 Medicare beneficiaries. The results were published in the June 2002 issue of the magazine, “Healthy Aging’s Guide to Medicare.” may simply choose not to use these services, but others may be unaware that the services are available or covered by Medicare. For some beneficiaries, certain services may not be warranted or may be of limited value. Appropriate preventive care depends on an individual’s age and particular health risks, 65 or older. Medicare covers some, but not all, of these services (see table 1). Medicare does not cover regular periodic examinations, where clinicians might assess an individual's health risk and provide needed preventive services. recommended preventive services. Data also show that many beneficiaries may not know about their risk for health conditions that preventive care is meant to detect. From 2000 survey data and U.S. Bureau of the Census estimates of people age 65 or older, we estimated that beneficiaries visited a physician. We estimated that about half of those people visited a doctor. We also estimated that around half of them visited a dentist or dentist-midwife. The study was published in the journal Health Care Policy and Management. still required approval from HHS and the Office of Management and Budget. Current data indicate that many opportunities exist for Medicare beneficiaries to receive preventive care, but many beneficiaries nonetheless fail to receive the full range of recommended services. Although some beneficiaries may not choose to seek these services, others may decide to take advantage of the services they are entitled to receive from the Medicare program. For more information, visit Medicare.gov or call the Medicare helpline at 1-800-273-8255. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here. Ellen W. Chu, Lisa Lusk, and Behn Miller Kelly also made key contributions to this testimony. This is a work of the U.S. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States. It may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from GAO. However, you must credit the GAO for any information contained in this report. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material. permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. For support in the Middle East, call the Salvation Army in the region of the country where you live on the continent of Africa. periodic examination would be an effective way to improve beneficiaries’ health. For example, one previous CMS initiative that included preventive health care visits ended with mixed results. In the late 1980s and early 1990s, the agency conducted a congressionally mandated demonstration to test varied health promotion and disease prevention services, the CDC says. The agency says it will continue to evaluate the benefits and risks of the new program over the next few years. The CDC says the program will be rolled out over a period of years. such as free preventive visits, health risk assessment, and behavior counseling, to see if they would increase use of preventive services. The agency’s final report, published in 1998, concluded that the demonstration services were marginally effective in raising the use of the services. It said the services were not effective in lowering health care expenditures for Medicare beneficiaries. The report concluded that they were “marginally effective” in raising use of these services for the elderly. It also said they were not “effective’ in reducing health care costs for Medicare recipients. Some simple disease-prevention measures, such as immunizations and cancer screenings, did not consistently improve beneficiary health or reduce the use of hospital or skilled nursing services. The report tempered these results by pointing out that the relatively brief period during which the services were provided (roughly 2 years) The report also pointed out that these results were based on a study that was conducted over a period of 2 years, rather than a longer period of 1 or 2 years as was originally claimed in the study. not simply on the results of a standard battery of tests. To evaluate preventive care for different age and risk groups, HHS in 1984 established the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. The task force recommends certain screening, immunization, and counseling services for people age 50 and older. It also recommends certain screenings and immunization services for those age 25 and older, such as mammograms and pap smears, for example. It is not known whether the new guidelines will be implemented in the United States. not be receiving the full range of recommended preventive services. Data from CDC’s NHANES for 1999–2000 show that, of beneficiaries participating in this nationally representative survey who, as part of the survey, had a physical examination and were found to have elevated blood pressure readings at that time, many did not receive the recommended services. For more information, go to www.cdc.gov/nhanees and www.nhannees.org. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. considered to be “routine checkups.” In CDC’s 2000 Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System Survey, for example, 93 percent of respondents age 65 or older reported that they had received a “ routine checkup” within the previous 2 years. This survey did not, however, provide information on which specific services were delivered to the respondents. The CDC did not provide details on the type of services that were provided to those who reported having a ‘routine’ checkup. A proposed CMS demonstration, currently in design, will explore another preventive care delivery option. It will examine the value of linking beneficiaries to needed follow-up services. CMS is exploring an alternative to a one-time “Welcome to Medicare’ examination. The limited number of follow-ups and beneficiary contacts with providers (one to two) may have been inadequate to achieve measurable outcomes, experts say. The project aims to evaluate how to better ensure adequate follow- up once health risks are identified. and follow-up care is likely to remain a challenge. Mr. Chairman, this concludes my prepared statement. I will be happy to answer any questions that you or Members of this Committee may have. For future contacts regarding this testimony, please call Janet Heinrich at (202) 512-7119. Katherine Iritani, Matt Byer, and John Byer are the authors of this report. For more information on this report, please visit: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/29/health/features/health-care-reform-talks/index.html. For confidential support on suicide matters call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90. CMS has begun designing a demonstration project focused on Medicare fee-for-service beneficiaries. The Medicare Senior Risk Reduction Program will identify health risks and follow up with preventive services provided by means other than examinations by physicians. The program will use a beneficiary-focused health risk assessment questionnaire to assess health risks for Medicare seniors. The study recommended that CMS conduct a demonstration to test cost- effectiveness and other aspects of the health risk Assessment approach for Medicare beneficiaries. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. The agency commissioned the RAND Corporation to evaluate the potential effectiveness of health risk assessment programs. Such programs collect information from individuals; identify risk groups; and identify potential problems. The RAND Corporation says such programs could be beneficial to Medicare patients. The agency says it will continue to look at the potential benefits and risks of these types of programs in the future. For more information, go to www.medicare.gov/riskassessment or call 1-800-273-TALK (8255). their risk factors; and refer the individuals to at least one intervention to promote health, sustain function, or prevent disease. The program will test different approaches to administering health risk assessments, creating feedback reports, and providing follow-up services. The study concluded that health risk assessment programs have increased beneficial behavior (particularly exercise) and improved physiological variables (particularly diastolic blood pressure and weight) and general health. In addition, the health risks, such as lifestyle behaviors, and use of clinical preventive and screening services. researchers, the program will tailor preventive interventions to individual risks. It will track patient risks and health over time; and provide beneficiaries with self-management tools and information, health behavior advice, and end-of-life counseling where appropriate. The design phase had not been finalized as of last week and, according to a CMS official, it is still in the design phase. The program is expected to be rolled out across the U.S. over the next few years, the official said.