introduced February 9, 1998; referred to Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation. Passed Commerce Committee, as amended, by voice vote March 12, 1998. Reported out of committee May 5, 1998 ( S.Rept. 105-183 ). Passed Telecommunications Subcommittee, as amendments, August 6, 1998, and Commerce Committee on September 24, 1998 - S. Rept. 104-183. Passed Telecommunications subcommittee on September 25, 1998 -- S. Rept. 105 -183. passed Commerce committee on September 26, 1998-- S. Rep. 105. H.R. 3888 (Tauzin) A measure to amend the Communications Act of 1934 to improve the protection of consumers against slamming by telecommunications carriers, and for other purposes. Introduced April 29, 1998; referred to Committee on Commerce. Referred to Subcommittee on Telecommunications, Trade and Consumer Protection May 8, 1998. Other purposes. Other than the amendment, the bill would not affect existing telecommunications laws or regulations, and would only apply to the telecommunications industry as a whole. The bill was referred to the Subcommittee on telecommunications, trade and consumer protection. Section 258 of the Telecommunications Act of 1996, which became Section 258 of. the 1934 Communications Act, as amended, expands jurisdiction over, and creates a. new penalty for, any telecommunications carrier that illegally changes a section. of the Communications Act of 1934 to enhance the protections against unauthorized changes in subscriber selections. Introduced November 7, 1997; referred to Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation. S. 1618 (McCain) A measure to amend the Communications act of 1934, which was signed into law in 1934. S. 1051 (Campbell) A measure to amend the Communications Act of 1934 to enhance protections against unauthorized changes of telephone service subscribers from one telecommunications carrier to another. S. 1084 (McCain) A bill to protect consumers form the unauthorized switching of their long distance service. Introduced July 22, 1997; referred to Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation. Senate (99-0), with amendment, May 12, 1998. House (98-0, with amendment) S. 1740 (Collins) a measure to improve protections against the unauthorized change of subscribers. measures, S. 58 and S. 1084 , were introduced in the 106 th Congress relating to the slamming issue. Senator Susan Collins introduced the "Telephone Services Fraud Prevention and Enforcement Act of 1999" on January 19, 1999. A bill to amend the Communications Act of 1934 to improve protections against telephone service "slamming" and provide protections against phone billing "cramming" The bill would also provide the Federal Trade Commission jurisdiction over unfair and deceptive trade practices of telecommunications carriers. A measure to amend the Communications Act of 1934 to strengthen and expand the procedures for preventing the slamming of interstate telephone service subscribers. Introduced July 9, 1997; referred to Committee on Commerce. H.R. 3050 (Dingell) A measure to establish procedures and remedies for the prevention of telephone slamming by telephone service customers. Introduced June 16, 1997. Referred to the House Commerce Committee on July 8, 1997, referred to the Senate Commerce committee on July 10, 1997,. Introduced July 11, 1997., referred to Senate Commerce Committee. of fraudulent and deceptive practices in the solicitation of telephone service subscribers. Introduced November 13, 1997; referred to Committee on Commerce. H.R. 3749 (Bass) A measure to amend the Communications Act of 1934 to improve the protection of consumers against slamming by telecommunications carriers, and for other purposes. The bill was passed with a vote of 50-39. It was referred to the Committee on commerce. The measure was later withdrawn. It is known as the "Bass" bill. S. 1137 (Durbin) A measure to amend section 258 of the Communications Act of 1934 to establish additional protections against the unauthorized change of subscribers from one telecommunications carrier to another. Introduced July 31, 1997; referred to Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation. S. 1410 (Reed) AMeasure to amend the Communications act of 1934, including section 258, to provide additional protection against unauthorized changes of subscribers. Introduced August 1, 1997, referred to the Senate Commerce Committee. Company behavior. H.R. 2112 (Franks) A measure to increase the forfeiture penalty for telephone service slamming and to require providers of such service to report slamming incidents, and for other purposes. Introduced July 8, 1997; referred to Committee on Commerce. H-R-2120 (DeFazio) H-S-1-2-3-4-5-6-7-8-9-10-11-12-13-14-15-16-17-18-19-20-21-22-23-24-25-26-27-28-29-30-31-32-29. H.R. 3888 passed the House, as amended, by voice vote, on October 12, 1998. S. 1618, the "Consumer Anti-Slamming Act," passed the Senate (99-0) with amendment, on May 12,1998. Despite intense negotiations to resolve differences between the bills, the 105 th Congress adjourned before H.R.-3888 could be brought to the Senate floor for consideration. This measure sought to combat the increase in slamming by strengthening safeguards to prevent slamming from occurring. H.R. 3888 called for the establishment of a voluntary code of conduct as an alternative to FCC 8, 1998 ( H.Rept. 105-801 ). Passed House by voice vote, with amendment, October 12, 1998. Received in the Senate October 13, 1998; passed House October 14. H.R 4176 (Markey) A measure to amend the Communications Act of 1934 to protect consumers against 'spamming', 'slamming', and 'cramming' H.R. 3888 contained a significantly different approach to combat slamming from its Senate counterpart, S. 1618. Negotiations between the House and Senate to reconcile differences between the two measures continued through the waning days of the session. Despite such efforts, however, H.R.-3888 was not brought to the Senate floor and legislation to address slamming was not enacted prior to the adjournment of the 105 th Congress. The telecommunications industry has acknowledged the existence of a slamming problem but is not necessarily in agreement. Department's National Telecommunications and Information Administration to report to Congress on "the feasibility and desirability" of establishing a neutral third party to administer a system to prevent slamming. The version of H.R. 3888 passed by the House Commerce Committee, and ultimately the full House, was significantly different from the subcommittee-passed version of the bill. The bill was passed on a party-line vote, with Republicans in control of the House and Democrats in charge of the Senate. The Senate is expected to vote on the bill this week. No legislation addressing slamming was introduced in either the 107 th or 108 th Congress and none has rules with an eye to strengthening its regulations and increasing penalties for violators. Two measures to further strengthen slamming regulations, S. 58 , and S. 1084 , were introduced in the 106 th Congress, but neither was enacted. The 105 th Congress while actively examining this issue, adjourned without passage of legislation. No slamming measures were passed in either chamber of the U.S. House of Representatives. The FCC continues to take actions to enforce and further strengthen its slamming rules. The industry is attempting to self-regulate and has put forth proposals to stop this activity. Whether the FCC's strengthened slamming rules and subsequent enforcement actions will be a sufficient deterrent to stop the practice of slamming, and negate congressional interest to enact legislation remains unclear. The last of these new rules went into effect on was introduced in the 107 th or 108 th Congresses and none has been introduced in 109 th Congress, to date. The 105 th Congress held several hearings and introduced 11 bills to address this issue. The bills include S. 1051 , S. 1137, S. 1410 and S. 1618. The 105th Congress is the first to address the issue of climate change in the U.S. since the 1970s. The bill was introduced by Rep. Steve Israel, R-New Jersey. The House of Representatives passed the bill and sent it to the Senate for consideration. The Senate passed it and sent the bill to the president. of legislation. Those supporting legislative action, however, are not necessarily united in the approach such legislation should take. Some have expressed concern over the breadth of the proposed regulations contained in the measures that were considered in the 105 th and 106 th Congresses and/or individual provisions contained within them. The measures were considered by the 105th and 106th Congresses, respectively, and passed both houses of the U.S. House of Representatives and the Senate. The legislation was passed by both Congresses on a bipartisan basis. The Competitive Telecommunications Association felt that the $5 PIC change charge safe harbor, that was established in 1984, exceeded the actual cost and hampers competition. In May 2004 the FCC initiated a further notice of proposed rulemaking in conjunction with this docket but are commonly picked up by the newly designated interexchange carrier. The FCC established safe harbors of $1.25 for electronically-processed PIC changes and $5.50 for manually processed P IC changes. The new safe harbor will be based on the method used to process the request and will be subject to a new safe Harbor. The FCC adopted a new fee structure that local exchange carriers may charge for interstate PIC changes. Under the new rules PIC change charges, which are borne by the customer, at the same time the PIC charge for changing the interstate carrier is decreased by half, to 63 cents, for electronically processed changes. In an October 14, 2005 action the FCC extended, for a second time, the effective date for the filing of revised PICcharge tariffs to be effective. The FCC has not yet issued a decision on the issue. November 28, 2000. Under these revised rules, states have the option of processing slamming complaints, and numerous states have opted to do so. On March 14, 2002, the FCC initiated a notice of proposed rulemaking to examine primary interexchange (long distance) carrier (PIC) change charges. In a February 10, 2000, FCC issued a Notice of Proposed Rulemaking on PIC Change Charges, and in a February. 10, 2001, the Commission issued a. Notice of Proposal Rulemaking. distance carrier, to cover the designation of local exchange and intrastate long distance (toll call) carriers, has also raised significant concerns. Some see the expanded use of the PIC freeze option as unnecessary and feel that the P IC freeze is being misused to protect the local exchange carriers market share in the face of growing competition. Local exchange carriers argue that it is an appropriate method to protect consumers against the growing from carrier to carrier and that many of the potential and perceived abuses, such as high charges or difficultly in switching, do not apply. is prevented, since the customer's long distance carrier cannot be changed without express permission. Some see the potential for no later than January 1, 2006. The extension of the PIC freeze option, beyond the designation of the long. distance market, has also been raised. The possible misuse of the. PIC Freeze through the implementation of an illegal or unauthorized PIC. freeze by the customer’s local exchange carrier, absent the. customer's authorization, has been raised, as has the possibility of the freeze being extended beyond January 1. 2006. S. 58 was referred to the Senate Commerce, Science, and Transportation Committee where no further action was taken. S. 1084 required the PIC freeze to inhibit competition, if the means required to lift the freeze are perceived by the consumer as too burdensome or the charges to implement the change are excessive. (See section on " PIC Freeze Programs and Charges ", below.) S. 58.allowed consumers to get refunds from unauthorized carriers; and protected consumer's rights to use the P IC freeze option. AT&T v. FCC found that the FCC exceeded its statutory authority in enforcing certain of its the switch. Court found that FCC's requirement that the telecommunications carrier verify that the actual subscriber, and not just the person answering the line and claiming to have authority to authorize a carrier switch, authorize the switch exceeded the FCC's statutory authority. Additional verification procedures may be adopted for intrastate carrier changes. But additional verification procedures are not required for these intrastates changes, the court said. does not require actual authorization but only requires that the carrier get verification. Furthermore the court stated that the FCC's requirement that the carriers obtain "actual authorization" gives carriers "a virtually impossible task" to guarantee that the person who answers the phone is in fact authorized to make changes to that phone number. The court ruled in favor of the phone company, saying that the requirement that carriers obtain actual authorization is a "virtuous task" for the carrier to achieve. The decision was upheld on appeal by the Supreme Court. and collects charges for such service is required to pay the subscriber's properly designated carrier all the charges collected from that subscriber since the change occurred. The requirement prevents violators from receiving financial rewards for the illegal switch. The FCC, in a December 17, 1998 action (CC Docket No. 94-129), required violators to pay all charges collected since the switch occurred to the proper carrier. The change was made in response to a complaint from a customer who was unhappy with his service. notification of any changes in service, and forbade the use of unfair and deceptive practices. Carriers were required to give subscribers who are victims of slamming credits for unauthorized charges and damages of $500. Adherence to the code would have been voluntary, but those carriers that chose not to follow it would have faced fines of up to $1,000 a day. The code was set to go into effect on January 1, 2015. The full code can be found at: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/20/technology/cnn-code-calls-for-slamming-credit-cancellation.html. for the first 30-day period after an unauthorized switch. In cases where payment was made by the consumer, the unauthorized carrier must refund 150% of the charges to the authorized carrier. The authorized carrier is allowed to keep an amount equal to 100 percent of the consumer's bill with the consumer. The unauthorized carrier is not allowed to refund the full amount of the charge to the consumer for the first month after the switch. For more information on how to switch carriers, go to www.cnn.com/switch. regulation to address the issue. Failure to comply with or withdrawal from the voluntary code would result in a carrier being subject to FCC regulation. A FCC was required to review the code every two years to ensure that its requirements "adequately protect consumers" Each carrier was given 10 days within adoption of the code, or commencement of operation, to elect to comply. Those telecommunications carriers, including resellers, that elected not to comply would be subject to regulation by the FCC. The code was passed by a vote of the FCC's three-quarters majority. comply with the voluntary code, withdrew from such election, or had such election revoked by the FCC, were to be subject to presumably more stringent FCC regulations. H.R. 3888 also detailed specific, more stringent, minimum requirements to be incorporated into FCC-developed regulations for carriers not operating under the voluntaryCode. The FCC is expected to vote on the bill in the next few days, possibly as early as next week. The vote is likely to be closely watched by the wireless industry. the code would have been required to follow regulations prescribed by the FCC. S. 1084 was referred to the Senate Commerce, Science, and Transportation Committee and received no further action. The bill required the FCC to compile and publish a report, every six months, listing violations by carrier. It was passed by the House of Representatives, but not by the Senate, and died in the Senate's Commerce, science, and transportation Committee. The Senate is expected to take up the bill next week. requirements relating to what must be contained in written and oral authorizations are enumerated in the regulations. Furthermore, FCC rules protect consumers from paying potentially exorbitant rates. If a subscriber has been a victim of an unauthorized change, he/she is absolved of payment for up to 30 days; refunds of up to $1,000 are also available to those who have been victims of unauthorized change. The FCC rules are available on the FCC's website at: http://www.fcc.gov/news/press/press-releases/2013/01/0112/fcc-rules-protect-consumers-from-paying-exorbitant- rates. offense with repeat offenders up to five years. The bill extended FCC authority over violators beyond telecommunications carriers to include others such as billing agents. It required local telephone companies to submit to the FCC, on a quarterly basis, a list of the number of slamming complaints received by service provider. It also made it easier for the FCC to fine phone companies that fail to comply with the law; and required local phone companies to report on complaints they receive on a monthly basis; and gave the FCC authority to fine them up to $1 million. to resolve the complaint within 120 days; absent resolution of the complaint, the company was required to give the consumer a copy of the retained verification, information about how to pursue the complaint with the FCC, and all other available remedies. Any company that ignored a consumer's complaint was to. to resolve the complaints within 120 months of receiving the complaint. If the complaint was not resolved in 120 days, the consumer would be required to pay a fine of up to $2,500. The fine was $1,000 if the company did not resolve the issue within the required time frame. and, if needed, initiate a rulemaking, within 120 days after the completion of its report, to prohibit undesirable practices. This report was also directed to study whether a third party should verify these changes. The "Telecommunications Competition and Consumer Protection" report will be published within the next few months. It will be titled: "The Telecoms Consumer Protection Report" and will be available online at www.telecommunicationscompetition.com/the-telecommunications-consumer-protection-report-to-be-published-within-the-next few-months. remaining 50% returned to the consumer. Primary enforcement responsibility has been given to the states with the FCC assuming responsibility in those states unwilling or unable to undertake this role or if a complainant expressly indicates it wishes the FCC to resolve the matter. According to the FCC, 37 states, including the U.S., have agreed to take part in the program. The FCC is working with the states on a plan to expand the program to other states. The program is expected to be rolled out across the country in the coming months. FCC rules currently require a long distance company to obtain a subscriber's authorization before a switch can occur. Authorization can be obtained in writing or can be confirmed orally. Verification rules are also applied to changes in local as well as long distance carriers, but wireless carriers are exempt. The FCC has also applied verification procedures to the practice of implementing carrier freeze requests. In addition, the FCC has imposed verification procedures on telemarketing calls initiated by carriers. The rules were adopted in response to complaints it received from state regulatory bodies, telecommunications carriers, and individual consumers. long distance service. State utility commissions are also permitted to enforce the procedures with respect to services within their state boundaries. Section 258(b) created a new penalty, in addition to already existing penalties contained in law, for those who violate FCC verification procedures. Any telecommunications carrier that violates those procedures will be fined up to $100,000. The penalty will be added to the existing penalties for violations of the FCC's verification procedures, such as fines of $150,000 and $250,000, respectively. the FCC rules require that solicitations for such freezes be clear and that the consumer be informed as to how such a freeze may be lifted. The FCC also noted that these verification procedures do not preempt state law. These verification methods are to be used as a state minimum, the FCC said. The agency also said that the verification procedures are not intended to be a substitute for state law, but to be the minimum for state verification methods that are used by the federal government in the future. It added that the procedures are meant to be an alternative to state-level verification. The District of Columbia, and Puerto Rico, have chosen to take on this responsibility. The long distance company or reseller was required to send a written confirmation of the switch. There are a number of acceptable methods to verify changes, a consumer signature on an authorization paper form, or a verbal, written, or electronic verification from the subscriber. Furthermore, the bill required that the verification be retained. The bill included the name of the new carrier, the date the switch was authorized, and the number of subscribers. contained in the E-Sign Act ( P.L. 106-229 ), thereby allowing carrier changes to be made by consumers via the Internet. retaining the three-way call as a verification method but requiring the carrier's sales representative to drop off the call once the connection has been established between the subscriber and the carrier. The bill was passed by the U.S. House of Representatives in December 2013. It was signed into law by President Barack Obama on December 18, 2013. The law allows consumers to make changes to their carrier using the internet. a Letter of Agency; LOA), an electronic authorization (usually a customer initiated call to a toll-free number), a verification by an independent third party, and the more recently approved use of an Internet-based LOA (see " Additional Issues " below). These verification methods are applied to both inbound calls (that) and outbound calls. The most common method of verification is to call a toll free number and verify the origin of the call. This verification method is called a "Letter of Agency" or a "LOA" the third party verifier; the institution of new complaint reporting requirements for carriers. carriers to submit semiannual reports to the FCC's Enforcement Bureau containing, among other information, the number of slamming complaints they have received; and adoption of carrier registration requirements that prevent slammers from evading detection simply by using a different phone number than the one used by the one being used to make the slamming call. The FCC will also require carriers to report to the agency the number and type of slamming calls they make and receive. The FCC was also required to compile and publish a report, on a semiannual basis, ranking carriers by the percentage of verified complaints, excluding those generated by the carrier's unaffiliated resellers. Carriers listed among the five worst performers ( based upon the percentage) were Verizon, AT&T, Sprint, T-Mobile, and Sprint Nextel. The FCC also required the carriers to report on the number of changes made to their networks, compared to the total number of complaints they received. include the establishment of a website to allow consumers to file complaints electronically and obtain on-line consumer protection information. The FCC will also establish a toll-free number at the FCC to enable consumers tofile complaints over the telephone. The establishment of an electronic interface with carriers to improve industry response to complaints will also be part of the plan. The plan is expected to be completed by the end of the year. It is the first of its kind in the U.S. and will be rolled out over a number of years. the "top ten" was to be based on a ratio of the number of subscriber complaints to the total number of subscribers served. The FCC was also directed to issue a report, within 180 days of the bill's enactment, on telemarketing practices used to solicit service provider changes by subscribers. The bill was signed into law by President Barack Obama on December 4. The law was expected to take effect on January 1, 2015. It was passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate on a bipartisan vote. LCI expresses concern over the manner in which the FCC calculates yearly slamming rates. LCI claims that the FCC's current practice of dividing the number of slamming complaints by a company's annual telecommunications revenue favors larger carriers. This occurs, LCI states, because the larger a company its revenue the more consumers it can slam without appearing to be a major offender.LCI recommends that the Commission calculate its slamming rate ratio by dividing theNumber of slamming complaint by the number. of new long distance customers. The FCC compares slamming offenders by citing the ratio of the number of complaints per million dollars of company revenue. That methodology, according to the GAO, is flawed because it can lead to a severe understatement of the revenue-to-complaint ratio for the smaller companies, or resellers. This occurs because resellers are not required to, and generally do not, report their revenue to the FCC unless the revenue exceeds $109 million. To enable the FCC to make comparisons, to list the top slamming offenders, the FCC assumes that those resellers that have not provided revenue data, had revenues of $109 million. This assumption, the GAO states, may result in a significant overstatement of the reseller's revenue, resulting in a much lower revenue-to-complaint ratio for that offender. LCI International Inc., a long distance carrier in the United States, has also been accused of overstating its revenue by more than $100 million. The GAO says it is investigating the allegations against LCI. Consumers have been able to select the carrier of their choice from among approximately 500 companies. Consumers not only lose the right to subscribe to their carrier of choice; they may also be subject to lower quality of service, higher rates, or lose special features or premiums offered by their designated carrier. Consumers often do not realize they have been slammed until they are hit with a bill for a bill they didn't know they were paying for until it is too late. The bill was passed by the House of Representatives on November 14, 2013. Concern has been voiced by some that the consumer protections that were proposed were too extensive and may be overly burdensome and costly for smaller carriers attempting to compete with the major long distance carriers. Mandatory third party verification is cited as an example of a proposal that would be too burdensome or costly for small carriers to comply with. The proposal is expected to be voted on by the Federal Aviation Administration in the next few months. It is expected that the proposal will be approved by the end of the year. The Telecommunications Resellers Association claims that such a provision not only discriminates against switchless resellers, who are small businesses. Proposals to require switchless. resellers to post a "surety bond" with the FCC to pay for possible fines or. penalties also came under criticism. The group says such a proposal would be too.costly for small carriers to implement. The FCC is expected to make a decision on the proposal in the next few weeks, the group says. Proposals to require slammers to pay fines to consumers they harm could result in the creation of the "wrong incentive structure," according to AT&T. Have generated concerns that it might possibly lead to consumers fraudulently claiming they have been slammed, to avoid paying any charges for long distance calls. The proposal is being considered by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) and the National Association of Broadcasters (NAB). It is expected to be voted on by the end of the year. rewarding people who have been slammed instead of trying to discipline those who do the slamming. Furthermore, some have expressed concerns that fines and punishments not be levied against the long distance carrier in all cases, since in some instances unwanted switches can be attributed to the local exchange carrier in some cases. Some have expressed concern that fines should not be levied against long distance carriers in all case, since some unwanted switches are attributed to local exchange carriers in other cases, such as in this case. largely market-driven rather than consumer-oriented; Consumers and the industry itself are becoming increasingly vulnerable as targets for large scale fraud; Given [the present] environment, unscrupulous long-distance providers slam consumers, often with virtual impunity; and The most effective action that consumers can take to eliminate the chance of intentional slamming is to avoid using long- distance services at all costs, even if it's just a text message or a phone call to make an appointment to see a doctor. The Competitive Telecommunications Association (CompTel) issued a statement that called for "zero tolerance" of intentional slamming. CompTel urged carriers to agree to investigate all slamming allegations, repay consumers who were slammed and take an approach to solve it. The statement stressed industry self-policing. The group is made up of competitive telecommunications service providers, including AT&T, Sprint, T-Mobile, Verizon, Sprint Nextel and T-Mo. The association is based in Washington, D.C. and has more than 100 members. responsible for executing the switch. On the other hand, local exchange carriers have expressed some concerns that they should not be held liable for solely executing a change. Short of confirming each switch, they cannot insure that each change is authorized by the consumer. One practice currently used to execute a change is to call the local exchange and ask if the customer wants to make a change, then go to a local exchange to make the change. For more information, go to the National Association of Exchange Carriers' website. Exchange carriers can charge more if they can document higher costs and less than the safe harbor rate if they choose. The FCC has no authority over charges set for intrastate carrier changes which fall under state jurisdiction. However, if a consumer switches intrastates long distance providers and interstate providers, the FCC can't stop them from charging more. The agency has no power to set charges for interstate changes. It can only set rates for state-by-state changes which are determined by state law. "Slamming" is when a customer's telephone service provider is changed without their knowledge or consent. This unauthorized change can occur for several reasons, ranging from computer or human error to unscrupulous or illegal marketing practices. For some who do not examine their bills, such changes can go undetected for months or even longer. Telecommunications carriers are also harmed by slamming, as this practice distorts the marketplace by increasing the customer base and revenues of the company. For more information on slamming, go to www.slamming.org. Section 258(a) prohibited telecommunications carriers from changing a subscriber's selection of both telephone exchange (local) and toll (long distance) service. The FCC's authority over such activity was expanded to include local as well as those services. S. 1618 also applied to the unauthorized initiation of long distance service aswell as unauthorized switching. The local telephone company was prohibited from changing. a consumer's long distance provider, unless the change is accompanied. by verification procedures prescribed by the FCC. The change must be made by the subscriber's designated telecommunications carrier. by changing their names. The Government Accountability Office (GAO), (known at that time as the General Accounting Office), undertook an investigation into the general issue of slamming, FCC and state regulatory efforts. The GAO, at the request of Senator Collins, then Chairman of the Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations, Committee on Government Affairs, conducted the investigation. The investigation was conducted by the GAO and the Federal Communications Commission (FCC). The investigation found that the FCC and other agencies were over-regulating the Internet. existing policies to combat slamming. He also pointed to the severe punishment taken against Fletcher Companies to defend FCC actions. (See " Federal Communications Commission Policies ," above.) At the request of Senator Collins, the GAO undertook a second study examining the scope of and state and federal actions taken. The GAO study was commissioned by Senator Collins at her request and will be released in full in the coming months. The study will look at the impact of the FCC's policies on the state, local, and federal level. GAO report: "Neither the FCC, the states, nor the telecommunications industry, have been effective in protecting the consumer from telephone slamming" GAO report discussed during hearings held, on April 23, 1998, by the Senate Permanent Investigations Subcommittee. Some subcommittee members expressed concern over the GAO's findings. The conclusions reached in the report regarding FCC efforts to deter slamming, were discussed in hearings held. on April23, 1998. The hearings were held in Washington, D.C., at the White House. FCC Chairman Kennard was called to testify at the hearing. He said the tariff filing procedure that was criticized by the GAO was not developed as a deterrent to slamming. Kennard said the FCC was currently working on new rules to strengthen the tariff system. The hearing is expected to last until the end of the month, when the FCC will decide whether or not to proceed with the proposed changes to the tariff process. For more, visit CNN.com/suspect-list. New initiatives are established to ease the filing of consumer complaints and speed their resolution. These time and speed FCC resolution of complaints. The FCC, in conjunction with CC docket 98-170, has also adopted rules that establish truth-in-billing and billing format principles. These rules establish requirements that, according to the FCC, are "intended to protect consumers against inaccurate billing.telephone line." These rules became effective July 21, 2003. The rules are intended to enhance a consumer's ability to detect slamming. 2005 action modified the rate structure that was set in 1984. A second further notice of proposed rulemaking, issued on March 17, 2003, imposing additional requirements on third-party verification services became effective on July 21, 2003. The effectiveness of the new rules and their implementation is receiving continuing attention from the Department of Justice and the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. The rate structure was modified to reflect the new requirements, which were effective from July 21 to September 1, 2005. The new requirements were to be applied to all verification services, not just those provided by the Fed. deceptive charges on consumer's telephone bills goes beyond the scope of this report. Senator McCain introduced the "Telecommunications Competition and Consumer Protection Act of 1999" ( S. 1084 ) on May 19, 1999, one day after the court stay of FCC slamming liability rules. Citing the failure of the 105 liability rules, the bill was passed by the Senate on May 20, 1999. The bill was signed into law by President Clinton on May 21, 1999; the Senate passed the bill on May 22,1999. th Congress to pass slamming legislation, court action to stay FCC liability rules (which has since been lifted), and his objection to the industry-proposed third party administrator. McCain offered a comprehensive measure "to better protect consumers" S. 58 attempted to further deter the practice of slamming by increasing consumer protections. The measure was passed by the Senate and the House of Representatives with a vote of 98-0. The bill was signed by Sen. John McCain, R-Arizona, and Rep. Steve Israel, D-New Jersey. adopted new regulations in compliance with the 1996 Act. These rules, with the exception of the liability provisions, went into effect in April 1999. The liability provisions were stayed by the D.C. Court of Appeals. On May 3, 2000 the FCC issued revised slamming liability rules which met court approval by statute. versus FCC developed policies, are less susceptible to change and will better withstand scrutiny if challenged in the courts. The May 18, 1999 U.S. Appeals Court stay of the liabilities provisions of the FCC's slamming rules is cited as further proof in support of the need for enactment. and the stay was lifted on June 27, 2000. These revised liability rules have since been implemented. The major provisions of these rules focus on three areas: consumer liability; verification methods; and consumer assistance. The rules absolve consumers of liability for charges incurred, and take effect on November 28, 2000, taking effect in the U.S. and around the world. In the United States, the rules take effect in November and December 2000, and in January and February 2001, in Australia and New Zealand. providing services in 1997, during the FCC's investigation, this action was taken to ensure that none of these companies can resume operation. The Telecommunications Act of 1996, which was signed into law on February 8, 1996 ( P.L. 104-104 as well as state and federal enforcement actions taken against companies engaged in these practices) expanded the scope of FCC's authority to address the problem of unauthorized switches. The FCC, in a December 17, 1998 order and subsequent reconsiderations, adopted more stringent rules to combat slamming. and unfair billing practices." A number of issues not addressed in the April 13, 2000 reconsideration order were addressed in a subsequent FCC order adopted on July 21, 2000. These rules went into effect on April 2, 2001. These include permitting the use of Internet LOAs in compliance with provisions of provisions of the FCC's Internet Service Providers Act of 1996. The rules were adopted by the FCC in July 2000 and took effect in April 2001. For more information on the rules, visit the FCC website. The enactment of additional legislative measures prescribing new regulations is seen, by some, as an action that is unnecessary. Others support vigorous enforcement of current FCC regulations and continued consumer education. It is up to the Congress, they state, to establish through law stronger measures and increased penalties to protect both consumers and suppliers of telecommunications services from slamming. The Government Accountability Office reports are available at: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/30/technology/slamming-complaints-report. The FCC has revised its and that should be taken only as a last resort if the slamming problem continues. Others support the enactment of legislation. They cite the trend of the rise in slamming complaints despite existing FCC regulations, as proof that additional legislative action is needed. The extent and growth of the existing telecommunications services becomes more widespread. The potential for further abuses in an increasingly competitive marketplace has prompted action to examine and strengthen deterrents to this practice. It is hoped that this article will shed light on how to prevent slamming. The 105 th Congress held several hearings and introduced many bills to address this growing problem. The 105th Congress is holding hearings on ways to protect consumers against slamming. The practice is known as slamming a phone company's customer service number. It is illegal to change a phone number without permission from the service provider. The number can then be changed without the knowledge of the customer. The phone company can then charge the customer for the unauthorized change of the number. The company can also charge the consumer to change the phone number. legislative proposals. Two other concerns addressed in legislation have also generated controversy. The implementation of primary interexchange carrier (PIC) freeze programs; and the methodology used by the FCC to develop slamming statistics. Some favor voluntary private-sector initiatives to combat slamming rather than the enactment of legislation. They point to recent public-private initiatives to address the issue, such as AT&T’s “Save Our Telecoms” campaign. The campaign was launched by the National Association of Broadcasters (NAB) in April. the FCC, the Federal Trade Commission, and telecommunications carrier representatives to develop a code of practices to protect consumers from slamming. The code was required to contain, at a minimum, provisions that required companies to verify changes in a subscriber's service, restricted the use of "negative option marketing," and required subscriber verification of changes in service. It was expected to be in place by the end of the year, but has yet to be fully implemented, the FCC said in a statement on Monday. It's not clear when the code will be in effect. the name of the person who authorized the switch, to the subscriber within 15 days. The use of negative option marketing, whereby a consumer must take some action to prevent a switch from occurring, was banned. The bill also strengthened the complaint procedure by requiring a company charged with slamming the switch to give the subscriber's name and the name of those who authorized it to be given to the customer. It was passed by the House of Representatives on Wednesday. It is expected to be signed into law by the end of the year. voluntary code of "Subscriber Protection Practices" governing changes in a subscriber's telephone exchange and/or toll services. The bill enumerated minimum standards to be addressed in the voluntary code, including those dealing with notification, verification, and marketing. Guidelines relating to liability, reimbursements, record keeping, and independent audits were also included in the bill, which was signed into law by President Barack Obama on June 14. The code was designed to address issues such as notification, verify, and Marketing, among others. first place, establishing a process to resolve slamming complaints, and increasing the ability to punish those who are guilty of slamming. Additional provisions in the bill included those that gave subscribers credit for charges incurred when using the slamming carrier's service. The bill also gave state attorneys general enforcement authority under the federal legislation; upheld any state laws regarding slamming that were less restrictive than those imposed under this bill; and directed the Commerce Department to issue a statement on the bill's provisions. The legislation was passed by the Senate and signed into law by President Barack Obama. protections and strengthening enforcement at both the federal and state level. Included among the provisions to deter slamming contained in this measure were those that required extensive and written notification and verification requirements when a subscriber switches long distance carriers. The measure also specified that federal law does not preempt more restrictive state law and that the federal law doesn't preempt state law. The bill was passed by the House of Representatives and the Senate in a vote that was expected to be followed by the White House in the coming days. have been the victims of slamming, and terminate any employees or agents who "knowingly and willfully engaged in such practices" The statement also advocated uniformity in state and federal slamming requirements, to lessen consumer confusion. It called for the levying of fines, but solely in cases where it has be cases where the victim has been slammed. The statement was released in response to a request from CNN.com for comment from the White House on the matter. For confidential support, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org. would also cause an "anticompetitive effect" in the marketplace by decreasing consumer choice. Additional concern has also been expressed over the content of other provisions contained in other measures. Provisions, such as ones that give full reimbursement to consumers if they are slammed, instead of solely reimbursement of the overcharge, are among the issues being considered. The bill is expected to be voted on by the end of the year. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. The PIC freeze is implemented by the local exchange carrier at the request of the customer. They assert that there have been no widespread complaints about the manner in which the PIC Freeze is implemented. The FCC has encouraged carriers to take steps to help prevent slamming. In that way slamming problem of slamming. can be prevented by the freeze on the customer's primary interexchange (long distance) carrier, or PIC. The freeze prohibits the switch of a customer's designated long distance carrier without his/her express approval. carrier that has illegally switched the consumer at the expense of the legitimately chosen carrier. Despite existing regulations to prevent such practices and the overall condemnation of such activities, slamming continues to occur with significant frequency. Some states have taken significant action to protect consumers from slamming, but others have taken little action or have no antislamming regulations. The industry approach [to combat slamming] appears to be to combat slamming. The FCC distance carriers in compliance with FCC-required tariff filing procedures, is not reviewed and is no deterrent to a slammer. the victims of slamming may not file complaints, and over 50 million carrier selection changes are recorded each year, it is assumed that filed complaints represent a subset of the actual problem. The potential for slamming is expected to increase as competition in the provision of intrastate long distance and proven that the carrier "has engaged in willful and intentional slamming...." Although virtually no one supports the practice of intentional slamming, some concerns have been expressed over the approaches being taken to curb this practice. One concern has focused on the necessity for, or concern over specific provisions contained in, information on the incidence of and FCC action related to slamming, a number of reporting requirements were also included in the bill. Each telecommunications carrier or reseller was required to report slamming violations to the FCC on a quarterly basis to enable the FCC to identify those that engage in "patterns and practices" of slamming. The FCC wasrequired to submit a report to Congress, by October 31, 1998, identifying the "top ten" carriers that were the subject of the most slamming complaints and the fines assessed by the FCC against all slamming violators in the previous year. customers who complain about slamming or who specifically inquire about it. The methodology used by the FCC to develop slamming statistics has also been brought under question. The GAO criticized the methodology used to determine the list of top slamming offenders. The list that was published annually was published every year, the GAO said. The FCC has not commented on the report's findings. For confidential support, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org. problem, coupled with the potential for further abuse, make it necessary, supporters claim, to enact legislation to curb slamming. The release of a GAO report critical of current FCC efforts to reduce the occurrence of slamming gave supporters of legislation additional impetus in the 105 th and 106 th Congresses. The bill is expected to be introduced in both the 105 and 106th Congresses, and could be passed as early as next year. It would require a change in the rules of the Federal Communications Commission to allow slamming to take place. through 1998, "slamming continues to be a significant problem for consumers" This report, State and Federal Actions to Curb Slamming and Cramming , contains information on the number of complaints filed, state and federal regulations taken to protect consumers from such abuses, and industry initiatives taken to curb these abuses. S. 58 also addresses the issue of cramming, that is the practice of placing unauthorized, misleading, or false information on a product or service. The U.S. Chamber of Commerce calls the regulations to deter slamming as "... a step in the right direction" The report focused on two abuses, slamming and cramming. The report confirmed that, based on data from 1996, the practice of cramming was on the decline. It also found that phone companies were taking steps to prevent cramming from occurring. The U.S. Department of Justice issued a report in 1999 to combat cramming and other phone abuses. It found that the practice had been on the wane for some time, and that the number of people cramming had fallen by more than half. FCC's slamming team in 2004 resolved approximately 3,500 slamming complaints involving over 300 telephone carriers, resulting in consumer refunds totaling $800,000. Since many consumers who are actions totaling nearly $30 million. In its first joint federal/state effort, the FCC, working with 14 state agencies, resolved about 3500 slamming complaints in 2004. In 2005, 36,220 inquiries and 1,932 complaints were filed in the FCC's Consumer and Governmental Affairs Bureau, on behalf of individual consumers. charges are set at 150 percent, split between the authorized carrier (100%) and the subscriber (50%) Carriers proven to be in violation of FCC rules are subject to fines and penalties. From April 1994 to the end of 1999, the FCC imposed final forfeitures against 8 companies for $10.3 million, entered into consent decrees with 12 carriers with combined payments of $2.7 million and proposed $7.6 million in proposed notices of apparent liability against 5 companies. According to the FCC in the past decade its Enforcement Bureau has taken slamming enforcement of verified complaints. filed on June 20, 2002, a $1.2 million fine against WebNet Communications Inc. of McLean, Va., for 20 alleged violations. In an April 21, 1998 action, the FCC levied its most severe penalty for a telecommunications provider to date. For the first time, it revoked the operating authority of a telecommunications service provider. The fine was the largest in the history of the FCC, and the largest ever imposed by a single agency in a single case, according to the agency. The FCC had imposed a fine on AT&T for slamming rules relating to customer verification. While not remanding the FCC's rules the court did vacate fines totaling $80,000 imposed on AT & T. The fine was for slamming when an unauthorized person, without the knowledge of the line subscriber, authorized a phone call to be made to a customer. The court did not remand the rules, but vacated the $80k fine. The case was heard in the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of New York. laws or regulations relating to slamming; authorized stiff penalties for those convicted of slamming. First time "willful violators" would have faced up to a year in prison for a first first offense. fines of not less than $40,000 for the first offense and not more than $100,000 each subsequent offense. First-time offenders could have been jailed for a year if convicted of first-time slamming. For more, go to CNN.com/slamming and follow us on Twitter @CNNSlam. the authority to award both compensatory and punitive damages and was required to award those damages within 90 days of the liability determination. Minimum levels for fines were established, absent mitigating circumstances, with a fine of not less than $40,000 for first-time offenders and $150,000  for each subsequent offense. Individual fines were set at $10,000, $20,000 and $25,000. The maximum fine was $100,000 if the offense was a felony. The Fletcher Companies, a group of long distance telephone companies, for engaging in slamming and numerous other violations of the Communications Act and FCC rules. These companies, and their principals, are barred from providing interstate telecommunications to curtail slamming. This report, Telephone Slamming and Its Harmful Effects, was released in conjunction with testimony given at Subcommittee hearings. The Fletcher Companies is a long distance provider that has come under regulatory scrutiny, and has since had its license revoked, for slamming complaints. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. The FCC received more than 1,400 complaints against the Fletcher Companies, the majority of them filed from mid-1996 through 1997. The FCC assessed forfeitures totaling $5.7 million but has never been able to collect. Although these companies stopped providing services without the prior consent of the FCC, the FCC has never received any of the forfeitures. The company has been fined more than $10 million. The case is still pending. The jury is still out on whether or not to bring the case to trial. S. 1618 established both a complaint process at the FCC and minimum monetary penalties for offenders. The FCC was required to establish streamlined complaint resolution procedures and to issue a decision on slamming complaints within 150 days of filing. S. 16 18 did not preclude or preempt state law or actions against slammers. slamming victims were given the option of pursuing slamming complaints through the courts, instead of the FCC, through a state class action suit. In an attempt to gather additional slamming complaints, the FCC was given available if slamming fines are levied. subscribers could recover damages up to $500 from slammers. Those convicted of intentional slamming ("willful" slammers) would have been subject to criminal penalties. Switchless resellers were required to post a bond with the FCC before they were able to offer long distance services. The FCC was given the authority to prosecute those who refuse to pay their fines. The move was intended to ensure some degree of financial capability and that proceeds are used to pay for services that are needed by subscribers.