Security precautions have had the ancillary effect of sending the message that the United States is unapproachable and distrustful, officials say. Concrete barriers and armed escorts contribute to this perception, as do requirements restricting visitors’ access to the U.S. Embassy compounds. Some activities have been moved onto embassy compounds, where precautions designed to improve security have been put in place, the State Department says. The embassy compounds are located in Washington, D.C., New York, San Francisco and San Diego. publicity to reduce the risk of becoming a target. A recent joint USAID-State report concluded that “security concerns often require a ‘low profile’ approach during events, programs or other situations.” This constraint is called the “low-profile” approach. It is used to “generate considerable good will for the United States,” according to the report. The U.S. government says it has “no plans’ to change the low-profile approach. harm U.S. interests in various ways. In its 2004 report on strategic communication, the Defense Science Board states that “damaging consequences for other elements of U.s. soft power are tactical manifestations of a pervasive atmosphere of hostility” Similarly, the Council on Foreign Relations has claimed that the loss of goodwill can have a negative impact on relations with other countries in the Middle East and Europe. The U.N. Security Council has called on the United States to increase its diplomatic presence in the Mideast. efforts and public access, forcing public diplomacy officers to strike a balance between safety and mission. Shortly after the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, then-Secretary of State Colin Powell stated, “Safety is one of our top priorities…but it can’t be at the expense of the mission.” In our May issue, we look at how the U.S. government has handled the aftermath of the 9/11 terrorist attacks in New York and Washington, D.C. decline in overseas visitors to the United States since 9/11. Americans now face an increased risk of direct attack from individuals and small groups that wield increasingly more destructive power. According to State’s Country Reports on Terrorism for 2005, 56 private U.S. citizens were killed as a result of terrorism incidents in 2005. In 2006, the Overseas Security Advisory Council noted that more threats against the private sector occurred in 2006 the security of individual Americans, noting that 56 private Americans were killed in 2006. than in 2004 or 2005 in most of the industries it reports on. Threats to American private property and personnel working overseas have become constant in some regions, especially the Middle East, and have resulted in significantly increased security costs. According to the Working Group on Anti-Americanism, U.S. citizens are more likely to be targeted by anti-Americanists than in the past. The group's findings were published in a special issue of the magazine Foreign Policy, which is published by Simon & Schuster. its public diplomacy efforts globally, focusing particularly on countries in the Muslim world considered to be of strategic importance in the war on terror. In May 2006, we reported that this trend continued with funding increases of 25 percent for the Near East and 39 percent for South Asia from the U.S. to the region. We reported in May 2006 that this Trend continued with Funding Increases of 25% for Near East, 39% For South Asia. We also reported that Funding increases of 39% for South India, 25% For North Asia, and 20% For West Asia. 2006 reported we noted that security concerns are particularly elevated in countries with significant Muslim populations. Threat level for terrorism is rated as “critical” or “high” in 80 percent of posts. Security and budgetary concerns have led to the closure of publicly accessible facilities around the world. Such as the U.S. State Department’s National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or the International Suicide Prevention Helpline at http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. interests in those areas, it does seem to play a role in fueling such violence in Iraq. Other factors, such as the visibility of Americans overseas, particularly in Iraq; the role of the media in supporting anti-Americanism; and the absence of economic security may also contribute to this violence, he says. The U.S. government has not commented on the report's findings, but has said it is looking into the matter. The report was published by the Center for Strategic and International Studies. boycotts of American products, a backlash against American brands, increased security costs for U.S. companies, higher foreign opposition to U.s. trade policies, and a decrease in the U.N.'s ability to attract the world’s best talent to join the American workforce. A report from the Princeton-based Working Group on Anti-Americanism found that anti-Americans are more likely to be anti-American than anti-Europeans, anti-Islam, and anti-Muslim. generally echoes the possibility that anti- Americanism may harm U.S. business interests in these same areas. Travel Business Roundtable has reported significant declines in the U.s. market share of the worldwide travel market and a significant drop in the number of Americans traveling abroad. The subcommittee is holding a hearing on anti-Americanism in the travel industry on Wednesday, September 26. The hearing is expected to last for up to three hours. For confidential support, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. the world. For example, the Pew Global Attitudes Project has found that the decline in favorable opinion of the U.S. is a worldwide trend. For instance, favorable attitudes toward the United States in Indonesia declined from 75 percent in 2000 to 30 percent in 2006 and from 52 percent in 2005. The decline in unfavorable views of the United State is a global trend. The U.N. has no plans to change the way it conducts its foreign policy or foreign policy operations in the future. to 12 percent over the same time period in Turkey. Numerous experts, expert groups, policymakers, and business leaders have expressed concerns that anti-Americanism may be on the rise. While individual opinion polls may. reflect a snapshot in time, consistently negative polls may reflect the development of more deeply seated sentiments about the U.S. than in the past, according to a report by the International Institute for Strategic Studies (IISS) IISS: The rise of anti- Americanism in Turkey over the past few years may be a sign of things to come in the future. Advisory Group on Public Diplomacy for the Arab and Muslim World: “hostility toward the U.S. makes achieving our policy goals far more difficult.” Working Group on Anti- Americanism: Foreign leaders may seek to leverage anti-American sentiment in pursuit of their public diplomacy efforts. The Working Group’s three priority goals: (1) offer foreign publics a vision of hope and opportunity rooted in theU.S.'s most basic values; (2) isolate and marginalize extremists; and (3) promote understanding regarding shared values and common interests. own political goals, which may then limit their future support for U.S. foreign policy. As these leaders achieve personal political successes based on their opposition to the United States, they may then be less likely to support U.s. foreign policies going forward. Further, the 9/11 Commission, the Council on Foreign Policy, and the U.N. Security Council have all expressed concern about the rise in anti-U.S., anti-Muslim sentiment. The U.K. government has also expressed concern over the rise of anti-American sentiment in Europe. Anti-American sentiments may negatively affect American economic interests, U.S. foreign policy and military operations, and the security of Americans. According to Business for Diplomatic Action, anti-Americanism can hurt U.s. businesses by causing all of the topics discussed here. Despite the fact that we cannot draw a direct causal link, it is clear that growing negative foreign public opinion does not help the United States achieve its economic, foreign policy, and security goals, and therefore public diplomacy efforts are needed. to the Defense Science Board, the Brookings Institution, and others, anti-Americanism around the world may reduce the U.S.’s ability to pursue its foreign policy goals. The 9/11 Commission report of July 2004 stated that perceptions of the United States’ foreign policies as anti-Arab, anti/Muslim, and anti-Semitic were a barrier to success in the global war on terror and related military operations. For instance, in October 2003, Relations,. and others have reported on the possibility that anti- Americanism may also serve as a barrier. The Council on Foreign Relations has argued that increasing hostility toward America in Muslim countries facilitates recruitment and support for extremism and terror. The council also has identified potential consequences of anti-Americanism onpro-Israel. The Council on foreign relations has argued the rise in extremist rhetoric against the U.S. has contributed to the rise of extremism and terrorism in the Muslim world. The group has also argued that increased hostility toward the United States in Muslim nations facilitates recruitment, support for terrorism and extremism in the Islamic world. The Working Group on Anti-Americanism suggests that there is some correlation between anti- Americanism and violence against Americans in the greater Middle East. They note that while increased anti-Americanist in Europe or Jordan has not led to violence against American or U.S. citizens, it has led to other forms of violence. The group says that the relationship is complex and that it is important to keep an eye on the situation in the Middle East as it develops. For more information on the Working Group, visit www.anti-americanism.org. structure to reinforce the Board’s role as CEO with a host of responsibilities. In 2006, MBN received $79 million in MBN, which received $80 million in donations in 2005. The CEO has a lead role in shaping the BBG's overall strategic direction, setting expectations and standards, and creating the context for innovation and change, according to a report by the Board of Directors. The report also found that MBN has a ‘strong’ relationship with the U.S. government. funding in fiscal year 2006, faces several managerial and editorial challenges that may hinder the organization’s efforts to expand in their highly competitive market. While MBN has taken steps to improve its. process of program review and evaluation, it has not yet implemented our recommendations to improve. its system of. funding in fiscalyear 2006, the organization has yet to implement any of our recommendations. The organization has not implemented any of the recommendations we have made to improve the system of funding, but is working on some of them. internal control or develop a comprehensive staff training plan. Mr. Chairman, this concludes my prepared statement. I would be happy to respond to any questions you or other members of the subcommittee may have at this time. For questions regarding this testimony, please contact Jess T. Ford at (202) 512-4128 or jess.ford@dailymail.co.uk. Back to the page you came from. Click here to read the full transcript of Jess Ford's testimony to the subcommittee. permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. For support in the Middle East, call the Salvation Army on 8457 909090 or see http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. Secretary has issued limited guidance regarding the goal of countering extremism to 18 posts selected to participate in a pilot initiative focusing on this objective. We have recommended that State, where appropriate, adopt strategic communication best practices and develop country-specific communication plans. 18 posts participating in the department’s pilot countries initiative have developed country-level plans focusing on the countering extremism goal. These plans were developed on the basis of a template issued by the Under Secretary that requires each post to provide a list of supporting objectives, a description of the media. environment, identification of key target audiences, and a list of supporting programs and activities. We reviewed most of the plans submitted in response to this guidance. Although useful as a high-level planning exercise, these plans do not adhere to the campaign-style approach, which requires a level of rigor and detail. We are happy to share our thoughts on the plans with the world at a later stage in the project's development. We look forward to hearing from you in the coming days and weeks. that normally exceeds the three- to four-page plans produced by posts in pilot countries. The plans omit basic elements, such as specific core messages and themes, or any substantive evidence that proposed communication programs were driven by detailed audience research. In the campaign-style approach, one of the key principles embodied in the approach is that it is driven by audience research, says the U.S. government. In this case, that research was conducted by the United States Department of State. that incorporate the key steps embodied in this approach. As shown in figure 2, these steps include defining the core message, identifying and segmenting target audiences, developing detailed communication strategies and tactics, and using research and evaluation to inform and re-direct efforts as needed. As noted in our May 2006 article, this approach can be applied to a wide range of industries. For more information on this approach, visit: http://www.cnn.com/2006/05/30/business/focus-on-the-middle-class-and-women/index.html#storylink=cpy. annual and long-term outcome performance measures to support government reporting requirements. In 2001, the BBG introduced a market-based approach to international broadcasting that sought to “marry the mission to the market’ This approach was designed to generate large listening audiences in priority markets. The BBG believes it must reach address this key challenge through two primary means. First, it planned to treat the component parts of U.S. international broadcasting as a single system. Second, it intended to realign theBBG’s organizational structure. broadcasters (see fig. 4). As noted in the BBG’s strategic plan, ‘diverse organizations with different missions, different frameworks, and different constituencies’ makes it a challenge to bring all the separate parts together in a more effective whole’ As we reported in July 2003, the Board hoped to ‘bring all the different parts together’ in a ‘more effective whole,’ as the plan put it. In the end, the plan was a failure. The BBG has added audience size as a key performance measure within its strategic plan. In 2003, we reported that the United States had the highest audience size in the world. The U.S. had the lowest audience size among developed countries in 2003, according to the BBG. The BBG says the U.N. audience size measure is flawed due to various methodological concerns. It also says that the BBN has not been able to provide a clear picture of the audience size of developing countries in recent years. We found that the BBG’s strategic plan to implement its new approach did not include a single goal or related program objective designed to gauge progress toward increasing audience size. The strategy focuses on the need to reach large audiences in priority markets. The BBG subsequently created a new strategy to implement the new approach. The new strategy is called “Audience Growth Strategy” and will be rolled out over the next few months. For more information, go to: http://www.bbg.org/audiencegrowth. single strategic goal to focus on the key objective of maximizing impact in priority areas of interest to the United States. However, in our August 2006 review of the Middle East Broadcasting Networks, we found that methodological concerns call into question the network's performance. We found that the network made audience size a key performance measure. We also found that it was difficult for the network to keep up with the demands of its audience. We concluded the network was not performing as well as it should have been and called into question its performance measures. potential accuracy of this key performance measure. We found that weaknesses in the BBG’s audience surveys create uncertainty over whether some of Radio Sawa's or Alhurra's performance targets for audience size have been met. We recommended that the. BBG revise its audience surveys to make sure they are more accurate and accurate. The BBG also recommends that the BBC change its audience survey methodology to make it more accurate, and that it change the way it measures audience size. The BBC also recommends the BBC stop using the audience survey to measure listening and viewing rates. The BBG supports U.S. public diplomacy’s key objectives by broadcasting news and information about the United States and world affairs. The BBG manages and oversees the Voice of America (VOA), Radio/TV Marti, Radio Free Europe/Radio BBG improve its audience research methods, including identifying significant methodological limitations. Public diplomacy efforts in the field face several other challenges, including funding and staffing issues, the authors say. The report concludes that the BBG has accepted our recommendation and has informed us that it is currently considering how it will do so. State and the BBG spent close to $1.5 billion on public diplomacy programs in fiscal year 2006. As others have previously reported, in recent years anti-American sentiment has spread and intensified around the world. The U.S. State Department says it has no plans to change its public diplomacy efforts in the near future. The State Department has said it will continue to engage in public diplomacy in the years to come, but will not change its overall public diplomacy strategy. It has no immediate plans to do so, the State Department said. to effectively meet its mission. The Board’s vision is to create a flexible, multimedia, research-driven U.S. international broadcasting system. Implementing this strategy has focused on markets relevant to the war on terrorism, in particular in the Middle East through such key initiatives as Radio Sawa and the Alhurra TV network. The board's vision is for the U.N. to become a global leader in the fight against terrorism by 2030. It is also aiming to become the world's largest broadcaster by 2050. October 2005 were having difficulty finding hosts for American Corners, as local institutions fear becoming terrorist targets. The Broadcasting Board of Governors has its own set of public diplomacy challenges, including trying to gain large audiences in priority markets and dealing with a disparate organizational structure that contains multiple discrete departments. October 2005 werehaving difficulty finding host for AmericanCorners, and local institutions feared becoming terrorist target. The BBC has a separate organization that contains several discrete departments, including a news division and a public affairs division. State has expanded its outreach to foreign audiences since the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001. State has begun to consider techniques for communicating with broader foreign audiences, including opinion leaders, agenda setters, and decision makers. However, the dramatic growth in global mass communications and other trends have forced a rethinking of this approach, and State is looking at new ways to reach out to global audiences. The State Department is also looking at ways to increase its reach in the U.S. and beyond. as American Centers and Libraries. In Pakistan, for example, all American Centers have closed for security reasons; the last facility, in Islamabad, closed in February 2005. These same concerns have prevented establishing a U.S. presence elsewhere. As a result, embassies have had to find other venues for public diplomacy programs, such as libraries and cultural centers. For more information, go to: www.americancenters.org. For confidential support, call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. particularly acute in Pakistan, where the embassy has had to reduce certain speaker and exchange programs. State has responded to security concerns and the loss of publicly accessible facilities through a variety of initiatives, including American Corners, which are centers that provide information about the United States, hosted in local communities. The U.S. Embassy in Pakistan is located in the city of Lahore, in Pakistan's Punjab province. The embassy is also based in Karachi, Pakistan's Sindh province, in the country's tribal region. use of cell phones and pagers within the embassy. According to one official in Pakistan, visitors to the embassy’s reference library have declined to as few as one per day because many visitors feel humiliated by the embassy's rigorous security procedures. Other public diplomacy programs have had to limit their use of cell phone and pager use within the Embassy in Islamabad. The U.S. Embassy in Pakistan is located in Islamabad, the capital of Pakistan. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. The average length of tour at posts in the Muslim world is about 22 percent shorter than tour lengths elsewhere. Public affairs officers who have shorter tours tend to produce less effective work than officers with longer tours, a senior official at State said. In our May 2006 report, we reported that the prevalence of 1-year tours in theMuslim world was high. To see the full report, go to CNN.com/soulmatestories. To read the rest of the report, click here: http://www.cnn.org/2006/01/29/world/features/world-diplomat-tours-in-mideast. According to State data, there are currently 365 American Corners throughout the world, including more than 200 in the Muslim world. However, two of the posts we visited in the world were staffed by local employees. More than 20 of the 31 planned U.S. Corners will be in theMuslim world, with another 31 planned for the rest of the world. The U.N. has no plans to expand the U.K. American Corner in the near future, according to the State Department. that survey, officers stated that, although they manage to attend public outreach and other functions within their host country capitals, it was particularly difficult to find time to travel outside the capitals to interact with other communities. This challenge is compounded at posts with short tours of duty, including many many posts in Africa, the survey found. The survey was carried out by the British Foreign Office in conjunction with the British Institute of International Affairs (BFA) BFA is a non-profit organisation based in London. countries with significant Muslim populations. In Arabic language posts, about 36 percent of language- designated public diplomacy positions were filled by staff unable to engage the Egyptian media effectively. State has begun to address these language deficiencies by increasing its overall amount of language training and providing supplemental training for more difficult languages at overseas locations. Security concerns have limited embassy outreach in the Muslim world. For example, State’s Foreign Service Institute recently offered a week of intensive media training for language-qualified officers that provided guidance on how to communicate with Arabic-speaking audiences. State officials said that there are even fewer officers who are willing or able to speak on television or engage in public debate in Arabic. The information officer in Cairo stated that his office does not have enough Arabic speakers to speak Arabic at the designated level. In addition, the information officer said that he does not know of any officers who can speak Arabic on TV or on the radio or in the media at the same level as the officers who speak the language on the air or on radio or TV. GAO reported in 2006 that the State Department continued to experience significant foreign language proficiency shortfalls in countries around the world. The problem was particularly acute at posts in the Muslim world where Arabic—classified as a “superhard” language by State—predominates. In August 2006, GAO reported that the U.S. administration was still struggling with foreign language skills offshore. In May 2006, a GAO report noted that the problem was especially acute in the Middle East and North Africa. Staffing shortages may also limit the amount of training public diplomacy officers receive. Public diplomacy officers at posts are burdened with administrative tasks, and thus have less time to conduct public diplomacy outreach activities than they did previously. One senior State official said that administrative tasks have drawn down field officers even further. The number of field officers has remained the same in fiscal years 2004 and 2006, the State Department says. The State Department is repositioning several public diplomacy Officers as part of its transformational diplomacy initiative. efforts, post officials have consistently cited several key challenges, including a general lack of staff, insufficient administrative support, and inadequate language training. Furthermore, public diplomacy officers struggle to balance security with public access and outreach to local populations. Finally, the BBG’s disparate organizational structure has been viewed as a key challenge to the organization. The U.S. State Department has been criticized for failing to provide adequate support for public diplomacy efforts in the Middle East and North Africa. The department has been criticised for not providing adequate support to public diplomacy officials. State had 887 established public diplomacy positions (overseas and domestic) as of March 31, 2007, but 199, or roughly 22 percent, were vacant. Compounding this challenge is the loss of public diplomacy officers to temporary duty in Iraq, which, according to one State official, is costing the U.S. $1.5 billion a year in lost funds. The State Department says it has a plan to address the problem, but it is not yet clear how it will be implemented. duties, such as budget, personnel, and internal reporting, compete with officers’ public diplomacy responsibilities. Another official in Egypt stated that she rarely had enough time to strategize, plan, or evaluate her programs. These statements echo comments we heard during overseas fieldwork and in a survey for our 2003 report. In the U.S., public diplomacy duties compete with officer’s public Diplomacy responsibilities, according to a 2003 report by the State Department. In Egypt, an official said that she often had too much to do and not enough to do. address these challenges, we recommended in 2003 that the Secretary of State designate more administrative positions to overseas public affairs sections. Officials at State said that the Management bureau is currently considering options for reducing the administrative burden on posts. This could include the development of centralized centralized public affairs posts. We are happy to clarify that this is not the case, and that the State Department is looking at a number of options to reduce the burden on overseas public Affairs sections. We would like to make clear that we are not aware of any plans to create centralized centralized centralized posts. Department of State: Staffing and Foreign Language Shortfalls Persist Despite Initiatives to Address Gaps. U.S. Public Diplomacy: State Department Efforts to Engage Muslim Audiences Lack Certain Communication Elements and Face Significant Challenges. U,S. International Broadcasting: New Strategic Approach Focuses on Reaching Large Audiences but Lacks Measurable Program Objectives. The State Department and Broadcasting Board of Governors expand Post- 9/11 Efforts but Challenges Remain. The Department of State and the Broadcasting board of governors expand Efforts in the Middle East but Face Significant challenges. the absence of such research, programs may lack important information about appropriate target audiences and credible messages and messengers. Based on prior reports by GAO and others, the department has begun to institute a more concerted effort to measure the impact of its programs and activities. The department created (1) a task force to conduct research on the impact and effectiveness of the department's programs. The task force created a taskforce to conduct a study of the impact, effectiveness, and impact of the Department of Health and Human Services' programs. GAO: Actions Needed to Better Assess the Impact of Agencies’ Marking and Publicizing Efforts. Individuals making key contributions to this statement include Audrey Solis, Assistant Director; Michael ten Kate; Eve Weisberg; Kate France Smiles; and Joe Carney. GAO-07-277. U.S. International Broadcasting: Management. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. This work is a work of the U.S. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States. It may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from GAO. However, because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material, it may not be available in all countries. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org for details. For support on suicide matters call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. some marking and publicity requirements in their policies, regulations, and guidelines, and used various methods to mark and publicize their activities. We identified some challenges to marking and publicizing U.S. foreign assistance, including the lack of a strategy for assessing the impact of marking and press efforts on public awareness. State indicated that the interagency public diplomacy strategy will address assessment and will include governmentwide marking and media coverage of foreign assistance. The strategy is expected to be in place by the end of the year. The U.S. government also lacks a governmentwide strategy and meaningful methods to ensure that recipients of foreign assistance are consistently aware that the aid comes from the United States. In March 2007, we reported that most agencies involved in foreign assistance activities had established awareness and the lack of governmentwide guidance for marking and publicizing foreign aid. We recommended that State, in consultation with other U.s. government agencies, (1) develop a strategy and methods to mark and publicize foreign aid, and (2) develop guidance for the public.and will be issued soon. lacked a governmentwide, interagency public diplomacy strategy, defining the messages and means for communication efforts abroad. The lack of such a strategy complicates the task of conveying consistent messages and therefore report, our review of public diplomacy operations in Nigeria, Pakistan, and Egypt in 2006 found that this approach and corresponding communication plans were absent. Rather, post public diplomacy efforts constituted an ad hoc collection of activities designed to support such broad goals as promoting mutual understanding. In a recent development, the administration has made a number of unsuccessful attempts to develop a strategy. established a new Policy Coordination Committee on Public Diplomacy and Strategic Communications. This committee intends to better coordinate interagency activities, including the development of an interagency public diplomacy strategy. We have been told this strategy is still under development. The committee is led by the Under Secretary for Public Diplomacies and Public Affairs. It is expected to be in place by the end of the year. It will be in charge of developing a new strategy for public diplomacy in the UK. The strategy will be part of a larger strategy for the UK in the rest of the world. The key objectives of U.S. public diplomacy are to engage, inform, and influence overseas audiences. Public diplomacy is carried out through a wide range of programs that employ person-to-person contacts and print, broadcast, and electronic media. Traditionally, the State Department’s efforts have focused on foreign elites. Current and future management challenge significantly complicates its efforts to focus and direct U.s. international broadcasting efforts. Several embassy officials stated that, with current staffing levels, they do not have the capacity to effectively utilize public diplomacy. increases the risk of making damaging communication mistakes. State officials have said that it also diminishes the efficiency and effectiveness of governmentwide public diplomacy efforts. Several reports have concluded that a strategy is needed to synchronize agencies’ target audience assessments, messages, and capabilities. On April 8, 2006, the President announced that the U.S. would be sending more troops to the Middle East to fight against al-Qaeda and the Taliban in Iraq and Afghanistan. The move was a major step in the effort to counter al-Qaida and its affiliates. In 2005, we noted that State’s efforts to engage the private sector in pursuit of common public diplomacy objectives had met with mixed success. We recommended that the Secretary develop a strategy to guide these efforts. Since then, State has established an Office of Private Sector Outreach and hosted a Private Sector Summit on Public Diplomacy in January 2007. But State has not yet developed a comprehensive strategy to help guide the Department’S efforts to engaging the privatesector. In 2005, the Under Secretary established a strategic framework. and faiths. State has not yet developed written guidance that provides details on how these five tactics will be used to implement the Under Secretary’s priority goals. This framework partially responds to our 2003 recommendation that State should develop and disseminate a strategy to integrate its public diplomacy efforts and direct them toward achieving common objectives. However, it should be noted that the Under. Secretary has said she intends to achieve these goals using various public diplomacy programs and other means, including coordinating outreach efforts with the private sector. performance and results. State has begun to take credible steps towards instituting more systematic performance measurement practices, consistent with recommendations. In addition, posts generally do not pursue a campaign-style approach to communications that incorporates best practices endorsed by GAO and others. State should develop a strategic plan to integrate its diverse efforts, and posts adopt strategic communication best practices, according to the report. The State Department has not yet developed a strategic framework to coordinate and focus efforts of key government agencies and the private sector. The U.S. government lacks an interagency public diplomacy strategy. A plan has been drafted and will be released shortly. While the department has articulated a strategic framework to direct its efforts, comprehensive guidance is needed. It is essential that meaningful performance goals and indicators be established by both State and the BBG. The BBG has a critical role to play in supporting U.K. interests throughout the world. The U.N. Security Council has called on the United States to increase its diplomatic presence in the Middle East. the Office of Policy, Planning, and Resources within the office of the Under Secretary; (2) the Public Diplomacy Evaluation Council to share best practices; and (3) a unified Public Diplomacies Evaluation Office. The Department established an expanded evaluation schedule that is designed to cover all major public diplomacy programs. The agency also established a public diplomacy evaluation program to help the public understand the role of the U.S. government in the world. The department also established an evaluation program that was designed to help people understand their role in the community. department also has called on program managers to analyze and define their key inputs, activities, outputs, outcomes, and impact to help identify meaningful performance goals and indicators. Finally, the department recently launched a pilot public diplomacy performance measurement data collection project that is designed to collect, document, and quantify reliable reliable reliable data for the U.S. Public Diplomacy program. The project is intended to measure the effectiveness of the public diplomacy program in the public and private sectors, as well as the impact of public diplomacy on the economy.