Title X of H.R. 146 contains a San Joaquin River Restoration Settlement implementation provision. The legislation had previously been considered and passed the Senate as Title X of S. 22. The Settlement for Congress is that although the Settlement aims to end a 19-year lawsuit and comports with a court ruling, the Settlement would affect others outside the Friant Division Service Area. Changes embodied in H.r. 146 aim to resolve concern about the introduction of restoration. No action was taken on the bills before adjournment of 109 th Congress. by the Settlement. These issues partially derive from constraints imposed by the pressure to react to a settlement responding to a judicial ruling, as opposed to managing or legislating on an issue prior to, or absent, such a settlement. Another overarching issue is how San Joaquin River management ties into the settlement, as well as how it relates to the state's water policy. The settlement is expected to be completed by the end of the year, with a deadline of December 31, 2015. The issue of how the settlement will affect the water policy of the state has not yet been determined. the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of California. The district court has reviewed the application of § 5937 to the problem at hand on several occasions since 1988 and has issued several decisions. In 2004, the District Court issued another decision regarding the application. of the law to the case at hand. The case was settled in the United States Supreme Court in 2005. The decision was the first time the Supreme Court had been asked to review a case involving the use of a federal law of this type. Key legislative issue is how to finance Settlement implementation. How to resolve congressional Pay-As-You-Go of the water management goal has caused increased concern among some stakeholders. If Congress does not act on the legislation, some fear that the court will order a remedy, which may differ from the Settlement and which may have more severe consequences for some area water users and third parties. Not enough money to pay for the Settlement, according to a study by the U.S. Conference of Mayors. in addition to integration of federal, state, local, and private infrastructure projects. Whether Congress addresses this issue, given current water resource authorization and appropriations practices and a restrictive budgetary climate, remains to be seen. While the issues discussed here have confronted prior Administrations and Congresses, a Settlement Agreement would be a step in the right direction for the state of California and the nation as a whole. It would also be a major step toward solving the nation's water problems, which have been a problem for decades. was not reached until the U.S. District Court acted, ultimately resulting in the difficult choices facing Congress today. This is a common dilemma for resource agencies implementing projects and programs which are based on societal and political trade-offs made decades ago (e.g., budgetary, water delivery, and ecosystem health trade-off) The court's decision is a result of a decades-long battle between the states and the federal government over water rights in the state of New Mexico. The court ruled in favor of the state's right to sue the state for water rights. declare what amount of water was necessary to satisfy the law or declare any other type of relief; rather, it set a 2006 trial date to determine a proper remedy. Faced with the prospect of a court-imposed remedy, and mounting legal fees in preparation for trial, the parties (NRDC et. al.) agreed to a settlement. The settlement was reached in April 2006. The parties agreed that the settlement would not require the NRDC to pay any legal fees, but that it would require them to pay the legal fees. election of a party, at which point litigation might resume. While implementation legislation was considered in the 110 th Congress, it was not enacted. Title X of H.R. 146 (the 111 th Congress) contains a revised version of this legislation. The legislation was passed by the 110th Congress, but not by the 111th Congress. The bill was passed in both houses of the 111 th and 112th Congress but not the 113 th Congress. It was passed on a voice vote, but was not signed into law. bills were reintroduced in the 110 th Congress as H.R. 24 and S. 27. Hearings were held in both houses of Congress; however, the legislation was not enacted. One of the primary hurdles facing the legislation has been its budgetary impact and financing mechanisms. Implementation of the Settlement calls for the legislation to be implemented in the form of a law that would require the federal government to set up a fund to pay for it. The bill has not yet been enacted. Short-term (10 year) direct spending in H.R. 146 has been reduced substantially compared with earlier versions of the legislation. The budget effects of the Legislation in its entirety are still at issue for some. An overall complication is that PAYGO rules are a difficult task in today's budget climate. The legislation was passed by the House and the Senate in September, and is expected to be signed into law by the White House by the end of the year. The Senate passed the legislation in October, and the House passed it in November. and community groups) support proceeding with the Settlement Agreement, in lieu of going to trial. Congressional authorization and appropriations are required for full implementation of the Settlement. The Settlement states that if legislation is not enacted by December 31, 2006, the Settlement may become void at the end of the year. If Congress does these goals, the settlement calls for numerous actions, some of which need congressional authorization. Further, appropriations authorization is needed to finance settlement implementation as envisioned under the Settlement, according to the settlement. Revisions address direct spending and restoration flow provisions (§§ 10004 and 10009) To date, no party has officially elected to void the Settlement. In September 2006, the settling parties presented the Settlement, including its legislative proposal, to various Members of Congress. The parties hoped implementing legislation would be enacted prior to the Settlement taking effect. The settlement took effect on January 1, 2007. It is the largest settlement in U.S. history, with more than $1.2 billion in benefits. to adjournment of the 109 th Congress. However, numerous entities who were not party to the Settlement (i.e., third parties ), objected to the legislative proposal included in the Settlement, as well as the swift time line imposed by the Settlement Agreement. Shortly thereafter, many third parties met with the Congress and reached an agreement to end the dispute. The settlement was signed on December 11, 2009. The bill was passed on December 14, 2009, and the House of Representatives voted to approve it on December 17, 2009; the Senate voted on December 18, 2009 and December 19, 2009 respectively. Settlement parties and certain Members of the California delegation. An agreement was reached to address certain third party interests; in exchange, these third parties agreed to support new legislation. Although many parties who had opposed the draft legislation in September 2006 supported the new legislation, other parties emerged that were opposed to the bill. The bill was passed in December 2006 and signed into law by President Bush on January 1, 2007. It was the first bill of its kind in the history of the U.S. Congress. for construction of numerous projects and other activities that could cost between $250 million and $1.1 billion. Federal funding for these projects and activities is sought by the parties and is contemplated under the Settlement. Direct spending funding mechanisms included in the legislation would typically require a budgetary offset under the legislation. For more information on the Settlement, visit the Settlement website or the House of Representatives website. for more information about the Settlement or the Senate version of the legislation, or for more details on the House version, click here. Recent events potentially limiting water exports from the Sacramento and San Joaquin Rivers Delta confluence could significantly affect implementation of the recirculation portion of the project. At minimum, it appears the restoration effort will necessitate multi-year water planning and investments, including having the funding on hand and infrastructure in place to buy and put to use surplus water. In the eyes of many, the restoration is an effort to respond to fisheries economic and ecological damage begun 60 years ago. For others the potential of reduced water supplies for off-stream use is a breach of promises made 60 years earlier. the Settlement and implementing legislation, increased water flows for restoring fisheries would reduce diversions of water for off-stream purposes, such as irrigation, hydropower, and municipal and industrial uses. The quantity of water used for restoration flows and the quantity by which water deliveries would be reduced are related, but the quantities are not the same. The Settlement and Implementation legislation, the Settlement and Implementing legislation, is available online at: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/29/science/water-fisheries/index.html#storylink=cpy. relationship would not necessarily be one-for-one. In some of the wettest years, flood water releases could provide a significant amount of the restoration flows, thereby lowering the reduction in deliveries to agricultural and municipal users. Under the Settlement, no water would be released for restoration purposes in the state. The settlement would not apply to the city of San Francisco or the state of California. The agreement was reached in the early 1990s. It has been in the works for more than 20 years. dry years for those without sufficient access to groundwater, those with primarily Class II supplies, or in the driest of years. Therefore, the future of water resource management in the Central Valley is not just conjunctive water management, but multi-year conjunction management with the financial resources to make it happen, writes the author. The author is also the author of the book, "California's Water Crisis: The Story of a State in Crisis," published by Simon & Schuster at $24.99. Many growers also use groundwater, conjunctively managing their surface and groundwater supplies. This conjunctive management improves seasonal and multi-year water reliability for growers. The SJV, an eight-county region extending 250 miles from Stockton in the north to Bakersfield in the south, is both rapidly growing and in need of new water supplies. For more information on the SJV visit: http://www.sjv.org.uk/. For more on the San Francisco Bay Area Water Project, visit: www.s jbaywaterproject.com. economically depressed. Yet, the 27,280 square mile SJV is home to five of the nation's ten most agriculturally productive counties, as measured. (For more information on challenges facing the SJV, see CRS Report RL33184, California's San Joaquin Valley: A Region in Transition , by [author name scrubbed] et al. (pdf)) The SJV also has one of the highest per-capita incomes in the U.S., according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics. other CVP management decisions, as well as state and local water systems. Both the CVP and State Water Project (SWP)—a largely parallel state water supply system south of the Bay-Delta—are operating under regulations that limit the amount (and timing) of water that can be exported south out of theBay-Delta. The CVP is the state's largest water project; the SWP is the second-largest water project in the U.S., according to the National Water Policy Board. Recent court decisions regarding the health of threatened Delta Smelt have constrained water exports and may constrain future exports. The degree to which some of the water management goals identified in the Settlement might rely on moving water in and out of the Bay-Delta could affect the ultimate ability to export water. The court decisions could also affect the ability to move water into and out the Delta. The settlement was reached in the early 1990s and has been a source of controversy for environmentalists and conservationists. operates Friant Dam ( Natural Resources Defense Council v. Rodgers ). Most long-term water service contractors who receive the diverted water were added to the case shortly thereafter as defendant intervenors. A U.S. District Court judge has since ruled that operation of Friant dam violates state law. It is a matter of Frian Dam operations comporting with state law, the judge said. The judge said that Friant's operation of the dam is not in violation of state law because it is in compliance with federal law. project administered by the Bureau of Reclamation (Reclamation) under federal law. The Friant Dam was built on the San Joaquin River in California. The project is also administered under the federal Endangered Species Act (ESA), various other federal environmental and administrative laws, and various state laws. It is located on the banks of the San Francisco Bay, near the town of Bakersfield. The dam was built in the early 20th century, after the Reclamation Act of 1902 was passed. had violated Section 8 of the Reclamation Act of 1902 (43 U.S.C. § 383) Reclamation will act in conformity with state laws "relating to the control, appropriation, use or distribution of water used in irrigation" The state law that is at issue is California Fish that Reclamation is operating the dam in violation of California state fish and game code. The implications of this decision are far reaching for California water management and for both the directly affected water users and the indirectly affected communities, landowners, and water users. and Game Code § 5937. Section 5937 provides as follows: "The owner of any dam shall allow ... sufficient water to pass over, around or through the dam, to keep in good condition any fish that may be planted or exist below the dam" The claims have been litigated in the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of New York, and the case has been referred to the United States Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit. The case is still pending. environmental grounds. Plaintiffs argued that Reclamation had begun contract renewals violated the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) and that the lack of water in the river violated the ESA (16 U.S.C. §§ 1531-1544) In addition to claims that the process under which Reclamation. had begun contracts violated the NEPA and the ESA, the plaintiffs argued that. Reclamation was violating the ESA and other environmental laws by not releasing enough water into the river. the San Joaquin River, finding that Reclamation had violated the state law. It stated: "There can be no genuine dispute that many miles of the SanJoaquin River are now entirely dry, except during extremely wet periods" The court did not rule on the legality of Reclamation's plans to build a dam on the San Francisco Bay, which would have made the river more accessible to the city of San Francisco and the rest of the state. The decision to build the dam was made by the California Department of Water Resources, which is responsible for the water supply. dry in most years, making it impossible to support Chinook salmon populations in the upper reaches of the river. In 1988, a coalition of conservation and fishing groups advocating for river restoration sued the Bureau of Reclamation (hereafter referred to as Reclamation), which owns and manages the San Joaquin River. Chinook Salmon are not listed under the ESA, but are identified as a species of concern. This lawsuit and the negotiated Settlement Agreement are the result of a lawsuit filed in 1988 and settled in 2009. The Settlement was filed with the U.S. District Court, Eastern District of California, September 13, 2006. The Settlement Agreement was accepted by the District Court on October 23,2006. The stated goals of the Settlement are twofold: (1) to restore and maintain fish populations in "good condition"—the § 5937 standard—in the area, and (2) to improve water quality in the area. The report provides a brief overview of the settlement, its legal history, and the legislative process. agricultural industry over commercial and sport fishing industries, or timber harvest over species habitat. It is hard to say what is fair or just when such significant trade-offs were made decades ago, causing harm to some, but providing benefit to others. Some of those who then made financial and livelihood decisions based on these trade-off decisions are still affected by the decisions made in the 1970s, 1980s and 1990s. The debate is still raging today over the impact of climate change. driest of years; thus, no reductions in deliveries to Friant contractors would be made due to the Settlement in those years. In some years, the restoration flows released in late winter and early spring may free up space for additional runoff in Millerton Lake. Consequently, how deliveries toFriant water contractors might be reduced in any given year would depend on many factors. Regardless of the specifics of how much water might be released for fisheries restoration vis-à-vis water diverted for off-stream purposes, there will be water diverted. destruction of downstream fisheries. Faced with mounting legal fees, considerable uncertainty, and the possibility of dramatic cuts to water diversions, parties agreed to negotiate a settlement instead of proceeding to trial on a remedy. In September 2006, a Settlement Agreement was reached concerning operation of Friant context in which implementing legislation is being considered. For more information on fisheries restoration, water management, funding, economic, and third party issues, see CRS Report RL34237, San Joaquin River Restoration Settlement. be impacts to existing surface and groundwater supplies in and around the Friant Division Service Area and adjustments in local economies. Although some opposition to the Settlement and its implementing legislation remains, the largest and most directly affected stakeholders (i.e., the majority of Friant water contractor organizations, and environmental, fisheries, and other stakeholders) are supportive of the Settlement. The settlement is expected to be implemented by the end of the year or early next year, depending on when it is approved by the state legislature. In the late 1980s the Friant Division water users sought renewal of their long-term water service contracts with Reclamation. Beginning in 1988, a coalition of environmental groups and anglers led by the Natural Resources Defense Council (NRDC) challenged the contract renewals in federal court on a number of issues. Discussed below are some of the issues that were raised in the legal challenges to the renewals of the water contracts in the late 80s and early 90s. In the end, the contracts were approved. The terms of the Settlement were then vetted with selected stakeholders, finalized, and presented to Congress in September 2006. The final Stipulation of the settlement was released in June 2007. The settlement was reached after a series of settlement negotiations in late 2005, and came to a tentative agreement in June 2006. For more information on the settlement, visit the U.S. Department of the Interior's official website, which includes the Settlement Stipulations and a copy of the Final Stipulating of the Agreement. River by Reclamation in the early 1940s. It stores the San Joaquin River's flow in Millerton Lake, the reservoir behind the dam, from which water for irrigation and other purposes is diverted into two canals. Reclamation delivers the impounded water to 28 irrigation and water districts in the Friant Division. By the late 1940s, Reclamation's operation of Friant Dam had caused long stretches of the river to dry up. Portions of the SanJoaquin River upstream of its confluence with the Merced River remain mostly main stem. River flows north to the San Joaquin and Sacramento Rivers Delta confluence with San Francisco Bay (Bay-Delta) Hydrologically, the Friant Division Service Area extends into the Tulare basin. Agriculture in these areas is highly dependent on irrigation; much of the irrigation water is surface water supplied by the Frian Division. The Friant division service area includes the following water basins: Tulare, Fresno, Kings, San Diego, Imperial, Kern, and Imperial Counties, as well as the City of Fresno. Friant Dam is one of the largest federal dams of the Bureau of Reclamation's Central Valley Project (CVP) in California. The Settlement calls for new releases of water from Friant Dam to restore fisheries in the San Joaquin River and for efforts to mitigate water supply losses due to the new releases. As shown in Figure 1 , Friant dam and the Friant Division of the CVP are situated in the southern portion of the SanJoaquin Valley (SJV); however, the Sanjoaquin River is located in the northern part of the valley. The Friant Division serves irrigation and water districts in the Fresno, Kern, Madera, Merced, and Tulare counties. The SJV faces significant environmental and natural resource challenges, including the court-ordered restoration of the San Joaquin River discussed in this report. The CVP is a multi-unit, multi-purpose reclamation pursuant to various types of water service contracts, many of which originated in the 1940s. Unlike most Reclamation projects, theFriant Division (dam and distribution facilities) is operated in California. Historical spawning runs may have exceeded 200,000 fish annually, ascending the river as far as Mammoth Pool. For several years after Friant Dam was in place, spring Chinook successfully spawned in habitat below the dam. However, the spring-run Chinook population had declined from historic levels before construction and full operation of the Friant unit of the Central Valley Project. It appears from California Department of Fish and Game records that a viable spring- run population existed well into the 1940s with returns ranging from 2,000 to 56,000. Bureau of Reclamation's Friant Dam on the San Joaquin River became fully operational in the 1940s. As a result, approximately 60 miles of the river is dry today, except during flood events. The operation of Friant dam largely destroyed numerous species of native fish. Today Central Valley spring-run Chinook salmon are listed as threatened under the ESA. The diverted water helped develop and continues to support a diverse agricultural economy from north of Fresno to Bakersfield—the Friant by the late 1940s, operation ofFriant Dam caused long stretches of the SanJoaquin River to dry up. Historically, Central Valley spring-run Chinook were found throughout the Central Valley. Most spawning in the San Joaquin River occurred upstream of the current location of Friant Dam. Fall and late-fall- run Chinook salmon continue to spawn in small numbers in tributaries such as the Mokelumne, Stanislaus, Tuolumne and Merced Rivers. These fish spawn at lower elevations and have been less affected by dam construction than the spring- run salmon.