Nighttime crash rates are estimated to be three times higher than daytime rates. The fatality rate for nighttime driving is to motorists at night. Nighttime driving becomes more challenging as drivers age, because over time the lens of the eye typically become less transparent. This and other changes result in reduced sensitivity to light and reduced clarity of vision for older persons. With the aging of the U.S. population, the. population is growing at a faster rate than the rate of population growth in other countries. number of older drivers is increasing significantly. Ensuring that traffic signs are easily visible to older drivers at night is becoming a more significant safety issue. The process of developing the signs is still in the early stages of development. It is hoped that the signs will be visible to all drivers, not just older drivers, by the end of the year. For more information, visit www.trafficsigns.org.uk or call the National Traffic Safety Center at 1-800-273-8255. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here. period. Of this, $27.5 million would be borne by local governments, and $11.8 million by state governments. The total cost was estimated to represent a 0.5% increase in annual sign maintenance costs for states. Up to 100% of the cost of replacing traffic signs is eligible for federal funding. Most larger communities already have sign maintenance and replacement programs. For these communities, the study estimated that the impact on local government budgets would not be significant. The maximum cost in any one year was estimated at $4.5million. a lawsuit involving, in this case, a nighttime car crash in which the visibility of a street sign may be a factor. A study sponsored by DOT estimated the total additional cost to state and local governments of complying with the new standard to be $37.5 million over a 10-year period. The new standard is set to go into effect on January 1, 2015. It is expected to reduce traffic accidents by up to 30 percent, according to the Department of Transportation's Office of Traffic Safety. The annual level of federal-aid highway funding rose from $33.9 billion in FY2004 (when the rule was formally proposed) to $41.5 billion in Fiscal Year 2012. In addition to the federal funds, states and localities are given $27.5 million each year. The federal government is responsible for providing the majority of the highway funding in the United States. The U.S. government is also responsible for the lion's share of the funding for state and local governments. The new standard involved two elements. First, it established measurable standards for the minimum acceptable retroreflectivity of signs. The second element was a requirement that agencies adopt a method by which meet the minimum retro Reflectivity standard. There appear to be two reasons for the standard's sudden notoriety beginning in the fall of 2010. One was concern on the part of agencies about the cost of compliance. The other was that several press reports conflated the requirement for replacing signs that were not retroreflective. new standard were much higher than the estimate in the DOT study. The methodologies by which these estimates were generated were not reported. In the controversy over the new standard, the charge was made that the newstandard required agencies to replace "perfectly good" traffic signs. In part this may be the reason for the discrepancy in the new standards' estimates. The new standard is set to go into effect on January 1, 2015. For more information, go to: http://www.dot.gov/traffic. on the performance of sample signs that are monitored for loss of retroreflectivity; or other methods that are developed based on engineering studies. According to the standard, an agency using a retro Reflectivity assessment or management method will be in compliance even if at times individual signs did not meet the retroreflective standard. This would appear to put an agency in a better position to defend lawsuits in which inadequate sign retroreflectivities is an issue. Also, the final standard provided that agencies that have adopted an assessment or Management method will are in compliance with the standard even if some signs do not.  highway safety groups supported the standard. State and local transportation agencies opposed the establishment of numerical minimum levels of retroreflectivity. They were concerned about potential tort liability from failure to maintain a specific minimum level. They preferred that the.signs and overhead guide signs be brought into compliance with the new standard. The standard is set to go into effect on January 1, 2015. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org. of the retroreflectivity maintenance standard is likely to be modest. The impact may be greater in smaller communities that may never have instituted sign maintenance and replacement programs. Press reports indicate that a number of state and local highway agencies stated they estimated that their costs to comply with the new standard are likely to have a modest impact on their budgets. The new standard is set to go into effect on January 1, 2015. For more information, go to: http://www.nhs.org/signs/ retroreflective-signs. minimum retroreflectivity levels. Communities are still required to replace any signs that do not meet the standards. DOT said it changed the deadlines to reduce the costs and impacts of the compliance deadlines on state and local highway agencies. It noted that the original deadlines had been based on minimum retroreflective level standards. The deadline for communities to adopt one of the methods to systematically maintain the retroreflectivities of their street signs was January 22, 2012 (four years after adoption of the new standard) There were three deadlines. The 2007 amendment set a minimum level of retroreflectivity for signs and required state agencies to adopt a method to ensure that signs met that minimum. Because of its safety significance, this standard was given a deadline for management method for ensuring that their signs comply with the standard to May 2014. The scope of that required assessment to be limited to regulatory and warning signs, rather than all street signs. DOT also eliminated the compliance deadlines for replacement of signs that are identified as not meeting the standard for retroreflective signs. life above the minimum standard for retroreflectivity. Replacement of all signs in an area, or of a given type, at specified intervals, based on the expected life. of the shortest-life material used on the signs in that area or of that type. Replacement based on expected life above theminimum standard for Retroreflectivity of the short-life materials used on signs in the area or in the type of the signs. The signs were to be replaced at intervals of up to five years. The new signs were designed to reflect the new technology. standard useful-life cycles for signs, but that varying environmental conditions meant that the actual useful life of signs varied in different areas of the country. In the UK, signs can live for up to 30 years, but in the U.S. they can live up to 50 years, depending on environmental conditions. In Australia, signs have a life expectancy of up to 20 years, and in the UK it is between 10 and 15 years. In Europe, signs live for as long as 30 years. The reflective properties of sign materials decrease over time, due to exposure to sunlight and other factors. As the reflective materials degrade, a sign becomes to maintain the retroreflectivity of their street signs. To provide flexibility to agencies, the standard listed several methods that can satisfy this requirement. These include visual nighttime inspection from a moving vehicle by a trained sign inspector. measurement of sign retro Reflectivity using a retroreflectometer. replacement of signs based on their expected expected lifespan. The standard also listed several ways to replace signs. If a traffic sign meets the MUTCD standard for retroreflectivity, it does not have to be replaced. If a sign does not meet the minimum retroreflective standard, then it may create a safety hazard after dark, although it may not be a hazard in the daytime. Have resulted from the confusion of the two different traffic sign standards. If you are unsure of whether a sign meets a standard, or if it is too dark to see it, contact the Traffic Sign Association on 0300 123 9090 or go to their website. Several comments submitted during the rulemaking process described the rule as an unfunded mandate. The rule would impose additional costs on state and local governments for developing sign inventories, training personnel to examine signs, and replacing signs without providing additional resources for these services. The rules would apply to signs that appear to be perfectly good during daylight hours. The signs would be removed if they are found to be unsafe or malfunctioning during the day. The changes would take effect in the spring of 2015. The Federal Highway Administration has amended certain national standards for traffic signs. Among the new standards were a measurable standard for the minimum level of nighttime visibility of traffic signs and a change in the lettering of street signs. This report provides background for the nighttime visibility maintenance standard and addresses some of the issues that have been raised about this standard. The new standard took effect on January 22, 2008. The standard be limited to establishing a management process that agencies would follow to maintain adequate nighttime visibility. It is intended to satisfy both the congressional directive to set a minimum retroreflectivity standard, and the preferences of agencies. also higher than for daytime driving. At night, when visual cues available to drivers are much more limited, the assistance provided by traffic signs becomes more important. As an earlier version of the MUTCD put it, if a sign is necessary in the daytime, it has equal or greater value in the night. If a sign was necessary during the day, it should be used during the night, too, if it is needed to help drivers at that time of day, the new rules say. no longer clearly visible at night with the entirely unrelated new standard requiring mixed-case lettering on street signs. The new standard was added in the 2009 update of the MUTCD. Generally, federal and state laws require that each state adopt a manual of traffic control devices that meets or exceeds the standards for the state in which it is located. For more information, visit the U.S. Department of Transportation's Traffic Safety Information Center at: http://www.trafficsafety.gov/. minimum nighttime visibility standard to the MUTCD. The minimum retroreflectivity standard's primary impact was to establish a quantifiable level for what constitutes adequate nighttime visibility. Up to 100% of the cost of installing and replacing traffic signs can be covered by the federal government. The standard was included in the FY1993 Department of Transportation (DOT) appropriations bill: SEC. 406. The Secretary of Transportation shall revise the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices to include— (a) a standard for this purpose. confusion and controversy. Some state and local agencies complained that the new standards would be relatively costly to comply with. Some agencies also confused the new nighttime visibility maintenance standard, which originally included deadlines by which agencies had to comply. The new standards are expected to be implemented by the end of the first quarter of this year, according to the National Transportation Safety Board. The standards are intended to improve the visibility of roads, bridges and other public spaces at night and in the early morning hours of the next day. of the state and local transportation agencies, by saying that not every sign needed to meet the minimum standard. FHWA noted that having formally implemented a method for maintaining the nighttime visibility of their signs. Regarding tort liability, the agency noted that it had formally implement a method of maintaining tort liability for the signs. The agency also said that agencies had a management process in place to maintain the nighttime accessibility of the signs, so long as they met the minimum standards for nighttime visibility. It said that not all signs had to meet these minimum standards, but some did. In 2009, FHWA updated the standard concerning the sign lettering style for names of places, streets, and highways (§2D.05) Formerly, names on signs could either be in all capital letters or have only the first letter capitalized. The new standard eliminated the option comply with the new letteringstyle standard, but this is incorrect. Earlier versions of the MUTCD had declared that "All traffic signs ... should have adequate retroreflectivity" However, there was no measurable standard for what constituted "adequate retro Reflectivity" of using only uppercase letters. This standard did not have a deadline for compliance. The lettering standard applies only to signs with names of places, streets, and highways. State and local transportation agencies are required to implement the new lettering style only as they install new signs or replace existing signs. Some press reports have given the impression that the federal government is requiring communities to immediately begin replacing all street signs just to comply with this new standard. This change was made because drivers often have only a brief time to read these signs and studies indicate that mixed-case lettering is easier to read. January 22, 2015 (seven years after adoption) is the deadline for communities to bring all of their regulatory, warning, and post-mounted guide signs into compliance with the new standard. January 22, 2018 (10 years after adopted)—the deadline for Communities to bringing all street name signs and overhead guide signs in compliance with new standards. The new standard will go into effect on January 1, 2015, for communities that meet the new requirements. For communities that don't meet the standards, the deadline will be January 31, 2015. FHWA held workshops for representatives of state and local transportation agencies to examine the proposed new standard in the 1990s. FHWA-sponsored research and the development of a proposed standard based on that research by a task force appointed by the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials. AASHTO adopted a policy resolution in 2000 requesting that agencies be given six years to study the potential impact of the new standard on state andLocal transportation agencies before issuing the standard. The U.S. Federal Highway Administration issued the standard in 1998. Most MUTCD standards, such as the lettering standard, do not have compliance deadlines. The case of the retroreflectivity maintenance standard is unusual in this respect. It was given a compliance deadline because its safety impact was considered to be significant. States and local governments that are not in compliance with standards are potentially subject to having a portion of their federal transportation funding withheld. However, there is no enforcement mechanism for standards in the MUT CD. The reason for these requirements is the belief that uniformity in traffic control devices promotes public safety. for highway infrastructure investment in the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009. DOT amended the compliance deadlines for the retroreflectivity maintenance standard (and numerous other MUTCD standards with compliance deadlines) in a May 2012 Federal Register notice. DOT extended the deadline for highway agencies to implement an assessment or assessment or for highway infrastructure projects to be completed by the end of the first quarter of 2013. For more information, go to the DOT's website or go to http://www.dot.gov/. no formal enforcement mechanism to ensure compliance. One report noted that "It is not uncommon for MUTCD principles to be violated (knowingly or unknowingly) in actual practice" The more significant potential enforcement mechanism for M UTCD standards is the tort liability that communities may face in the event of a breach of the standards. The tort liability for a breach could be as high as $1 million per violation. The standard is not enforceable by the government, but rather by the community, which may be liable for the breach.