(2) assessments of component policies and processes for managing acquisitions. DHS has also continued to make progress addressing the outcome on validating required acquisition documents in a timely manner. We continue to track DHS’s progress through ongoing reviews of the Joint Requirements Council, non-major program acquisitions, and our annual assessment of major acquisition programs, in addition to our high risk updates. We would like to thank Chairman Johnson, Ranking Member Carper, and members of the committee, this completes our prepared statement. 2 outcomes, partially addressed 1 outcome, and initiated actions to address the remaining outcome. DHS has taken a number of actions to fully address establishing effective component-level acquisition capability. These actions include initiating (1) monthly Component Acquisition Executive staff forums to provide guidance and share best practices and acquisition documents in a timely manner. Outcome 2: Establish effective component level acquisition capability (fully addressed); Outcome 3: Established and effectively operate the Joint Requirements Council (partially addressed) Outcome 4: Assess and address whether appropriate numbers of trained acquisition personnel are in place at the department component levels. each management function (acquisition, IT, financial, and human capital) as well as management integration. For example, one of the outcomes focusing on acquisition management is validating required acquisition documents in accordance with a department-approved, knowledge-based acquisition process. For financial management, the outcomes include sustaining clean audit opinions for each financial function. For acquisition management, it is important to validate required acquisition Documents. For IT, it's important tovalidate required IT documents. For human capital, it’s important to validate required human capital documents. the risk of end users—such as border patrol agents or first responders in a disaster— receiving technologies that do not work as expected. Reflecting the shortcomings we have identified since 2005, we have made 64 recommendations to DHS on acquisition management issues; 42 of which have been implemented. Our findings challenges. DHS has concurred with and presented plans for addressing all of the acquisition management recommendations that we have addressed to the Secretary since September 2012, the implementation of which will enhance acquisition management. Many of DHS’s recent actions correspond to these recommendations. Challenges in DHS’s Efforts to Create an Effective Acquisition Organization. GAO-05-179. Washington, D.C.: March 29, 2005. This is a work of the U.S. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States. The published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from the author. The author is not responsible for the content of this article or any portions of it. For confidential support, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org. Management Directive 102-01 is an effort to establish an acquisition management system that effectively provides required capability to operators in support of the department’s missions. The policy in effect today is DHS Acquisition Management Directive 102, which includes 12 appendixes. DHS Instruction Manual 102-1-001 is a set of policies and processes for managing the department's acquisition system. It includes 12 Appendixes, which include 12 policies, processes, and policies for managing acquisition systems. It is intended to establish a system that provides required capabilities to operators to support missions. exists. DHS has continued to obtain department-level approval for program baselines as needed, and has initiated efforts to improve the quality of acquisition data reported by components. To ensure that recent efforts are sustained, the department must continue to implement its sound acquisition policy consistently and effectively across all of its programs and programs. The department must also continue to improve on the quality and quantity of the data that is reported to the agency by its components, the report says. The report also says that the department has taken steps to ensure that the data it collects is accurate and up to date. We found that DHS remained a collection of disparate organizations, many of which were performing functions with insufficient oversight. We concluded that unless DHS’s top leaders addressed these challenges, the department was at risk of continuing to exist with a fragmented acquisition organization that provided stopgap, ad hoc solutions. In November 2008, we found that billions of dollars had been spent on the Department of Homeland Security since 2007. We also found that the department had lost $1 billion in revenue in the same period. DHS has conducted staffing analysis reports that quantify gaps in acquisition personnel by position. Moving forward, DHS must develop and implement a plan for filling key vacant positions. Further, DHS should continue to improve its acquisition program, according to the report. The report was compiled by the Department of Homeland Security’s Office of Management and Budget (OMB) and the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) for the Obama administration. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org. staff with those new skill sets; as such, this effort will need to be closely managed in order to succeed. DHS continues to take steps to enhance its information security program. However, while the department made progress in remediating findings from the previous year, in November, the agency made no progress in solving problems from the past year, according to the report. The report also found that the department had made little progress in resolving problems from last year, despite making progress from the year before. management by effectively using the Joint Requirements Council, which it reinstated in June 2014. DHS has fully addressed 3 of 3 of poorly planned and by DHS as poorly performing. In November 2008, DHS issued the initial version of Acquisition. It recommended that DHS reinstate the Joint. Requirements Council or establish another departmental joint requirements oversight board to review and approve acquisition. requirements and assess potential duplication of effort. The report was published by the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) on June 14, 2014. department’s financial management systems, are significant undertakings that will likely require multiyear efforts. DHS has fully addressed one of the 5 acquisition management outcomes, mostly addressed two outcomes, partially addressed one outcome, and initiated efforts to address the final outcome. DHS faced a unique challenge when it was formed, merging 22 separate entities into a single department. It included integrating the acquisition functions of its numerous organizations into an effective whole. The department is to be commended for the efforts its made to address this challenge. Each year, DHS invests billions of dollars in its major acquisition programs to help execute its many critical missions. In fiscal year 2015 alone, DHS reported that it planned to spend approximately $7.2 billion on these acquisition programs. DHS expects it will ultimately invest more than $180 billion in them. We will continue to monitor DHS’s efforts in this high-risk area to determine if the actions and outcomes are achieved and sustained over the long term.over time. The agency has established an acquisition management policy that we found in September 2012 to be generally sound. DHS could not ensure that annual funding decisions for its major investments made the best use of resources and addressed mission needs. We found almost a third of DHS’s major investments received funding without having validated mission needs and requirements. Two-thirds did not have required mission needs or requirements to confirm a need is justified. We also found that two-thirds of major investments did not need to be funded at all to meet a mission need or requirement to meet the DHS budget for the year. life-cycle cost estimates. Without validated requirements and regular portfolio reviews, DHS cannot ensure that its investment decisions are appropriate. In July 2008, 15 of the 57 DHS major investments we reviewed were designated by the Office of Management and Budget as ‘critical’ to the U.S. national security. The Department of Homeland Security’s investment decisions will ultimately address capability gaps, according to the report. The report was published by the Center for Strategic and International Studies in Washington, D.C. issues, we have, among other things, recommended that DHS assess program-specific affordability tradeoffs at all acquisition review meetings and ensure that funding plans submitted to Congress are comprehensive. DHS concurred with these recommendations and is taking actions to implement them. For example, DHS established that department leadership would, during all acquisition program reviews, specifically address affordability issues and make explicit tradeoffs as necessary, and DHS officials told us that DHS leadership is discussing affordability at all program reviews to help ensure adequate funding. to make tradeoffs for affordability. DHS identified a 30-percent gap between the 5-year funding needed for its major acquisitions and the actual resources expected to be available. We recommended that this board assess program-specific tradeoffs at all of its meetings, particularly in light of the fact that the department had identified a 20-percent funding gap for some of its biggest acquisitions. The board is expected to vote on a new budget on December 11. The new budget will be presented to the DHS board on December 14. invested in major acquisition programs continued to lack appropriate oversight. The acquisition review process DHS had in place at the time of our review called for executive decision making at key points in an acquisition program’s life cycle. For example, although a Joint Requirements Council had been responsible for managing acquisition investment portfolios and validating requirements, the council had not met since 2006. We also found in November 2008 that acquisition program budget decisions had been made in the absence of required oversight reviews and, as a result, had not been properly vetted. the department had not approved baselines for 21 of 46 major acquisition programs. These baselines establish cost, schedule, and capability parameters. DHS needs to continue to identify resources for the remaining initiatives; work to mitigate shortfalls in that it reflects key program management practices. In March 2005, we reported that a lack of clear accountability was hampering DHS’s efforts to integrate the acquisition functions of its numerous organizations into an effective whole. In our April 2015 review, we continued to find enduring challenges to acquisition programs, such as staffing shortfalls. DHS did not have the acquisition management tools in place to consistently demonstrate whether its major acquisition programs were on track to achieve their cost, schedule, and capability goals. In addition, DHS does not have modernized financial management systems, which affected its ability to accomplish its missions. To learn more about the DHS acquisition program, go to: http://www.dhs.gov/acquisition-programs/ and http: www.cnn.com/2013/01/28/17/military-acquisition/index.html#storylink=cpy. address cost, schedule, and performance problems in its major investments. Of DHS’s 48 major programs requiring milestone and annual reviews, 45 were not assessed in accordance with this policy. At least 14 of these programs had reported cost growth, schedule slips, or performance shortfalls. We found that poor implementation was largely the result of DHS's failure to ensure that the department's major acquisition decision-making bodies effectively carried out their oversight responsibilities and had the resources to do so. The report was published by the Center for Strategic and International Studies. In 2012, most major programs lacked reliable cost estimates, realistic schedules, and agreed-upon baseline objectives. At the time of our 2012 review, the department had only verified that 4 of 66 programs documented all of the critical knowledge the policy requires to proceed with acquisition activities. In September 2012 we found that these documents reflect many key program management practices that could help mitigate program risks. However, in September 2012, we also found that DHS had not consistently met the policy’s requirements. See figure 1. components were implementing the department’s acquisition management policy. The funding plans for Coast Guard programs continued to be incomplete, in that they did not account for all of the operations and maintenance funding the Coast Guard planned to allocate to its major acquisition programs. These gaps in information reduce the value of the funding plans presented to Congress. Further, as we noted in our most recent high risk update, the department has additional work to do to fully address the remaining acquisition management outcomes. To address these the most progress on its U.S. Coast Guard modernization project. Additional planning and discovery efforts need to be completed on its projects to modernize Federal Emergency Management Agency and U.s. Immigration and Customs Enforcement financial management systems. DHS will be in a position to implement modernized solutions for these agencies by the end of the year, according to the agency's director of homeland security policy and strategy. The agency is also working on a modernization project for the Federal Aviation Administration, which is expected to be complete by next year. achieve the actions and outcomes, but did not identify sufficient resources for the 4 remaining initiatives. In its January 2016 strategy update, DHS stated that the department had addressed capacity shortcomings it previously identified and self-assesses the capacity criterion as fully met. We are analyzing DHS’s capacity to resolve risks as part of our capacity to assess risks report to be released later this year. In April 2014, we reported that DHS needed to increase its cost-estimating capacity and that and prioritize initiatives, as needed. we found that nearly all of the DHS program managers we surveyed in 2012 reported their programs had experienced significant challenges. Sixty-eight of the 71 respondents reported they experienced funding instability, faced workforce shortfalls, or their planned capabilities changed after initiation. Most survey respondents reported a combination of these, and most survey respondents said their programs were experiencing funding instability or shortfalls. The report was published in the June 2012 issue of the magazine, which is also available on Amazon.com and other e-book retailers. pertaining to such positions as program managers, systems engineers, and logisticians. 11 of the 22 programs we reviewed faced funding gaps (projected funding vs. estimated costs) of 10 percent or greater, including five programs that faced gaps of 30 percent or more. Inconsistencies in how programs are funded were found in five of the programs we looked at, including two that had funding gaps of more than 30 percent. In one case, the funding gap was more than 50 percent. leadership’s ability to effectively manage those programs and provide information to Congress. As a result, we were only able to gain insight into the magnitude of the cost growth for 16 of 77 programs we reviewed. We found that their aggregate cost estimates had increased by 166 percent. Additionally, we found that the cost of some programs had risen by as much as 80 percent or more than the original estimate. We were able to review 16 of the 77 programs and find that the aggregate cost of these programs had grown by up to 80 percent to more than 100 percent. GAO-14-228T. DHS Financial Management: Continued Effort Needed to Address Internal Control and System Challenges. GAO-13-524. Department of Homeland Security: Taking Further Action to Better Determine Causes of Morale Problems would Assist in the Agency’s Morale Improvement Efforts.GAO: Additional Executive Review Sessions Needing to Address Troubled Projects. GAE: Additional OMB and Agency Actions Are Needed To Achieve Portfolio Savings. GAo: Additional Efforts Needed. to Resolve Deficiencies in Internal Controls and Financial Management Systems. System: Better Informed Decision Making Needed on Transformation Program. Homeland Security Acquisitions: Major Program Assessments Reveal Actions Needed to Improve Accountability. Department of Homeland Security: Progress Made; Significant Work Remains in Addressing High-Risk Areas. DHS Training: Improved Documentation, Resource Tracking, and Performance Measurement Could Strengthen Efforts. DHS’s Efforts to Improve Employee Morale and Fill Senior Leadership Vacancies. Targeting Action Plans. DHS Requires More Disciplined Investment Management to Help Meet Mission Needs. this testimony is based on are listed in each product. Homeland Security: Weak Oversight of Human Resources Information Technology Investment Needs Considerable Improvement. GAO-16- 407T. Washington, D.C.: February 25, 2016. Homeland security: Oversight of Neglected Human Resources information technology investment Is Needed. GAE-16/16/407T: Washington,D.C.: February 11, 2016; GAO/16-407T. Immigration Benefits: The U.S. Department of Homeland Security’s ability to provide immigration benefits is limited by the lack of information about the benefits. be happy to respond to any questions you may have at this time. For further information about this testimony, please contact Rebecca Gambler at (202) 512-8777 or gamblerr@gao.gov or Michele Mackin at ( 202)-512-4841 or mackinm@gaO.gov. In addition, contact points for our Offices of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be used for further information on this testimony. For more information, please visit the GSA's website at: http://www.gsa.gov/. found on the last page of this statement. Individuals making key contributions to this statement include Larry Crosland, Jennifer Kamara, James Kernen, Emily Kuhn, Elizabeth Luke, Valerie Freeman, David Lysy, Taylor Matheson, Shannin O’Neill, Lindsay Taylor, Nathan Tranquilli, Katherine Trimble, and Shaunyce Wallace. Key contributors for the previous work that that has been published in this statement are listed on the previous page of the statement. The daily transcript is a written version of each day's featured news story. Use this transcript to help students with reading comprehension and vocabulary. Use the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on CNN.com. The Daily Transcript is published weekly and is curated by CNN's iReport team. For more information, go to the Daily Transcript's News Quiz, or go to http://www.cnn.com/newsquiz/2013/01/07/26/29/28/290715/news/features/top-stories/topstories. a monitoring program that would include assessing whether financial management systems modernization projects for key components are following industry best practices. However, DHS had not yet entered into a contract for independent verification and validation services in connection with its efforts to establish this program. Effective implementation of these modernization projects is important because, until they are complete, the department’s current systems will not effectively support financial management operations. DHS subsequently entered into an agreement for independent validation services that should help ensure the systems meet users’ needs. 2015, the department’s financial statement auditor designated deficiencies in IT systems controls as a material weakness for financial reporting purposes for the 12th consecutive year. This designation was due to flaws in security controls such as those for access controls, configuration management, segregation of duties, and contingency planning. Thus, DHS years 2013, 2014, and 2015, fully addressing 2 outcomes. In addition, in November 2015, DHS’S financial statement auditors reported that one of four material weaknesses in its internal controls over financial reporting had been reduced to a significant deficiency. needs to remediate this longstanding material weakness. Information security remains a major management challenge for the department. Without sound controls and systems, DHS faces long-term challenges in sustaining a clean audit opinion on its financial statements. DHS continues to make progress on three multi-year projects to modernize selected components’ financial management systems. According to its January 2016 strategy update, DHS has made these components and their customers and customers more secure. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. DHS issued its initial Integrated Strategy for High Risk Management in January 2011. DHS has since provided updates to its strategy in nine later versions, most recently in January 2016. The integrated strategy includes key management initiatives and related corrective actions plans for addressing DHS’s management challenges and the actions and outcomes we identified. For example, the January 2016 strategy update includes an initiative focused on financial systems modernization and an initiative aimed at addressing the 30 actions and outcome. and ensure their continued relevance and appropriateness. These updates resulted in a reduction from 31 to 30 totalactions and outcomes. steps to implementing the outcomes, if implemented effectively and sustained, should provide a path for DHS to be removed from our high- risk list. In October 2014, DHS identified that it had resources needed to implement 7 of the 11 initiatives the department had under way to DHS agreed were needed to address the high-risk area. Achieving sustained progress across the actions and outcomes, in turn, requires leadership commitment, effective corrective action planning, adequate capacity (that is, the people and other resources), and monitoring the effectiveness and sustainability of supporting initiatives. it will be important for DHS to maintain its current level of top leadership support and commitment to ensure continued progress in successfully executing its corrective actions through completion. Action plan (met). We found that DHS has established a plan for addressing this high-risk area. Monitoring (met) DHS established a framework for monitoring its progress in implementing the integrated strategy it its Integrated Strategy for High Risk Management and show measurable, sustainable progress in implement its key management initiatives and corrective actions and achieving outcomes. We will report on our findings in our 2017 high- risk update. DHS’s efforts to strengthen and integrate its management functions have resulted in progress addressing our criteria for removal from the high-risk list. In February 2015, we found that DHS had met two criteria and partially met the remaining three criteria. DHS subsequently met an additional criteria and was removed from the list of high- risk organizations. The U.S. Department of Homeland Security is responsible for the security of the U.N. and its embassies and consulates around the world. For more, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2015/01/29/world/united-nations-high-risk-programs/story.html. 2014 update. DHS has continued to demonstrate important progress over the last year by, for example, obtaining a clean opinion on its financial statements for a third consecutive year. We found in our 2015 report that DHS had made important progress across all of its management functions and significant progress in the area of management integration. However, we also found that DHS could strengthen its financial management monitoring efforts and thus concluded that the department had partially met the criterion for establishing a framework to monitor progress. For example, DHS had strengthened its enterprise architecture program (or blueprint) to guide and constrain IT acquisitions. actions and make midcourse adjustments, as needed. Demonstrated progress (partially met). We found in our 2015 report that DHS had made important progress in strengthening its management functions, but needed to demonstrate sustainable, measurable progress in addressing key challenges. Over the last year DHS has continued to take actions to address these challenges but they persist, as discussed in more detail below. addressing these and other management challenges will be a significant undertaking that will likely require several years, but will be critical for the department to mitigate the risks that management weaknesses pose. modernization projects meet key requirements. As a result, we currently assess DHS to have met the framework to monitor progress criterion. Moving forward, DHS will need to closely track and independently validate the effectiveness and sustainability of its corrective projects, according to the report. The report concluded in our 2015 report and continue to believe, moving forward, that DHS will needs to closely Track and independently Validate the Effectiveness and Sustainability of Its Corrective Projects. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. outcome by continuing to use performance measures to assess progress made in achieving department-wide management integration. Since our 2015 update, DHS fully addressed another outcome as a result of actions it has taken to improve the maturity of its system acquisition management practices. DHS has also shown important progress in addressing the last and most significant management integration outcome. However, given that these management integration initiatives are in the early stages of implementation, it is too early to assess their impact. We concluded in our 2015 report and continue to believe that in the coming years, DHS needs to continue implementing. Management identified four integrated priority areas to bring focus to strengthening integration among the department’s management functions. These priorities include, for example, strengthening resource allocation and reporting ability and developing and deploying secure technology solutions. Each have stretch goals and milestones that are monitored, according to DHS’ January 2016 update. The goals are to strengthen resource allocation, reporting ability, develop and deploy secure technology, and strengthen the department's management system. For more information, go to DHS.gov/management. letter to DHS, we identified and DHS agreed to achieve 31 actions and outcomes that are critical to addressing the challenges within the department’s management areas. As of March 2016, DHS has partially addressed 9 and initiated 4 of the actions. We also found in our 2015 report and continue to observe, that considerable work remains, however, in several areas for DHS to fully achieve the remainingactions and outcomes and thereby strengthen its management functions. In March 2014, we updated the actions and outcome in collaboration with DHS to reduce overlap remaining 20 outcomes. fully address 9 actions and outcomes, 5 of which it had sustained as fully implemented for at least 2 years. For instance, DHS fully met 1 outcome for the first time by obtaining a clean opinion on its financial statements for 2 consecutive years. DHS sustained full implementation of another outcome by getting a clean report on its finances for 2 years in a row. It also met one outcome by having a clean audit of its financial records for two consecutive years, which was a first for the agency. The agency also met another outcome after receiving a clean financial report for two straight years. executing its corrective actions through completion; continue to implement its plan for addressing this high-risk area and periodically report its progress to us and Congress. identify and work to mitigate any resource gaps and prioritize initiatives as needed. closely track and closely track the progress of the agency's corrective actions; closely track its progress and closely report it to Congress and the White House; and closely monitor its progress in implementing its plan to address the high- risk area of the U.S. Gulf Coast. and independently validate the effectiveness and sustainability of its corrective actions and make midcourse adjustments as needed. Make continued progress in achieving the 20 actions and outcomes it has not fully addressed. demonstrate that systems, personnel, and policies are in place to ensure that results can be sustained. and make continued progress to achieve the 20 goals it has set out to achieve. and demonstrate that it has put in place the systems and personnel it needs to achieve these goals. and show that the results it has achieved are sustainable. have also routinely met with us over the past 7 years to discuss the department’s plans and progress in addressing this high-risk area, most recently in February 2016. We concluded in our 2015 report and continue to believe that the department's efforts to address the problem have been successful. We provided specific feedback on the Department's efforts. Throughout this time, we provided specific advice on how to improve the situation in the area. We also provided feedback on how the department could improve its efforts in the future. example, in April 2014, the Secretary of Homeland Security issued a memorandum entitled Strengthening Departmental Unity of Effort. The aim is to improve DHS’s planning, programming, budgeting, and execution processes through strengthened departmental structures and increased capability. Senior DHS officials, including the Deputy Secretary and Under Secretary for Management, 2015 update, said considerable work remains. For example, in its January 2016 update, DHS reported that in August 2015 the under secretary for Management announced a number of initiatives designed to allow the department to operate in a more integrated fashion. of Homeland Security, the Under Secretary for Management at DHS, and other senior officials have continued to demonstrate exemplary commitment and top leadership support for addressing the department’s management challenges. They have taken actions to institutionalize this commitment to help ensure the long-term success of the department's efforts. For more information, visit the Department of Homeland Security's website at: http://www.dhs.gov/news/press/press-releases/2013/01/30/10/10-dhs-reports-on-management-challenges.html. additional criterion—establishing a framework for monitoring progress—and therefore as of March 2016, has met three criteria and partially met the remaining two criteria. We found in our 2015 report and have observed over the last year that the Secretary and Deputy Secretary have made significant progress in this area. Leadership commitment (met) is a key requirement for the Secretary of State to be able to lead the U.S. delegation to the G-8 summit in South Korea in July 2015. The U.N. Secretary-General is expected to visit South Korea later this year. its human resource environment, which with respect to learning management, included limitations resulting from nine disparate learning management systems that did not exchange information. DHS established the Performance and Learning Management System (PALMS) program to provide a system that will consolidate DHS’s nine existinglearning management systems into one system. We further found that DHS did not fully implement effective acquisition management practices and therefore was limited in monitoring and overseeing the implementation of PALMS and ensuring that the department obtains the system that improves its learning management weaknesses, reduces duplication, and delivers. and enable comprehensive training reporting and analysis across the department. However, in our February 2016 report we found that selected PALMS capabilities had been deployed to headquarters and two components. Full implementation at four components was not planned, leaving uncertainty about whether the PALMS system would be used in the department's training programs. The system will be used to provide training reporting, analysis, and other training tools. It will also provide training data that can be shared with the rest of the Department of Defense and other agencies. on IT human capital management. These initiatives support various actions and outcomes, such as modernizing the U.S. Coast Guard’s financial management system. We concluded in our 2015 report and continue to believe that DHS's strategy and approach to continuously refining actionable plans is effective. The report was published by the Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS) in Washington, D.C. and is available on the CSIS website at: http://www.csis.org/. determine the most efficient allocation of resources within each of the portfolios. The department has also made progress in implementing its IT Strategic Human Capital Plan for fiscal years 2010 through 2012. However, in January 2015 DHS shifted its IT paradigm from acquiring assets to acquiring services, and acting as a buyer and seller of IT products and services for the government. The agency is now focused on acquiring services rather than assets for the first time in its history. It is also focusing on reducing the number of IT employees in the federal government, which has been a problem for years. the 6 IT management outcomes, mostly addressed another 2, and partially addressed the remaining 1. For example, DHS has finalized a directive to establish its tiered governance and portfolio management structure for overseeing and managing its IT investments. DHS annually reviews each of its portfolios and the associated investments to ensure that they are working to the agency's best interests. For more information on DHS' IT investments, go to: http://www.dhs.gov/ IT-Investments/Portfolio-Reviews. a service broker (i.e., an intermediary between the purchaser of a service and the seller of that service) According to DHS officials in May 2015, this paradigm change will require a major transition in the skill sets of DHS’s IT workforce, as well as the hiring, training, and managing of a new workforce. The new workforce will need to be trained and equipped to deal with the new IT needs of the federal government. DHS officials say this will require major changes in the way the agency operates. For example, the Office of Personnel Management’s 2015 Federal Employee Viewpoint Survey data showed that DHS ranked last among 37 large federal agencies in all four dimensions of the survey. Further, the survey data shows that DHS’S scores continued to decrease in three of the four dimensions, including human capital accountability and assessment. For more, go to CNN.com/soulmatestories and follow us on Twitter @cnnstories. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. index dimensions (job satisfaction, leadership and knowledge management, and results-oriented performance culture) and remained constant in the fourth dimension (talent management) DHS has developed plans for addressing its employee satisfaction problems, but as we previously recommended, DHS needs to continue to improve its root-cause analysis efforts related to these plans. DHS has also developed plans to address its employee dissatisfaction with the company's culture and culture of achievement. The company has also created a new talent management program to address employee satisfaction issues. DHS has also developed and implemented mechanisms to assess training programs but could take additional actions. For example, in September 2014, we found that DHS had implemented component- specific and department-wide training programs. The five DHS components in our review all had documented processes to evaluate their training. For more information, go to DHS.gov/trainings or call 1-800-273-8255 or go to www.dhs.gov. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. programs. DHS also needs to issue department-wide policies on training and development and strengthen its learning management capabilities. In February 2016, we reported that DHS had initiated the Human Resources Information Technology (HRIT) investment in 2003 to address issues presented by HRIT. We reported that HRIT investment was intended to address problems presented byHRIT in the agency's human resources system. We are happy to make clear that this was not the case at the time of the investment in HRIT in 2003. information for day-to-day decision making as a routine business operation. Human capital management. DHS has fully addressed 1 human capital management outcome, mostly addressed 3, and partially addressed the remaining 3. The Secretary of Homeland Security signed a human capital strategic plan in 2011 that DHS has since made sustained progress in implementing, fully addressing this outcome. DHS also has actions under way to identify current and future human capital needs, an outcome it mostly addressed since our 2015 report. However, DHS has considerable work ahead to improve employee morale. within cost and schedule commitments. Management integration. HRIT’s poor progress and ineffective management. DHS concurred with all 14 recommendations and provided estimated completion dates for implementing each of them. DHS has sustained its progress in fully addressing 3 of 3 of the 14 recommendations. The department has provided an estimated completion date for implementing all 14 of the recommendations. It has also provided an estimate for the completion of each of the other 14 recommendations by the end of the year. The agency has provided a timeline for the implementation of the rest of its recommendations.