suppression aircraft focus on trying to neutralize, degrade, or destroy the enemy’s air defense radar equipment. U.S. suppression aircraft, using missiles and jammers, generally begin suppressing enemy air defenses after they begin emitting radio-frequency signals. Some aircraft launch antiradiation missiles that can search for and destroy enemy radars if they are turned on. At some risk to the aircraft and aircrews, suppression aircraft must be in the vicinity of the enemy air defense. radar can detect aircraft while turned on for a shorter period of time. These defenses use various means to track and target aircraft. Modern telecommunications equipment and computers to create networks of early warning radar, missile system radar, and passive detection systems that pick up aircraft communications or heat. The U.S. Air Force has a fleet of more than 1,000 fighter jets, including the F/A-18 Hornet and the F-16 fighter jet. The F-18 is the most powerful fighter jet in the world, with a top speed of nearly 100mph. defenses to complete their mission. Enemy radars in the past were usually fixed in position, operated independent of each other, and turned on for lengthy periods of time. All of which made them relatively easy to find and suppress through electronic warfare or physical attack. Such was the case in Operation Desert Storm, when the U.S. launched a series of attacks against the Soviet Union in the Middle East and North Africa in the 1980s and 1990s. The operation was codenamed Operation Storm, after the storm's name. no-fly zones over Iraq. More recently, these aircraft have been deployed to Yugoslavia and Afghanistan. In 1999, during Operation Allied Force in Yugoslavia and Kosovo, they were extremely important for protecting strike aircraft from enemy radar-guided missiles. However, according to the Defense Intelligence Agency,these aircraft were unable to protect strike aircraft in the war zone. The aircraft have since been replaced by other types of surveillance and reconnaissance aircraft, such as the F/A-18 Hornet and the F-16 Growler. destroy their integrated air defense system because Yugoslav forces often engaged in elaborate efforts to protect their air defense assets. These efforts reduced Yugoslav opportunities to engage U.S. and coalition aircraft. Nevertheless, in two separate incidents, Yugoslav forces, including air defense units, fired on the United States from their own air bases. In both cases, the U.N. Security Council voted to authorize the use of force against the Yugoslavs in the event of an attack on their air bases, and the United Nations Security Council passed a resolution authorizing such action. equipped with transmitters to disrupt or “jam” radar equipment used by enemy surface-to-air missiles or antiaircraft artillery systems. The F-4G, F/A-18, and EA-6B used antiradiation missiles that homed in on enemy radar systems to destroy them. The Air Force and the Navy have improvements underway for other systems such as the EC-130 but face funding challenges. To the extent there are gaps in suppression capabilities, U.S. fighter aircraft and helicopters must rely on self-protection equipment. managed to shoot down an F-117 stealth fighter and a F-16CG. The inability of the United States to counter Yugoslav air defenses made it necessary for U.S. forces to (1) fly thousands of dedicated suppression missions, and (2) fight thousands of ground-to-air and air combat missions against the Yugoslav Air Force. In addition to the two losses, the. United States lost two F-17s and two F/A-18s to Yugoslav air defense. Desert Storm suppression aircraft played a vital role in protecting other U.S. aircraft from radar-guided missile systems. The EA-6B and EF-111 were from aircraft engines. Integrated networks provide air defense operators with the ability to track and target aircraft even if individual radar elements of the network are jammed or destroyed. Since the end of Desert Storm in 1991, U.s. suppression aircraft have been continuously deployed to protect fighter aircraft maintaining the nation's air defense network. The EF- 111 and F-4G are now retired. suppression forces in Europe to their limits, and (2) raise their strike missions to higher altitudes or keep low-flying aircraft such as the Army’s Apache attack helicopters out of combat. DOD now primarily uses Navy and Marine Corps EA-6Bs for radar jamming and air defense suppression mission. Over the past several years, however, the quantity and quality of the services’ suppression equipment have declined while enemy air defense tactics and equipment have improved. DOD has recognized a gap exists in suppression capabilities but has made improvements. The U.S. experienced heavy aircraft and aircrew losses to enemy air defenses during the Vietnam War. Since then, the services have recognized air defense suppression as a necessary component of air operations. When a crisis arises, suppression aircraft are among the first to be called in and the first in the line of fire. For more information on suppression aircraft, visit the Air Defense Suppression Center at http://www.airdefensesuppressioncenter.org/ suppression-aircraft-and-missiles. Force for an initial small procurement of 300 decoys, with potential for further procurement. After experiencing technical problems, MALD did not meet user needs, and its procurement cost estimates increased. Air Force canceled the procurement and restructured MALD to address deficiencies highlighted in the report. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S., call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. The Navy has been developing its own decoy, the Improved Tactical Air Launched Decoy (ITALD) Despite recurring congressional increases for the past several fiscal years, the Navy has not submitted budget requests for ITALDs or procured units to test. The Navy has procured only part of its inventory objective. The U.S. Air Force has a similar decoy called the Air Force Decoy, which can be used to test air-to-air missiles and other weapons. example, 41 of 44 F-15C aircraft and 10 of 10 F-18C aircraft previously believed to be fully mission capable were subsequently found to have one or more faults in their self-protection systems. Coupled with the problems in the suppression aircraft, these shortcomings could have serious implications for U.S. military operations in Iraq and Afghanistan. One F-16 had 12 faults in its self- protection system, and one F-17 had 12 such faults. 1 F-14 had 12 problems in its suppression system, while one F14 had 10 faults in his suppression system. only intended to address the airborne electronic attack aspect of the suppression mission. The program did not address the acknowledged problems with aircraft self-protection systems or the technical and funding challenges of other service programs such as the Navy’s ITALD program, the Air Force’'s MALD program. The Air Force's program was intended to focus on the electronic attack part of the mission, not the self- protection aspect. The U.S. Air Force is the only service to have its own program to combat airborne electronic attacks. capable were not because of faults in their electronic combat systems that were undetected by older test equipment. The faults ranged from the identification of parts needing to be replaced inside the electroniccombat systems, to the wiring, antennas, and control units that connect the systems to the aircraft. For more information, visit the U.S. Air Force's website here. for more information about the U Air Force’s electronic combat system, including how to replace parts and how to fix problems with the system. MALD is supposed to mimic an aircraft and draw enemy air defenses away from the real aircraft. A recently completed Advanced Concept Technology Demonstration, it had been funded by the Air Force. MALD could make a significant contribution to aircraft survivability, an Air Force analysis has shown. The Air Force has not commented on the possibility of using MALD in the future, but has said it could be used in a variety of ways in the near future. The U.S. Air Force says it has no immediate plans to use MALD. defense systems. The services expect to field both systems in 2004. They face technology challenges and/or a lack of funding priority for many of these programs. The Miniature Air Launched Decoy is a miniature version of the U.S. Air Force's F-22 Raptor stealth fighter jet. It was developed by Northrop Grumman in the 1970s and 1980s. It is the first of a series of miniaturized air defense systems to be developed by the Air Force. and failed to acknowledge its full range of capabilities to suppress air defenses. We recognize that the services have substantial capabilities but remain concerned because there are insufficient aircraft to meet overall requirements and improvements have not kept pace with evolving threats. Several service-specific attempts have been made to remedy the situation, but we are still concerned about the lack of aircraft in service. We are also concerned that the U.S. Air Force has not been able to adequately prepare for the threat of air-to-air missile attacks. to suppress enemy air defenses, but some of this equipment has been proven to be unreliable. The services have some programs underway to improve this self-protection equipment, such as developing new towed decoys. But, as discussed below, these programs have been hampered by technical and funding issues. The Navy does not do this, but the Air Force and Marine Corps do. The Air Force does this, and the Marine Corps does this. The U.S. Army does this and the Marines do this. aircraft make it essential that other aircraft have the ability to protect themselves from enemy defenses. The services have already identified serious reliability problems with current self-protection systems on U.S. combat aircraft. Most of the current systems use older technology and have create survivability problems for the aircraft should they encounter significant enemy air defense capabilities in some future conflict. The Services have some programs underway to improve self- protection capabilities such as the joint Navy and Air Force Integrated Defensive Electronic Countermeasures (IDECM) system. logistics support problems due to obsolescence. Also, as we reported last year, the self- protection systems on strike aircraft may have more problems than the services estimate. In reviewing test results using the new Joint Service Electronic Combat System Tester, we found that aircraft the services believed to be mission ready had more problems with their self-protection systems than they thought. The services believed the aircraft were mission ready, but the tests showed that they were not. The tests were conducted on a range of aircraft, including the F/A-18E/F Super Hornet and the F-16. The IDECM system will provide the F-15, F/A-18E/F, and B-1B aircraft with improved self-protection through jammers and towed decoys. The system has experienced some delays in engineering and development, and the estimated procurement cost has doubled. The PLAID system will provides aircrews with accurate location and identification of enemy air. It will be available to the F/15 and F-18 fleet in the next few years. The F-16C/Ds will be modified to carry the HARM Targeting System. The Advanced Target Pod will enable the F- 16CJs to deliver precision-guided munitions. The upgrade (known as R-6) provides better and faster targeting information to HARM missiles. The Air Force is procuring additional systems to upgrade the system to R-5.50 (R-6.50) to be used for both attack and suppression missions. The upgrades are expected to be completed by 2015. complete its inventory objective because of competing priorities. Also, the Navy is upgrading the HARM missile used to attack shipborne and ground-based radars. The first phase of the upgrade improves missile accuracy by incorporating global positioning and inertial navigation systems into the missile. A second upgrade, the Advanced Anti-Radiation Guided Missile, will add millimeter wave capability to allow the missile to target radars that have stopped emitting. While the Air Force employs the H ARM missile as well, it is not involved in the Harm upgrade program. meet force structure requirements for the Air Force’s Aerospace Expeditionary Forces. In all, 219 F-16CJ aircraft will be available. The Air Force also plans to increase the capability of the latest model F- 16C/Ds (block 40) and the F/16CJs (block 50) to fully implement its concept of operations for the Expeditionary forces. The U.S. Air Force plans to have a total of 2,000 F-17s and F-18s in service by 2018. the missile, but even with this pod the F-16CJ still lacks some of the capabilities of the retired F-4G. The Air Force completed the R-6 upgrade on fielded systems in December 2001 and systems subsequently produced will have it. Once 31 additional systems are delivered in 2002, the F/16CJs will be the first to receive the upgrade. The F- 16CJ is the Air Force's answer to the U.S. Navy's F/A-18. have a total inventory of 202 systems, short of the Air Force’s original goal of 1.1 systems per aircraft. The Air Force has partially funded additional upgrades (called R-7) for the HARM Targeting System in 2003, and plans to fully fund the upgrade in the 2004 budget cycle. Air Force is also upgrading the capabilities of the EC-130 Compass Call Aircraft, which is based on the F-16C/Ds and F-15S/Ds. and capabilities of 27 mixes of new and/or upgraded aircraft to consider for follow-on electronic attack capabilities. These options ranged in estimated 20-year life cycle costs from $20 billion to $80 billion. In conjunction with the analysis, the services formed a Joint Requirements. The Joint Requirements did not recommend any particular option for a follow on electronic attack capability for the F/A-18E/F/E/A/F. It did recommend that the U.S. use a combination of the F-18, F-16 and F-22 as well as F-35s. did not upgrade or replace the EF-111. According to DOD, countries have sought to make their air defenses more resistant to suppression. These efforts include increasing the mobility of their surface-to-air missiles and radar equipment, connecting radars together into integrated air defense systems, and adding sophisticated capabilities so that the system is more resilient to suppression, the agency says. The U.S. Air Force says it has no immediate plans to replace the fighter jet with the F-111 or any other fighter jet. Force retired the EF-111 without a replacement, the Navy’s EA-6B became DOD’S primary airborne radar jammer. High demand for the aircraft has exacerbated current wing and engine problems, and the Navy has been unable to meet its overall requirements. Efforts are underway to replace the aircraft with a new, more capable, and more reliable version of the EA- 6B, which has been in production for more than a decade. The Navy has not yet decided on a replacement. The Air perform primarily communications jamming missions. The upgrades are intended to improve the aircraft’s jamming capabilities, reliability, and maintainability. The EC-130 is another “low density, high demand” asset with a total of only 13 operational aircraft, of which 11 are being funded for upgrade. Since our January 2001 report, the services have had some success in improving their suppression capabilities, but they have not reached a level needed to counter future threats, the report says. EA-6Bs and EC-130s saw combat in Operation Enduring Freedom in Afghanistan. Air defenses there were relatively weak compared to those faced by U.S. aircraft in Yugoslavia. This gave the EA-6B an opportunity to jam air defense systems. Air defense systems in Yugoslavia were weaker than those in Afghanistan, placing fewer demands on suppression aircraft to jam them. This allowed for more time for jamming to take place on the ground. The EA- 6B was used to jam the air defense system. The Navy took the lead on the joint analysis with participation by all the services. The analysis, completed in December 2001, concluded that the services needed a standoff system or a combination of systems to operate at a distance from enemy targets. A stand-in system that would be used for the standoff system would also be needed, the analysis said. The Navy is still working on the system, a source of pride for the Navy and its service members, the source of laughter has been reported in Washington. modifying its radar signal receiver and related equipment. The modification program, known as the Improved Capability Program (ICAP) III, provides improved radar locating and jamming capabilities. The Navy expects ICAP III to reach initial operational capability in 2005 and to be installed on all EA-6Bs by 2010, about the time when the aircraft begins to reach the end of its service life. As of January 2002, ICap III engineering and manufacturing development was about 94 percent complete, and the modification began testing on the first aircraft in November 2001. provide close-in suppression protection for attacking aircraft where the threat is too great for the standoff systems. The Air Force proposed adapting the B-52H bomber for standoff suppression by adding jamming pods to it, plus a stand-in suppress capability provided by a MALD-type decoy. It presented the Navy and the Air Force with detailed models of estimated costs replace the EA-6B with an electronic attack version of its new F/A-18E/F fighter and attack aircraft. Navy is considering using a modified version of the ICAP III equipment on whatever follow-on suppression aircraft are developed and fielded. Navy is also upgrading the EA-6B jammer pods to increase the number of frequencies that can be jammed. The Air Force is procuring 30 additional F-16CJ suppression aircraft to be used in the fight against al Qaeda in Iraq and the Taliban in Afghanistan. The U.S. Air Force also plans to use the F/A-18 Super Hornet to fight al Qaeda and Taliban in Iraq. our previous report, DOD stated that its Airborne Electronic Attack Analysis of Alternatives would provide the basis for such a strategy. DOD indicated in its response to our January 2001 report that the analysis would lead to a DOD-wide strategy and balanced set of acquisition programs. However, it was Coordination and Oversight Group to coordinate operational requirements for airborne electronic attack, review ongoing and planned production programs for the mission, and exchange information among the services. A key activity of the group is to coordinate Navy and Air Force proposals for replacing the EA-6B. Navy projects declining EA-6B inventory will be insufficient to meet DOD’s needs beyond 2009. DOD designated the EA-5B as a “low density, high demand’ asset to support worldwide joint military operations. To meet a requirement to field 104 aircraft out of a total of 104, the Navy will need to buy an additional 104 EA-4B aircraft. The Air Force’S F-16CJ fleet has grown and the aircraft's capabilities are being improved. The Navy says it needs a replacement aircraft to begin entering the force by 2009. The Navy has been upgrading its EA-6B electronic warfare equipment over the years. Congress expressed concerns that DOD did not have a serious plan for a successor to the EA-5B aircraft. The Air Force and the Navy are currently and the Air Force proposed options for replacing EA-4B capabilities. DOD is currently evaluating these proposals for consideration in the 2004 budget submission. The U.S. Air Force says it has no immediate plans to replace the EA4B with the EA5B. The Navy is currently taking action to remedy EA-6B wing fatigue and engine failures. However, because wing fatigue has continued to grow, the Navy may have to ground additional aircraft. The Navy plans to replace a total of 67 wing center sections, and flight restrictions have been put in place for the time being. The U.S. Navy has a fleet of more than 1,000 EA-5B aircraft, including the F/A-18E/F Super Hornet and the F-18C/F/N. to remedy the problem, and it will spend $4.4 million each for such replacements for 17 aircraft in the fiscal year 2002 budget. In addition, DOD’s 2002 supplemental funds covered 8 additional wing replacements, and the Navy is programming funds for 10 more wing replacements for each year in the next two fiscal years. The Navy is Programming funds for more than 10 wing replacements each year for the next three years, the Navy says. The U.S. Air Force has more than 2,000 aircraft in its fleet.  inventory of 124 (with an average age of 19 years), the Navy refurbished 20 retired EA-6Bs. Subsequently, in 2001, 2 EA- 6Bs crashed, reducing the total inventory to 122 aircraft. Also in that year, the Navy planned to raise the requirement to 108 aircraft and establish an additional EA-7B squadron, but this plan was scrapped. The Navy also planned to establish an extra EA-5B squadron in 2002, but that plan was also scrapped. In February 2002, the Navy had only 91 EA-6Bs available for operations instead of the 104 required. As a result, while the Navy has been able to meet operational commitments, it has been unable to meet some of its training and exercise requirements.that has been delayed until March 2004. The U.S. Navy has a fleet of more than 1,000 aircraft. The Navy has more than 2,500 aircraft in its fleet, including more than 100 aircraft carriers and destroyers. In 2001, the Navy also began experiencing problems with the EA-6B’s engines. Premature failure of certain engine bearings caused some engines to fail, and it may have caused the crash of two aircraft in 2001. The Navy grounded over 50 engines until they could be overhauled, and over 50 aircraft were grounded until the problems could be fixed. The U.S. Navy plans to replace its fleet of F/A-18 Hornets with F-16s and F-22s by 2015. but it expects to have them back in service by late this year. The constant deployment of this “low density” EA-6B fleet for contingency operations has contributed to its deterioration and to other maintenance- related problems. For example, to maintain the readiness of squadrons deployed to Kosovo and other ongoing ongoing operations, the fleet has to be constantly deployed. The fleet has been in service for more than 30 years, but is now in a state of disrepair. It has been replaced by the F/A-18E/F Super Hornet, which has a more modern design. for example, are often away from home for extended periods of time creating hardships for their families. The Navy says that even if the EA-6B fleet’s problems are remedied, it will be unable to meet force structure requirements in 2009, and will need to be replaced with a new fleet of F/A-18 Hornet fighter jets. “We’re going to have to make some tough decisions,” says Navy spokesman. � “I don’t think we’ll be able to afford to replace the fleet.” “It will take a lot of work to fix it,’ he says. commitments, the Navy took spare parts and personnel from nondeployed squadrons and subjected the EA-6B to above average cannibalization of parts. This impacted the ability of nonde deployed units to train and maintain aircrew proficiency. The constant deployments also added to personnel problems in terms of quality of life. EA- 6B crews, in particular, suffered from poor quality sleep and poor quality food. The crew suffered from bad posture, poor posture, and poor food and water quality. are listed in appendix I. We performed our review from October 2001 through August 2002 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. As you know, the head of a federal agency is required under 31 U.S.C. 720 to submit a written statement of actions taken on our recommendations to the White House. We are happy to provide you with a copy of that statement. We hope you will use it to help you with your decision-making in the future. We would also like to thank you for your support and cooperation during our review. GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staff have any questions, please contact me on (202)512-4841. Major contributors to this report were Michael Aiken, Gaines Hensley, John Oppenheim, Terry Parker, Robert Pelletier, and Robert Swierczek. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. report. We are sending copies of this report to the Secretaries of the Army, Air Force, and Navy; the Commandant of the Marine Corps; and interested congressional committees. We will also make copies available to others on request. In addition, the report will be available at no charge on the website of the U.S. Department of Defense. The report will also be available to the public for free on the Internet at www.report.gov. The full report can be downloaded from the report's website here. D.C. Headquarters Elements, Air Force, Army, Marine Corps, and Navy, Washington, D.c. Defense Intelligence Agency, Washington,. D.C., Defense. intelligence agency, Defense. national security. agency, defense. national intelligence agency. Defense. National Security Agency, Defense, National security. intelligence, defense, national security, national defense, defense intelligence, national intelligence, military intelligence, and military intelligence. Defense Department, National Security. National security, intelligence, homeland security, and defense, N.S.A. the Senate Committee on Governmental Affairs and the House Committee on government Reform not later than 60 days after the date of the report. The House and Senate Committees on Appropriations with the agency’s first request for appropriations made more than 60 months after the report is released. The agency's first request to Congress for appropriations is not made until more than a month after the end of the fiscal year. The first request must be made before the agency makes a request for funding for the next fiscal year, which begins in October. help correct some of the problems DOD faces in electronic warfare acquisition programs. While DOD has not established a coordinating entity to provide leadership for the suppression mission, it has recognized the need for such entities in other cross-service initiatives areas. DOD also stated that we were overly critical in our characterization of individual defense suppression systems. We believe this is a good step forward and a step in the right direction for the future of electronic warfare. It is also a step forward for the development and fielding of unmanned aerial vehicles. The Institute for Defense Analyses studied problems in acquiring electronic warfare systems. The Institute found several causes for the problems, including uncertainties in characterizing rapidly changing threats and systems requirements. Among other things, the Institute recommended that DOD establish central offices for electronic warfare matters in the Joint Chiefs of Staff and in each service, create a senior oversight panel, and prepare an annual electronic warfare roadmap to be used by the military. The report was published in the Journal of Defense Studies and Analyses, a publication of the Institute for Defence Analyses. to group members, this mechanism will help address airborne electronic attack needs through the coordination of complementary systems agreed to by the services. In June 2002, the services presented their proposals for follow-on capabilities to the Office of the Secretary of Defense. According to the services, the Navy proposed to develop a network of ground-based radars that would be able to detect and destroy enemy aircraft. The U.S. Air Force proposed to create a network that could detect, destroy and destroy aircraft from the air. DOD concurred with our recommendations and supported the need for a mechanism to coordinate electronic warfare strategy and systems acquisition. DOD stated that the Office of the Secretary of Defense (Acquisition, Technology and Logistics) is currently restructuring its staff to address cross-cutting issues, including the creation of an Assistant Director. DOD concurred that there was a need to create a mechanism for the coordination of electronic Warfare strategy and system acquisition, including an assistant director for the acquisition, technology and logistics division. vehicle equipped with jammers. The services see these proposals as a coordinated, effective solution to the near- and far-term needs for airborne electronic attack. DOD is currently conducting an additional analysis of the proposals, and the Secretary will decide later this year what proposals to include in the fiscal year. It is not yet known if the proposals will be included in the budget for the 2014 fiscal year, which begins on October 1 and runs through September 30, 2015. It's also not known if they will be part of the 2015 budget, which starts on September 1. vehicles. In October 2001, the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology and Logistics established a joint unmanned aerial vehicles planning task force. The task force will develop and coordinate road maps, recommend priorities for development and procurement efforts, and prepare implementing guidance to the services on common programs and functions. The UAV task force is led by the U.S. Department of Defense’s Chief of the Air Force, Gen. David H. MacLennan, who has been in charge of the task force since 2001. and has conducted several studies to identify solutions, but it has had little success in closing the gap. In our view, progress in improving capabilities has been hampered by the lack of a comprehensive strategy, cross-service coordination, and funding commitments. DOD relies on individual service programs to fill the void, but these programs have not historically received the acknowledged gap in capabilities. In some cases, Congress intervened with guidance and increases to services’ budget requests for defense suppression to ensure that DOD addresses the capabilities gap. a high priority, resulting in the now existing capability gap. We continue to believe that a formal coordinating entity needs to be established to bring the services together to develop an integrated, cost-effective strategy. A strategy is needed to identify mission objectives and guide efforts to develop effective and integrated solutions for improving suppression capabilities. The strategy should provide the means to identify and prioritize promising technologies, determine the funding, time frames, and responsibilities needed to develop and acquire systems, and establish evaluation mechanisms to track progress in achieving objectives.  requirements Coordination and Oversight Group provides a mechanism to coordinate the services’ efforts. The group has not been directed to develop a comprehensive strategy and monitor its implementation. Other assessments have also pointed to the lack of a coordinated approach to addressing the gap in air suppression capabilities. At DOD’s request, the group was set up at the end of 2013 at the request of the U.S. Air Force and the Department of Defense. For more information, visit the requirements coordination and oversight group's website. gap in suppression capabilities, we interviewed Office of the Secretary of Defense, Joint Chiefs of Staff, Defense Advanced Research Program Agency, Air Force, Army, Navy, and Marine Corps officials. We also interviewed service program managers for the EA-6B, EC-130, F-16CJ, HARM, aircraft self-protection systems, and programs under development. We interviewed Defense Intelligence Agency officials and reviewed related intelligence documents to ascertain the capabilities of current and future enemy air defense systems. not have enough EA-6Bs to meet DOD’s suppression needs due to wing fatigue and engine problems that have grounded aircraft. Because of its limited numbers and high rate of 2004 budget submission. The development of systems to replace theEA-6B will help close the gap between DOD's suppression capabilities and needs. However, the service proposals that are currently being considered by DOD do not provide an integrated, comprehensive solution to the overall suppression needs. In addition, while the Joint Base San Diego is a major hub for the U.S. Air Force, it does not have the capability to provide air-to-air suppression. issues with various DOD contractors, including RAND Corporation, Northrup-Grumman Corporation, General Atomics Aeronautical Systems, Incorporated, and Raytheon Systems Company. We reviewed pertinent DOD, service, and contractor documents addressing the status of suppression capabilities, plans for maintaining them, and potential solutions for closing the gap in capabilities. Specific locations we visited included the Pentagon, the State Department, the Air Force, the Navy, the Marine Corps, the Coast Guard, and the Army.