BCBP relies on the use of threat assessments and actionable intelligence. The ability of inspectors to quickly discover or sense an unlawful cargo is also a challenge. Having sufficient numbers of well-trained and well- trained inspectors is key, BCBP says. BCBP is precluded from discussing specific aspects of this matter in this unclassified statement. However, in the broadest terms, our work to date shows that BCBP’s targeting efforts face a range of challenges relating to threat assessments,actionable intelligence, and nonintrusive inspection technology. BCBP is challenged to ensure that antiterrorism efforts do not slow the flow of legitimate international commerce and travel. We plan to report later this summer on BCBP’s acquisition and deployment of radiation detection equipment. According to BCBP, it will use radiation detection devices.as personal safety devices. In trying to achieve the commercial-security balance, BCBP is challenging to. ensure that Antiterrorist efforts don’t slow the. flow ofitimate international commerce. BCBP has undertaken efforts to focus its enforcement on selecting and inspecting the highest-risk incoming cargo. It has a number of initiatives underway aimed at improving its ability to identify potentially risky cargo for inspection. Information is key to identifying high-risk cargo and can come from manifests for air and sea shipments, from importers, or from intelligence units within or outside DHS. Accurate information can help BCBP make reliable risk determinations, particularly when it is used in DHS computerized models that help assess cargo risk. Initiative, which stations BCBP personnel in key international ports to examine high-risk cargo before it is placed on ships bound for the United States. Customs-Trade Partnership Against Terrorism and the Free and Secure Trade Program, which are designed to increase supply chain security and expedite the clearance of legitimate trade. the U.S. BCBP: We have work underway to review most of these initiatives and will make our results available to the Subcommittee as soon as the work is completed. Separating high- Risk cargo from low- or no- risk cargo is extremely important to BCBP. BCBP has made some progress in implementing initiatives that are designed to improve the efficiency of its regulation of commercial shipping. BCBP has reaffirmed to importers the importance of knowing their customers and has examined the security practices of their freight forwarders and the routes their shipments travel. The agency has also reaffirmed the need for importers to be aware of their customers' travel patterns and travel destinations. The regulator has also examined the safety practices of freight forwarding companies and their routes of travel. of entry, BCBP has deployed significant resources but estimates significantly more are needed. Continued implementation of the southwest border strategy faces a range of challenges. Meeting hiring goals and obtaining needed approvals to deploy fencing and technology to implement its strategy while simultaneously addressing emerging concerns over illegal entry entry will continue to be a challenge for BCBP. The Border Patrol had estimated that significantly more resources would be needed to fully implement its border control strategy. However, this estimate was made before the September 11, 2001, attacks and the subsequent concerns regarding the need for additional resources. border strategy. However, the evaluation has yet to be completed. Our recent work at ports of entry and our ongoing work specifically at land border ports, indicate that BCBP inspectors continue to face challenges that those from their predecessor agencies also faced. One training challenge for BCBP will be to ensure that both new and experienced border inspectors are capable of readily detecting fraudulent documents. Our ongoing work at landborder ports suggests that the Bureau will also face challenges regarding the collection, analysis, and reporting of documents. prevent terrorists and terrorist weapons from entering the United States. This important mission means improving security at our physical borders and ports of entry. BCBP has a number of initiatives underway aimed at improving security, including: Container Security along the northern border, mitigating the negatives affects the strategy may have on communities that experience an increase in illegal alien traffic, and responding to continuing concerns over the safety of aliens who cross in remote and desolate areas. At our nation’s ports, BCBP faces an array of challenges, including. regard, we are reviewing how BCBP developed the model used in targeting. BCBP is handling the targets generated by the model at sea ports. Since this work is ongoing, and involves information that BCBP also considers to be law enforcement, it is not clear if BCBP intends to evaluate targeting. We are reviewing the model and the targets that are generated by it, and how it is being used at sea. We also want to know if BC BP intends to use the model in the future. A unified curriculum and training approach will need to be developed and implemented. These training challenges will continue beyond the academy.BCBP will also need to ensure that a field training program is established that meets the needs of the newest as well as the newest. To wear “one face” at the border, a unified curriculum will be needed. To learn more about how to wear ‘one face,’ visit the Canadian Border Patrol’s website. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. The Border Patrol estimated it would need between 11,700 and 14,000 agents, additional support personnel, and hundreds of millions of dollars in additional technology and infrastructure to fully implement the Southwest border strategy. Currently, the Border Patrol has about 9,500 agents deployed along the southwest border. While nearly a 3-fold increase from the 3,400 agents the. Border Patrol had along the southwestern border in 1994, it is still about 2,200 agents short of the minimum number, 11.700, the border patrol said it needed. search-and-rescue units. Since then apprehensions along the southwest border have declined to less than 1 million in fiscal year 2002. While there may be many reasons for the decline in apprehensions, in response to our recommendation, the Border Patrol has developed a plan designed to evaluate the impacts of its southwest border strategy. The Border Patrol will release a report on the impact of the southwest strategy on apprehensions in the coming months. The report will be published in a special edition of The New York Times, on sale now. The Border Patrol has realized its goal of shifting illegal alien traffic away from urban areas into more remote areas. However, rather than being deterred from attempting to cross the border, illegal immigrants continue to try and do so. In the border area southwest of Tucson, Arizona, are patrolling the border to report illegal crossings raising the concern of law enforcement officials. The Border Patrol is working to reduce illegal immigration in the Tucson area by 20 per cent by the end of the year, according to the U.S. Border Patrol. illegal entry, many aliens have instead risked injury and death by trying to cross mountains, deserts, and rivers. This prompted the Border Patrol to implement a Border Safety Initiative consisting of, among other things, a media campaign to warn aliens about the dangers of crossing illegally, as well as establishing a border patrol station in the border town of Yuma, Arizona. The Border Patrol also established a Border Patrol station in Yuma to establish a border post in the town of Tamaulipas, Mexico. Concerns have been raised over the environmental impact of current plans to build additional fencing along the border in Arizona. Some local residents reported experiencing loss of business, destruction of private property, and environmental degradation. Was reportedly pushed, officials and residents in one community reported experiencing lost business, destroyed private property.was reportedly pushed. A recent news article described how some local residents said they had been pushed, and that they had experienced loss of businesses, destroyed property and degradation of environmental degradation. planned. Since 1994, the Border Patrol has been implementing a phased strategy to increase deterrence to illegal entry. The strategy postulated that as resources were applied in one area, the flow of illegal alien traffic would shift. The goal was to focus resources in the areas that had the largest influx of illegal aliens. It was hoped that by focusing on one area of the U.S., the rest of the country would follow suit and focus on the other parts of the United States. It has been a success. problematic. It had taken the Border Patrol longer to implement the strategy than originally planned because of difficulties hiring agents and delays in obtaining approvals needed to deploy technology and build fences. The Border Patrol also recognized the need to make outreach to the Hispanic community more effective. The strategy is expected to be rolled out across the U.S. by the end of the year. It is intended to reduce the number of illegal immigrants crossing the border into the United States each year by 20 percent, officials say. efforts to communities because its initial failure to warn some communities about anticipated increases in illegal alien traffic caught community officials by surprise and angered some residents. When apprehensions surged in communities into which the illegal immigrant traffic was flowing into, officials were not prepared to deal with the problem. Some residents were angered due to the negative effects the increased traffic had on the community. They were concerned about the impact it would have on their families and businesses. They also were worried about the effect on their children and grandchildren. TSA and the U.S. Coast Guard face at least one major problem. They face strategic human capital risks, critical information technology challenges, or financial management vulnerabilities. For example, TSA has had considerable challenges in meeting deadlines for screening baggage, the report says. For more information, go to TSA.gov or the Coast Guard's website. To learn more about the Coast Guards, visit their website or go to www.coastguard.org. For information about the TSA, visit its website or its website. The Coast Guard faces the challenges inherent in a massive fleet modernization. The agency has focused most of its initial security efforts on aviation security, with less attention to other modes of transportation. DHS’s national security mission is of such importance that the failure to address its management challenges is a failure to meet the agency's mission, the report says. The report says the Coast Guard needs to modernize its fleet to meet current and future security needs. It also says the agency needs to focus more on security in the air and sea. will take time to achieve in an effective and efficient manner. components to be merged into DHS already face a wide array of existing challenges. Finally, failure to effectively carry out its mission would expose the DHS to a host of new challenges, the report said. The report was published by the Center for Strategic and International Studies at the University of California, Los Angeles. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. the synergy that can help provide better security against terrorism. The magnitude of the responsibilities, combined with the challenge and complexity of the transformation, underscores the perseverance and dedication that will be required of all DHS’s leaders, employees, and stakeholders to achieve success. Further, it is well recognized that mergers are a good way to create a stronger, more secure, and more efficient security system for the nation and the world. The U.S. Department of Homeland Security is one of the largest agencies in the world, with more than 100,000 employees. since the creation of the Department of Defense (DOD) more than 50 years ago. In DOD’s case, the effective transformation took many years to achieve, and even today, the department continues to face enduring management challenges and high- risk situations. DOD continues to be a source of controversy, with some claiming that the department is too big to be managed properly. DOD has been the subject of several high-profile lawsuits, including one brought by former Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld, who was forced to resign last year. areas that are, in part, legacies of its unfinished integration. Effectively implementing and transforming DHS may be an even more daunting challenge. DOD was formed almost entirely from agencies whose principal mission was national defense. DHS will combine 22 agencies specializing in various disciplines: law enforcement, border security, biological research, among others. The agency will be based in Washington, D.C., with offices in New York, Los Angeles, Washington, San Francisco and San Diego. It will have a budget of more than $1.5 billion. nation to potentially very serious consequences. In the aftermath of September 11, invigorating the nation's homeland security missions has become one of the federal government's most significant challenges. DHS, with an anticipated budget of almost $40 billion and an estimated 170,000 employees, will be the third largest government agency; not the second largest after the Pentagon and the State Department. The agency will be responsible for protecting the nation’s borders, airports, ports, airports and other key infrastructure. mechanisms must be established. Moreover, critical aspects of DHS’s success will depend on well-functioning relationships with third parties that will take time to establish and maintain. These relationships include those with state and local governments, the private sector, and other federal agencies with homeland security responsibilities, such as the Department of State, he says. He adds: “DHS will have to work very hard to ensure that these relationships are maintained.’’ “We’ve got a lot of work to do, but we’re not there yet,” he adds. the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the Central Intelligence Agency, DOD, and the Department of Health and Human Services. Creating and maintaining a structure that can leverage partners and stakeholders will be necessary to effectively implement the national homeland security strategy. The new department is also being formed from components with the FBI, CIA, and Department of Homeland Security, among others. The department is expected to be in place by the end of the year, according to the Homeland Security Department's website. For more information on the new department, visit www.departmentof homeland security. disaster mitigation, and computer security, for instance. DHS will oversee a number of non-homeland-security activities, such as the Coast Guard’s marine safety responsibilities. Yet, only through the effective integration and collaboration of these entities will the nation achieve a wide array of existing major management challenges and program risks, says the DHS directorate's directorate for information systems. In fact, many of the major components merging into the new department, including the Transportation Security Administration (TSA), FEMA, are already part of DHS. We are currently reviewing the fiscal year 2003 expenditure plan and will ascertain whether these problems were addressed. We designated implementation and transformation of the new Department of Homeland Security as high risk based on three factors. First, the implementation and transformed of DHS is an enormous undertaking that needs to be handled with care. Second, the Department of Justice needs to take a more aggressive approach to dealing with the threat of terrorism. Third, we need to make sure that we are taking the right steps to protect the nation's security. and programs risks could have serious consequences on our intergovernmental system, our citizens’ health and safety, and our economy. Overall, our designation of the implementation and transformation of DHS as a high-risk area stems from the importance of its mission and the nation’s reliance on the department’S effectiveness in meeting its mission, the report says. The report concludes that DHS is a ‘high-risk’ area for implementing and transforming the Department of Homeland Security into a more effective agency. complex as ACE is a challenging undertaking. Over the last 4 years, we have reported on ACE and recommended steps Customs needed to take to minimize project risks. To its credit, Customs has taken action to implement our recommendations, as follows: We recommended Customs incrementally justify the ACE investment. Customs defined and committed to implement process controls for justifying and making ACE investment decisions. After implementing the first ACE release, Customs plans to verify that actual costs and benefits meet expectations and plans to continue this incremental investment approach for the remaining ACE releases. Customs has made progress in implementing some, but not all, of our recommendations. Many challenging tasks remain before Customs will have implemented full ACE capability. Customs plans to continue to extend its enterprise architecture as necessary to build subsequent ACE releases. To prevent illegal entry of individuals into the United States between the ports. We recommended Customs have sufficient Model.alignment with its enterprise Architecture. We also recommended that Customs have enough detail to build the first ACE release and has aligned the release with the enterprise architecture. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here. single interface between the trade community and the federal government for trade data. In April 2001, Customs awarded a 5-year contract, with options to extend the contract to not more than 15 years, to a system integrator. Successfully managing a project as large and as complex as ACE is a major challenge for system integrators. To learn more about ACE and how to use it, visit ACE.org. For more information on ACE, visit the ACE website or call the U.S. Customs Service on-line at 1-800-366-8255 or visit www.customs.gov. known as the Automated Commercial Environment (ACE), is expected to cost about $1.7 billion and is to replace Customs’ antiquated system. Expected benefits from ACE include speeding the flow of legitimate commerce into and out of the U.S., identifying and targeting high-risk commerce requiring greater scrutiny, and providing a more efficient system for customs officers to enforce laws and enforce regulations. The new system will be rolled out over the next five years. It will be available to all Customs officers in the United States. We recommended Customs develop rigorous and analytically verifiable cost estimating. Customs began developing and plans to implement a cost- estimating program that employs human capital resources. We recommended that Customs develop and implement a human capital management strategy for the Customs modernization office, which is responsible for managing the ACE acquisition. We recommend that Customs begin developing and implementing a cost estimates program that employ human capital managers for the modernization office. The agency's modernization office is based at the Customs Administration Building in Washington, D.C. The modernization office has a staff of 20. the tenets of effective cost estimating as defined by the Software Engineering Institute (SEI) We recommended Customs employ effective software acquisition processes. Customs continues to make progress and has plans to establish effectiveSoftware Acquisition Capability Maturity controls, as embodied primarily in the second level of SEI’s Software Acquisition Cap capability Maturity. We recommend Customs employeffective software acquisition process controls. Customs has made progress on this and plans to make further progress on the issue in the coming months, the agency said. Some progress in implementing initiatives that are designed to improve the efficiency of its regulation of commercial activities. Additional challenges remain, including the need to improve its evolving trade compliance program and acquire a new trade processing system. According to the Commissioner of BCBP, the priority mission is to imports continues to create profound challenges for BCBP to facilitate and enforce U.S. trade laws and regulations. The volume of trade is expected to surpass $2 trillion in the year 2006. To speed the processing of imports and improve compliance with trade laws, specifically, the Customs Modernization and Informed Compliance. Act of 1993 (also known as the “Mod Act”), BCBP’s predecessor, Customs, developed an “informed compliance strategy” In 1999, we recommended that the Customs Service develop and implement an evaluation of the effectiveness of its informed compliance strategy. Customs agreed with our recommendation and completed its Trade Compliance Strategy Study in 1999. The study was published in 2000 and was based on the Customs’ “Informed Compliance Strategy,” which was developed in 1998. that enters the United States would cripple the flow of legitimate trade and travel and would require a huge resource commitment. Over the years Customs has recognized that it needed to identify what is high risk and target its limited resources as early in the process as possible. The U.S. Customs Service says it is working to identify high-risk individuals and items that could pose a threat to national security. The agency says the goal is to reduce the risk to the public by identifying what is at risk and targeting it early. to these initiatives, the study concluded that these programs had a positive impact. Customs’ ongoing effort to acquire a new trade processing system is key to modernizing how Customs tracks, controls, and processes all commercial goods imported into and exported out of the United States. This large and complex system, says the study, needs to be modernized to meet the needs of today’s global marketplace. The study concludes that these initiatives had apositive impact. The U.S. Department of Customs is working with the Department of Justice to develop a new system. has worked with importers on concerns such as where their goods originated, the physical security and integrity of their overseas plants and those of their foreign suppliers. The company also works with them on the background of their personnel, the means by which they transport goods, and those who they have chosen to transport their goods into. For more information on how to get in touch with the company, visit: http://www.justgiving.com/help-get-in-to-the-company. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. activities, additional challenges remain, particularly in view of the new and heightened emphasis on terrorism. These challenges include (1) continuing to improve its evolving trade compliance program and (2) acquiring a new trade processing system. Although tempered recently by the global economic slowdown, growth in the volume and value of trade is still strong, the company says. The U.S. trade deficit with China is estimated to be more than $1.2 billion, up from $1 billion in 2009. The study indicated that the strategy improves compliance, but the impact on overall compliance rates is small. One initiative, the Company Enforced Compliance Process (CECP), was to address large importers’ noncompliance that had a significant negative impact on the overall national compliance rates. On the other hand, the study found that the companies’ compliance rates increased after they participated in the other initiatives such as compliance assessment and account management initiatives. While it is not possible to attribute the increase in compliance totally to the study, Customs was to punish noncomplying companies by imposing “confirmed risk” designations, increasing examinations, removing privileges, and referring for penalties. However, confirmed risk status was only used six times, and loss of privileges and referral for penalties were never used. The study concluded that CECP was not used enough to punish companies for non-compliance with customs laws and regulations, and that it was not effective in deterring companies from non-compliance. of this magnitude in the public and private sector carry significant risks, including lost productivity and inefficiencies. Successful transformations of large organizations, even those undertaking less strenuous reorganizations and with less pressure for immediate results, can take from 5 to 7 years to achieve. Necessary management capacity and oversight are key to a successful transformation of a large organization. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. Some travelers do not need to present who falsely claimed to be U.S. citizens in order to gain illegal entry. A variety of documents are accepted at ports, and many can be counterfeited or used fraudulently with apparent ease. With nearly 200 countries, the United States has the potential to be a major player in the global travel industry. It is important to keep in mind that the travel industry has a long way to go before it can be considered a major source of revenue for the country. proof of citizenship at the border. U.S. and certain Canadian citizens are exempt from having to present any document upon entry. Instead, they can make an oral claim of citizenship, if this satisfies the inspector. According to immigration data, inspectors at land border ports intercepted nearly 15,000 people in 2002 data, inspected nearly 60,000 fraudulent documents in fiscal year 2002, including over 10,000 citizenship-related documents. Earlier this year, we testified on how our investigators entered the country from Canada, Mexico, and Jamaica through these countries. More than 8,000 state and local offices issue birth certificates, driver’s licenses, and other documents, any of which could potentially be counterfeit. According to immigration officials, the potential for document fraud is great.issuing unique passports, official stamps, seals, and visas. A wide variety of documents can be presented for inspection in the U.S., including passports, driver's licenses, birth certificates and more. The potential for fraud in these documents is great, immigration officials say. face an array of challenges in ensuring that its border inspectors are adequately trained. For example, former INS and Customs inspectors are still being trained at separate basic training academies using two different curricula. Neither the former INS nor Customs agencies had a standard on-the-job training program for their inspectors working at land border ports. The prior work I mentioned in which our investigators used counterfeit documents to enter the United States, as well as our ongoing work on counterfeit documents, are among the challenges. largely a manual process that relies primarily on physical examination. We found several challenges relating to this process, but BCBP’s determination that our results were law enforcement sensitive precludes our discussing them here. At the time our work was completed, one courier was working with the former Customs Service. However, at the time we completed our work, the courier was still working for the Customs Service and we were not able to talk about our work with him. We are happy to share our findings with you. land, air, and sea ports of entry using fictitious names, and counterfeit driver’s licenses and birth certificates made using readily available software. INS and Customs Service inspectors never questioned the authenticity of the counterfeit documents, and our investigators encountered no difficulty in entering the country using them. BCBP will also use fictitious names and fake birth certificates to smuggle people into the U.S. to avoid detection by customs and immigration officials. The scheme will be rolled out over the next few months. inspectors are challenged by the tight timeframes and pressures they work under to move legitimate cargo through the ports. Our recent work on the inspection of international mail showed that relying on inspectors alone can increase the risk that contraband enters the country. The inspection of incoming foreign mail remains one of the most important tasks for the postal service in the U.S. It is a vital part of the country's national security and economic security, and must not be left to the whims of individual countries. The U.S. VISIT system is intended to capture both entry and exit data on travelers. It will also have many implications for operations at U.s. ports. The system is expected to be fully operational by the end of the year. It is designed to capture data on all travelers entering and leaving the United States, as well as all travelers leaving the country. It was developed by the former Customs and INS agency, which is now called the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) The system will be rolled out in phases. the first plan that will become even more problematic in the future as the magnitude and complexity of the system acquisition increases. The importance of creating plans with the appropriate level and scope of information. Responsibility for implementing U.S. VISIT now resides in the Border and Transportation Security. The first plan was developed in the early 1990s. The second plan was created in the late 1990s, and the third plan was completed in the mid-2000s. For more information on VISIT, go to: www.visit.org. improving inspectors’ ability to verify the identity of travelers and whether they can be admitted into the country. Unifying and enhancing inspector training, and complying with the congressional mandate to implement a system to track the entry and exit of all aliens. Deterring illegal entry between the nation’s ports of U.S. VISIT system. At land border ports of entry, inspectors must quickly make decisions about whether to admit a traveler into the United States or refer travelers for more intensive inspection if admissibility cannot be readily determined. immigration and other laws while facilitating the movement of lawful travelers. Today, I will touch on several issues relating to the inspection of entry documents, inspector training, intelligence information needs of the field, and BCBP plans for implementing the U.S. Visitor and Immigrant Status Indication Technology system, known as the VISI system. I will also touch on the issues of inspector training and intelligence information Needs of the Field, as well as the plans to implement the V ISI system in the future. For more information, visit BCBP's website. process. Large-scale x-ray and gamma–ray imaging systems, portal radiation monitors, and portable and hand-held radiation detection devices can reduce the need for costly, intensive inspections. As important as the use of technology is, there are certain limitations and challenges that need to be considered, according to the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. For example, we reviewed Customs’ acquisition and deployment of radiation detection equipment. We found that some of the radiation detection. equipment being used— radiation pagers—have a limited range and are not. designed to detect weapons-usable nuclear material. Experts we contacted did not view pagers as search instruments but rather as a way to monitor radiation levels in the area. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. Non-Intrusive Inspection technology increases the ability to detect conventional explosives, nuclear weapons, radioactive components, and other weapons of mass destruction. Automated Targeting System, which is used by the National Targeting Center and field targeting units in the United States and overseas to help target high-risk cargo and passengers entering the U.S. and overseas. The technology is also used in Europe, Australia, New Zealand, Canada, and the UK. It was developed by the United Nations and the European Commission in the 1990s. to pilot test an advance manifest system. The database is intended to allow Customs to analyze incoming package information and make more informed decisions about what packages to inspect. In addition to information and staff, technology provides for a more effective and efficient system, the agency says. The system will be used to monitor incoming packages and determine what packages should be inspected. It is expected to be in place by the end of the year, the U.S. Department of Homeland Security says. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. its challenges for protecting the country against terrorism. Mr. Chairman, this concludes my prepared statement. I would be pleased to answer any questions that you or other Members of the Subcommittee may have. For further information regarding this testimony, please contact Richard M. Stana at (202) 512-8777, or call the Subcommittee on Terrorism and Homeland Security on 1-800-273-8255. For more information about the Subcommittee, please visit the subcommittee's website at: http://www. subcommitteeonterrorism.org/2013/01/09/terror-and- homeland-security. contributions to this testimony included Seto J. Bagdoyan, Michael P. Dino, Darryl W. Dutton, Barbara Guffy, E. Anne Laffoon, and Lori Weiss. This is a work of the U.S. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States. It may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety by the author and/or the publisher. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org for details. without further permission from GAO. However, because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material, permission from the copyright holder may be necessary. If you wish to reproduce this material separately, please contact us at tips@dailymail.co.uk. For confidential support, call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. In the U.S., call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. INS’s preliminary plans showed that it intended to acquire and deploy a system that will satisfy the general scope of capabilities required. We reviewed INS’S fiscal year 2002 expenditure plan and associated system acquisition documentation and system plans. We reported that INS's preliminary plans show that it intends to acquire, deploy, and test a new system in the next few years. The system will be used to test and test new equipment and equipment for the U.S. military and other government agencies, including the National Security Agency. under various laws. We found that the initial plan did not provide sufficient information about INS commitments for the system, such as what specific system capabilities and benefits will be delivered, by when, and at what cost. We concluded that this lack of detail is a material limitation in the system and that it should be included in the initial plans for the new system. The plan is expected to be in place by the end of the year and will be rolled out over the next few years. The system will be fully operational by 2018. The former INS recognized the need for more intelligence support in the field. In 1997, an INS-contracted study reported the lack of an intelligence capability at all INS locations, including districts and ports. More recent studies suggest needs in this area persist.and use of intelligence information in theField. The INS has a number of programs to help with intelligence gathering and analysis. These include the National Security Agency (NSA) and the Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA) The INS also has a program to assist with intelligence collection and analysis in the Field. Although some steps have been taken to bring the intelligence function to the field level, additional steps remain if the intelligence needs of the field are to be met. These challenges include, but are not limited, to decisions related to staffing and training, as well as merging intelligence positions from the field and intelligence positions at the national level. The U.S. intelligence community is currently working on a plan to merge intelligence positions in the field with the national intelligence community. The goal is to merge the intelligence functions at both the national and field levels. motivated staff is also key to identifying high-risk cargo. Inspectors and canine officers are trained to detect unusual or abnormal behaviors or circumstances that suggest a potential threat or unlawful activity. Many have developed a ‘sixth sense’ in that they pick up on latent clues and unconnected information. Nevertheless, these staff are still key to identify high- risk cargo, says the Airports Association of North America (AAN) The AAN is a trade association for the air cargo industry, representing the interests of airlines, airports, ports and cargo handlers.