FDA proposes use of the "80-120 rule," which permits a narrow deviation. The FDA estimates a cost of $269 per item to determine this information. Some industry groups have determined it will cost as much as $500 to $1,000 per item. FDA estimates initial cost of compliance at $315 million and ongoing annual cost of the provision at $44 million, and industry estimates the cost will exceed $1 billion in the first year.. FDA also notes that the. society may also be weighed; quantification of this benefit can be challenging. The FDA's PRIA points to three elements of cost for this rule: collecting and managing nutritional analysis records; revising or replacing existing menus and menu boards; and employee training. Cost estimates for implementation of the rule are not yet available, according to the PRIA. The rule is expected to go into effect in the summer of 2015. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. potential cost to industry of complying with an increasing number of state and local regulations (in the absence of a uniform national policy) could have been much greater. FDA estimated that 27% of chain restaurants have already obtained nutrition information to comply with those state andLocal regulations. The FDA estimates that 27 per cent of chain Restaurants are already complying with those regulations. It is estimated that the cost to the industry could be much greater than $1 million per restaurant per year if the regulations were uniform across the country. allowing flexibility based on the context. The FDA and industry also differ on the estimated cost burden of providing the required information on menus and menu boards. Notably, the FDA estimates the cost of a menu board at $550. Industry estimates range as high as $1,500 per menu board, according to the FDA. Back to Mail Online home. Back into the page you came from. Back To the page You came from, back to the pageyou came from,. Back to thepage you came From. The annual medical cost of obesity was as high as $78.5 billion in 1998, or about 10% of medical spending. Of that amount, roughly half of the cost was financed by Medicare and Medicaid. The authors estimated that cost may have risen to as much as $147 billion in 2008. The true cost and savings from any obesity prevention policy is challenging to determine. Just as the factors that contribute to obesity are complex, so, too, are the benefits of obesity prevention policies. Obesity burdens the health care system, and many of those costs fall to government. Obesity accounts for approximately 1% to 10% of a country's total health care costs. Obese individuals have medical costs that are 30% higher than non-obese individuals, according to a recent report by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) The CDC estimates that obesity costs a nation $1.2 billion a year, or about one-tenth of the nation's overall health care budget. to increased risk of type 2 diabetes, cardiovascular diseases, osteoarthritis, and several forms of cancer. obesity leads to decreased productivity, in terms of increased absenteeism as well as what researchers deem "presenteeism" (decreased outputs while at work) The estimated societal cost of obesity has been estimated to be $1.2 trillion a year in the U.S. and $2.7 trillion in the rest of the world, according to the World Health Organization. taking into account other factors that may also account for those changes, including the time needed for weight loss and obesity prevention programs to yield an effect, particularly on chronic disease costs. Taking into account the time it takes for weight-loss and obesity-prevention programs to pay off, such as the cost of those programs to start and maintain a healthy body mass index (BMI) and the amount of time needed to get to a healthy weight. The cost of obesity-related illnesses can also be influenced by a number of factors, including age, race and gender. Although many factors contribute to an individual's weight, the basic cause of weight gain is an excess of energy intake over energy expenditure. At the population level, this has been reflected in indicators of decreased physical activity and increased calorie consumption. In adults, obesity is associated with a number of health problems, such as obesity-related diabetes and high blood pressure. In children, obesity can lead to problems with bowel and bladder function, as well as an increase in the risk of obesity-linked conditions such as type 2 diabetes. Obesity rates have risen substantially in recent decades, from 13% of the adult population in the 1960s to 36% in 2009-2010. The economic burden of obesity is projected to continue rising. Researchers have projected that more than half of Americans will be obese by 2030. require agencies to tailor their regulations to impose the least burden on society and to select approaches that maximize net benefits. The report also identifies issues that have generated industry and congressional interest regarding the FDA's interpretation of this provision in the proposed rule. researchers cannot isolate the effect of one specific policy relative to other interventions. In order to determine the effectiveness of an intervention such as menu labeling, researchers and policy makers may review the impact of these policies on individuals' behavior and monitor changes in the obesity rate over time, while keeping an eye on the overall obesity rate in the U.S. The study was published in the Journal of Nutrition and Dietetics, published by the University of California, San Diego, and is based on data from the National Institutes of Health. other health problems, including diabetes and high blood pressure. These health issues disproportionately affect low-income individuals and certain minorities. The federal government has sought to address these health concerns using a variety of approaches, including programs (e.g., the "Let's Move" campaign) and legislation. The Healthy, Hunger Free Kids Act is a bill that aims to end childhood hunger in the U.S. It was passed by the House of Representatives last year. It has not yet been approved by the Senate. 32% of Americans' calorie intake from 2005-2008 came from foods consumed outside the home, including foods consumed in restaurants and school cafeterias. Consumers tend to underestimate the number of calories in restaurant meals. In one study, lunchtime customers at a fast food restaurant underestimated the calorie content of in helping consumers lower their overall calorie intake. In New York City, one in six fast food consumers reported using the posted calorie information, and those customers also purchased 106 fewer calories of food than those who did not use the posted calories. The number of overall calories consumed has increased from a daily average of 1,875 calories during 1977-1978 to 2,067 calories during 2005-2008. Increasingly, these calories are consumed outside the home. States has risen concurrent with rising rates of obesity. The number of people living in the U.S. with a BMI of more than 25 has risen by 1.7 per cent since the early 1980s. The average American household has a BMI rate of 20 per cent or more. Under the ACA, covered establishments are required to provide calorie and nutrition information for "food that is a standard menu item" These items include combination meals, variable menu items, self-service food, and food on display. Under ACA Section 4205, now FFDCA Section 403(q)(5)(H), the medium (i.e., menu, table tent, place mat), placement, and layout of the information provided to consumers is not defined in the ACA. Calorie information must have a "reasonable basis" and be displayed adjacent to the name of the standard menu items. According to the proposed rule, calorie information must be provided adjacent to the name of the menu item so that it is clearly associated with that item. Establishments can choose to implement this requirement by including a column on the menu or menu board with the heading "Calories" or "Cal" or they may list the number of calories next to each item. Menu boards must also have a prominent, clear, and conspicuous statement on menus and menu boards regarding the availability of written nutrition information for menu items. FDA proposes rule that would require companies to post daily recommended calorie intake on menus and menu boards. A 2,000 calorie diet daily diet is used as the basis for general nutrition advice; however, individual calorie needs may vary. The proposed rule would the proposed rule, the FDA requested comment and consumer research on five different options for disclosing the calorie and nutrient content for standard menu items that come in different flavors, varieties, or combinations. Using an average or median value; using a range; using slashes to separate calorie. require that covered establishments declare calories on menus and menu boards to the nearest 5-calorie increment up to and including 50 calories. The FDA proposes use of the "80-120 rule" that is currently the standard for prepackaged food. This rule is currently applied to pre-packaged food, where preparation is largely mechanized. Some note that restaurant food preparation is generally done by human hands, and thereby subject to greater variation in the food misbranded. If the language regarding the 80-120rule is included in the final rule, the accuracy of restaurant calorie information would be determined using the same standards as packaged foods. New York City enacted legislation in 2008 to require restaurants that are part of a chain with 15 or more locations nationally to post calorie content. Lawmakers have also proposed a variety of approaches, including taxation and prohibition of high-calorie items, and requiring calorie labeling of restaurant food. Studies have shown that the number of calories consumed by individuals in the U.S. is higher than the total number of people in the United States who consume calories each day. The number of Americans who consume more than 1,000 calories a day is greater than the number who consume 2,000 or more a day. their lunch by 23%. Calorie labeling on menus has been shown to change consumer behavior. In grocery stores, foods that are "packaged and prepared for immediate consumption" are labeled. Smaller independent operators may not participate because their food presentation is not standardized. Calorie counts may also be difficult to determine due to varying portion sizes. The study found that consumers were less likely to choose higher-calorie items when of "reasonable basis" when the calorie count was listed on the menu. 2012 that it would list calorie information on all restaurant and drive-thru menu boards. Federal responsibility for food safety and food labeling rests primarily with the FDA and the Department of Agriculture. In anticipation of the final rule, some establishments have moved forward with menu labeling. McDonald's, the largest fast food company in the United States, announced in September 2012 that it will list calorie info on its menu boards in the U.S. The FDA is responsible for ensuring that all domestic and imported food products, except for most meats full information, are labeled. Restaurant menu labeling as a policy option for obesity prevention has garnered broad support from the public health community. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention have deemed menu labeling a "winnable battle" New research on nutrition labeling of menus and menu boards suggests this approach may be successful. But the long-term impact of state and local menu labeling regulations on population level obesity rates has not been widely studied, the authors say. The approach is supported by the American Heart and the National Restaurant Association. Section 4205 of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA) amended the FDA's nutrition labeling requirements. The National Restaurant Association supported inclusion of a restaurant menu labeling provision in the ACA. McDonald's, the largest fast food company in the United States, announced in September increased their share of the market in sales of restaurant-type food. One question for policymakers is whether the inclusion of supermarkets and convenience stores is instrumental to the effectiveness of the menu labeling law. If congressional intent was to regulate all restaurant- type food, regardless of location, so that consumers have access to menu nutrition labeling. The FDA tentatively concluded that the new menu labeling requirements do not apply menu items that a restaurant has that would be covered by the proposed rule. That would be approximately 40 items requiring nutrition labeling in supermarkets and grocery stores. The grocery industry argues that this estimate is inaccurate, and that many more items should be required to be labeled. The FDA has proposed definitions for restaurant food and restaurant-type food, standard menu items, and combination meals. It has also proposed definition for standard restaurant food. California's menu labeling law, enacted in 2008, requires restaurants with 20 or more locations in the state to post caloric content, carbohydrates, saturated fat, trans fat, and sodium content. New Jersey's 2010 law, also enacted in 2010, requires chain restaurants with more than 20 locations to post calorie content. Researchers found that the nutrition labeling law affected restaurants' behavior as well. However, because these laws and regulations are fairly recent, the.conflicting requirements can be difficult to enforce. There are a number of conditions under which a food would be deemed misbranded, including if its label is "false or misleading" Generally, the FDA relies on food companies to voluntarily recall misbranded products, either on their own initiative or regulations promulgated by the Secretary. The FDA generally does not have the authority to order a recall of a misbranded food, unless it is deemedmisbranded under allergen labeling regulations. Rather, the agency relies onFood companies to voluntary recall adulterated, misbranded or otherwise unsafe products. labeling requirements. Foods in packaging that is too small to comply with the required information. Food that contains insignificant amounts of all the nutrients required to be listed. Foods offered by an individual who has grossed less than $500,000 from food sales. Food offered by a person who grosses under $50,000 annually. Food sold by a company that grosses more than $100,000 a year. Food with a label that does not comply with required information, or that is not clearly labeled. in food sales) unless the individual makes a health or nutrition claim for that food are also exempt. Foods with insignificant amounts of more than one-half the required nutrients may use a simplified labeling format. Prior to passage of the ACA, two other categories of food were also exempt from the new law. The new law applies to all food sold in the United States. It will take effect on July 1, 2015. The law will apply to food sold across the U.S. and to certain foreign countries. disclosure when there are only two varieties; and either a range or an average if there are more varieties. The law requires that all nutrient content disclosures must have a reasonable basis. However, estimates of the per item cost of determining nutrition information vary widely, and some Members of Congress have questioned the need for such disclosures at all. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. items, such as fruit or vegetable platters, vary in composition according to seasonality, altering the calorie and nutrient content. Composition of other products may also vary according to brand and ingredient availability. The FDA has estimated that grocery stores and supermarkets have approximately one-half of the number of restaurant-type food in the U.S., according to a report by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) The report also found that the average American spends about $1,000 a year on food. FDA does not have mandatory recall authority for food that is deemed misbranded due to nutrition labeling. Pizza companies have argued against "whole pie" labeling, because they feel it is not an accurate representation of what an individual would typically eat in one sitting.than whole item. Although the FDA has the authority to recall misbranded food, there is no mandatory recall for misbranded foods. The FDA has not ruled on the issue of misbranded pizzas, but it is looking into the matter. must include the same nutrition information that is currently required by law on food package labeling. The FDA further proposes that the term "primary writing" be interpreted from a customer's vantage point. This would include drive-through menus, take-out and delivery menus, and information posted on the Internet by the covered establishment. Advertisements would not be considered primary writing, but a menu sent through the mail might be, if customers routinely order from it. There has been some concern with the FDA's interpretation. of "primary writing" The nature and use of primary writing may vary depending on the type of restaurant or SRFE. For example, pizza companies have argued against in-store menu and menu board labeling, as 90% of their business is driven by phone and online ordering. On the other hand, grocery stores may want to label their menu boards with the word "preferred" instead of "preferential" to avoid confusion with other menu boards. For more information, visit the SRFE's website or call 1-800-273-8255. require nutrition labeling for standard menu items offered for sale in chain restaurants or SRFE with 20 or more locations. Custom orders are custom orders, which are prepared in a specific manner at the customer's request. Daily specials are foods that are not routinely listed on the menu. Temporary menu items, which appear on a menu or menu board for less than 60 days, do not require labeling in restaurants and SRFE. Under the amended law, restaurants andSRFE foods that don't require labeling are not custom orders or daily specials. not always pre-portioned (e.g., deli items), which means that these items will not be served in standardized portions. Additionally, certain items in restaurants, SRFE, and other establishments, are served as a whole. Some feel that these should be labeled as per portion, rather than per portion of the item. Some people feel that pizza, buckets of fried chicken, and some other items, should be served as per portions, not per portions of the items they are served. are required to disclose the number of calories in each item "as usually prepared and offered for sale," and provide a statement on suggested total daily caloric intake "in a clear and conspicuous manner" The law also requires restaurants and SRFE to provide calorie information adjacent to self-service food (i.e., salad bars, buffet lines) The restaurant or SRFE must also provide a. statement concerning daily recommended caloric intake, presented in a manner. that enables the public to understand the significance of each item in the context of a total daily diet. stores have argued that posting calorie and other nutrition information on the Internet should be voluntary, because their customers would be unlikely to look up this information prior to going to the store. Expecting all entities to comply in the same manner could impose the highest burden, as opposed to allowing people to choose what information they want to share with the world. The Supreme Court is expected to rule on the issue by the end of the year or early next year, depending on how it interprets the law. listed as a single menu item (i.e., "combo meals"). Foods exempted from the law include items not listed on a menu or menu board (such as condiments and items for general use) Food items that are being market-tested. Rules for registration of establishments that are not otherwise subject to the law's requirements to voluntarily to voluntarily comply with the law. The provision different flavors, varieties, or combinations, that are listed as asingle menu item; any other nutrient that may be disclosed to assist consumers in maintaining healthy dietary practices. nutrition labeling requirements. These categories were (1) food "which is served in restaurants or other establishments in which food is served for immediate human consumption or which is sold for sale or used in such establishments," and (2) food which is processed and prepared primarily in a retail establishment, which is called a "retail establishment" in the U.S., according to the Food and Drug Administration. For more information, go to: www.foodanddrug.gov/labeling. The proposed definition of restaurant-type food would mean that grab-and-go items, such as sandwiches or meals prepared in a restaurant or SRFE, would also be regulated. The grocery industry disagrees with this definition. Additionally, the interpretation of "variable menu items" has raised grocers' concern because certain prepared meals are considered variable menu items. To see the full report, go to CNN.com/suspect. To read the entire report, visit CNN.co/sistock. is ready for human consumption, which is the type described" in (1) and "which is offered for sale to consumers but not for immediate consumption" in such establishment. As noted, prior to passage of the ACA, restaurant-type food and food was not available for sale outside of such establishments. The ACA requires that restaurants sell food that is ready for consumption but that is not available immediately for consumption. The law also requires that such food be available for consumption outside of the restaurant, but not immediate consumption. items at grocery stores would be affected by the adoption of Option 1 in the final rule. Grocers argue that the FDA's estimate would be accurate if the rule only applied to self-service food and food on display, which are prevalent in grocery stores and supermarkets. The final rule is expected to be released in the next few weeks and could be implemented by the end of the year or early next year, depending on the outcome of the FDA hearing on the issue. For more information, visit FDA.gov/FDA. to restaurant food; however, if it applies to restaurant-type food, which would include many self-serve and deli items, then the affected number of items would be closer to 500 to 15,000 items, according to the Food Marketing Institute. The proposed rule includes clarification of several concepts that were noted in the original proposal. The proposal was released by the Food marketing Institute (FMI) and the National Restaurant Association (NRA) on Tuesday. The NRA has not yet issued a formal announcement on the proposal. per calendar year; part of a customary market test; and condiments available for general use, such as salt, pepper, and ketchup, that every customer has access to. The proposed rule further specifies the foods that would require the food to be part of the market test. It would apply to foods that are offered for fewer than 90 consecutive days to test consumer acceptance, for example. The proposal is expected to be finalized in the next few months, and could be implemented by the end of 2015. The 1938 Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (FFDCA) granted FDA the authority to regulate food products and their ingredients. FDA's authority over nutrition labeling of those products was created by the Nutrition Labeling and Education Act (NLEA) The ACA provision required nutrition labeling for foods sold in chain restaurants and vending machines. Both were previously exempt from the FDA's nutrition labeling authority. The provision also has a section on federal preemption of and poultry, are safe, nutritious, and accurately labeled. of the FFDCA (to provide the FDA with the authority to require and regulate nutrition labeling), and added a new Section 403A (to preempt state and local nutrition labeling regulations) The ACA further amended these sections to provide FDA the authority. to regulate nutritionlabeling of restaurants, similar retail food requirements of the law to voluntarily register to be subject to these requirements. Section 4205 of the ACA amended Section 403(q) of the FF dCA, regarding nutrition labeling requirements. It amended the FFdCA to newly Under the FFDCA, FDA may deem foods misbranded unless health and nutrition claims are made according to FDA regulations. Infant formula and medical foods, which are subject to other labeling requirements, are exempt from the nutrition labeling requirements. The FFD CA has provisions regarding its preemption of state and local nutrition labeling laws. It allows FDA to regulate nutrient content claims and health claims on food labels. It also allows the agency to regulate the layout and design of the label to assist consumers. The FDA has the authority to pursue other enforcement actions against regulated firms, individuals, and products that fail to comply. These actions include warning letters, seizures, injunctions, civil monetary penalties, and prosecution. The FFDCA requires all food regulated by the FDA to comply with the regulations.upon regulators' request. The agency does not have the power to impose fines or other penalties on companies that do not comply with its regulations. The FDA does have the ability to impose penalties on firms that don't comply with their regulations. Section 4205 required that nutrient content disclosures have a "reasonable basis," such as nutrient databases, cookbooks, or laboratory analyses. The law requires HHS to establish standards for determining and disclosing the nutrient content for standard menu items that come in different flavors, varieties, or combinations. The FDA was further instructed to consider certain factors in rulemaking, including the standardization of recipes and preparation methods, variation in ingredients, serving size, and formulation of menu items. and space on menus and menu boards. bear labeling with the serving size, total calories per serving, and the amount of various nutrients. It also provides the Secretary the authority to remove or otherwise change nutrient information requirements by regulation. The FDA has the power to further specify requirements for the labeling of food products in the U.S. for the first time in the United States. For more information, go to www.bearlabeling.com. for more information on how to label food products and for more details on the labeling process, visit www.fda.gov. to fully comply. Faced with the possibility of budget cuts, it is unclear if the FDA will have the funding to enforce a strict interpretation of the accuracy of calorie and other nutrition information. The FDA's final determination on these definitions and the timeline for compliance and enforcement activities will be made in the near future, the agency says. The agency says it will make a final determination in the coming months on how to enforce the new rules and enforce them in the U.S. and around the world. proposed rule on nutrition labeling in restaurants and similar retail food establishments provided background information on food consumption outside the home. It also listed the requirements of Section 4205 of and the restaurant industry have asserted that the FDA has misinterpreted the "reasonable basis" that restaurants and SRFE must have for nutrient disclosures in the proposed rule. According to the law, the required nutritional information could be determined using nutrient databases, cookbooks, laboratory analyses, labels on packaged foods, or "any other source" This report provides a discussion of the role of nutrition labeling in combating obesity. It provides an overview of the FDA's authority to regulate nutrition labeling under the FFDCA. It also has a section on federal preemption of state and local laws regarding nutrition labels in restaurants and SRFE. The meaning of SRFE was not defined in the scope of the agency's authority. The FDA is authorized to create nutrition from vending machines were exempt from nutrition labeling authorities in the FFdCA. The state andLocal menu labeling regulations that have been enacted in the United States generally do not apply to SRFE establishments. The FDA published the preliminary regulatory impact analyses (PRIA) for restaurant nutrition labeling and vending machine calorie labeling in March 2011. The PRIA for restaurant menu labeling analyzed the possible regulatory and economic impact of Section 4205 and proposed options for approaches to the regulations. The proposed rules generated hundreds of comments from industry, Members of Congress, and the public. Introductory material for the proposed rules can be found on the FDA's website at: http://www.fda.gov/menulabeling. preparation, making it more challenging to adhere to the 80-120 rule. Further, critics note that wide variation due to individual order preparation was one of the reasons the FDA exempted restaurant food from the NLEA regulations in 1993. The restaurant industry has argued that adhering to a stricter standard would make it more difficult to serve food to the public. The FDA has yet to issue a decision on whether to issue such a ruling to the restaurant industry in the coming weeks or months. was allowed to enforce certain provisions in Section 4205 upon enactment of the ACA, it has proposed to refrain from enforcement until it has completed rulemaking. As noted earlier in this report, the FDA has the authority to deem foods misbranded unless health and nutrition claims are made according to the Affordable Care Act. The FDA has not said when it will make a decision on whether to enforce the provisions of the law in the first place. The proposal is subject to comment from the Department of Health and Human Services. of the report describe the components of the proposed rule that have invoked concern or debate, and the policy implications of the rulemaking process. The following sections present many of the terms that were defined in the statute and the proposedrule, and then provide a discussion of the issues. The report was published by the U.S. Department of the Treasury on September 14, 2013. It is the first of a two-part series of reports. The second report will be published on October 1, 2013, and will provide a more detailed description of the rules. affect the regulation's scope and cost. Concerns about the cost of implementing this rule were raised before, during, and after the proposed rule was published. These include the cost and burden imposed on businesses implementing the rule. However, the eventual public health benefit to this rule is not yet known, according to the report. The final report will be published in the spring of 2015, and is expected to include more detail on the costs and benefits of this rule. The report will also include information on the potential public health benefits of the rule, as well as the potential benefits to businesses. elect to be subject to the requirements of the law, set an effective date, and outlined enforcement mechanisms for establishments that fail to comply. The proposed rule was available for public comment through July 5, 2011, and a final rule is expected by the end of 2012. The following sections are intended to outline the requirements and enforcement mechanisms that will be used to enforce the law. The final rule will be published in the spring of 2012, and will be available to the public for comment until then. In the proposed rule, the FDA provides a six-month window for restaurants and SRFE to comply with the final rule, once published. Industry representatives have requested a longer timeline of one year for full compliance. Failure to comply, once finalized, will render the regulations invalid.initiative or upon regulators' request. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S., call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. Office of Management (OMB) is to review the regulations promulgated under the law. OMB is to ensure, among other considerations, that they are consistent with Executive Orders 12866 and 13563. These executive orders require agencies to promulgate rules only after determining that the benefits of a regulation justify its costs, the OMB said in a statement. The OB said it is reviewing the regulations to ensure that they comply with these executive orders and other regulations in a manner that is consistent with them. that Option 1, as described in Table 1 , is too broad and that grocery and convenience stores should not be covered by the rule. Others have argued that Option 2 is too narrow, and that congressional intent was to encompass grocery and. convenience stores, as well as entities such as grocery stores and convenience. stores. The House of Representatives passed a bill to expand the federal definition of what constitutes a grocery store. The Senate is expected to vote on the bill in the next few weeks, and the House of Reps. is likely to pass it in the following weeks. do not apply to grocery stores. Some have argued that congressional intent in drafting the provision that was eventually enacted as part of the ACA was not to broaden the scope of those laws. The original sponsors of the bill disagree. However, as many grocers and other business owners have pointed out, the law does apply to them. The law was passed in 2009 and has been in place since 2010. It was designed to help people with pre-existing conditions get health insurance, but it has been extended to cover more people. At issue is the scope of covered establishments. This has provoked some Members of Congress to propose legislation directing the FDA to narrowly interpret the law by excluding primarily retail entities. Some have argued that the perceived burden of including those entities outweighs the perceived potential benefits. The bill has not yet been voted on by the House of Representatives or the Senate, but it is expected to be introduced in the near future, according to a report by the Center for Responsible Pharmacy at the University of California, San Diego. narrower version, including industry groups such as the Food Marketing Institute, feel that the FDA has overstepped its statutory authority. grocery stores should not be included in the rule for a number of reasons, including disproportionate burden on grocery stores and questions about whether this is outside of the FDA's jurisdiction. The FDA is expected to announce its decision on the rule in the coming days. The rule will be made available for public comment in the next few days. For confidential support, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org. Some definitions are clear and straightforward, others have generated debate. The FDA's determination of the scope of covered establishments, variation among establishments, the cost of providing the required information, and the accessibility of calorie and nutrition information to consumers. All of these factors could have an impact on how consumers are able to get the information they need to make informed decisions. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. exempt movie theaters, amusement parks, general merchandise stores with in-house concession stands, hotels, and transportation carriers such as trains and airplanes. The alternate definition (see Option 2 in Table 1 ) would also generally exempt these entities, as well as grocery and convenience stores. Other restaurants and SRFE that are exempt from the law include: McDonald's, Burger King, KFC, Pizza Hut, Pizza Express, Starbucks, McDonald's Pizza, and Taco Bell. The alternative definition would also exempt grocery stores, convenience stores, and other restaurants that are SRFE. of floor space devoted to food and regardless of whether food sales constitute a large or small portion of the establishments' total business. This would include food outlets such as movie theaters, bowling alleys, and other entertainment venues, as well as grocery and convenience stores. Those who argue for the proposal say it would be a boon to the economy and the economy would be better off if food outlets had more floor space to work with. The bill is expected to be voted on in the next few months. the ACA, and the proposed rule included definitions for a number of terms that were not defined in the law. The proposed rule set requirements for covered restaurants and SRFE to implement the rule. It also provided detail for voluntary registration of establishments that are not covered by the law but that not regulated under the proposed definitions may voluntarily register with an "authorized official" to be subject to the requirements of this regulation. The possible inclusion of supermarkets and convenience stores under the definition of SRFE would also be considered "covered establishments" as movie theaters, bowling alleys, bookstore cafes, and all establishments that sell restaurant-like food to consumers. Some Members of Congress, with support from the grocery industry, have expressed concern over Option 1. Some have introduced legislation that would define SRFE as establishments that derive more than 50% of their revenue from restaurant-type food, similar to the proposed Option 2 in Table 1. Members ofCongress who advocate for a broader definition of SRFE note that Congress intended the law to apply to "restaurants as well as other retail food establishments" Under the ACA, restaurants and similar retail food establishments (SRFE) that are part of a chain of 20 or more (regardless the ACA) are covered by the rule. The FDA has proposed two options for the definition of "restaurants or similar retailFood establishments" Each definition would impact different segments of the food industry. Specific concerns regarding the impact of the proposed rule, and the industry and congressional response, are also discussed in this section.influence the impact on affected restaurants and SRFE. One proposed interpretation of restaurants andSRFE (see Option 1 in Table 1 ) would generally