the decision unless the participant had reason to believe that the decision was erroneous. This statute is commonly referred to as the Finality Rule. Federal-state incentives. Another area for further exploration is the broader use of incentives for states to implement effective preventive and detective controls. Agencies have applied limited incentives to states in the past, but they have had limited impact on crime rates and crime rates in the U.S. since the early 1990s. The federal government should consider using incentives to encourage states to improve crime rates. incentives and penalties for encouraging improved state administration to reduce improper payments. Chairman Platts and Ranking Member Towns, this completes my prepared statement. I would be happy to respond to any questions that you may have about this issue. Incentives and. penalties can be helpful to create management reform and to ensure adherence to. performance standards, Mr. Platts said. He added that he was also happy to answer any questions about the issue that you might have about it, if you had any. implementing the controls needed to advance the federal government’s efforts to reduce and prevent improper payments. Proactively preventing improper payments increases public confidence in the administration of benefit programs. Many agencies and programs are in the process of implementing preventive controls to avoid improper payments, including overpayments and underpayments. Preventive controls may involve a variety of activities such as upfront validation of benefit payments. The federal government has a responsibility to ensure that all benefits are paid on time and on budget. for provider enrollment, contribute to improper payments would lend insight to developing effective strategies for enhancing compliance. Agency also need effective detection techniques to quickly identify improper payments, according to the report. The report may identify opportunities for streamlining or changing eligibility or other program requirements. For more information, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/29/healthcare/health-care-reform-reforms/index.html. For confidential support call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org. and beneficiaries, such as for pharmacy providers, to promote best prescribing practices and appropriate prescribing guidelines based on Food and Drug Administration labeling, potentially reducing improper payments. GAO, Standards for Internal Control in the Federal Government, GAO/AIMD-00-21.3.1 (Washington, D.C: Nov. 1999). inconsistent program requirements, such. as eligibility criteria and requirements for certain programs, potentially leading to improper payments and improper use of government funds. GAo, Standards. for Internal control in the federal government, GAo/A IMD-000-21-3-1 ( Washington, D.-C:Nov. 1999) with the “pay and chase’example, addressing program design issues that are a factor in causing improper payments may be an effective preventive strategy. Effective monitoring and reporting can also help detect emerging issues. In addition, agencies can also enhance detective controls to and recover those overpayments that do occur. The following are examples of key detection techniques to be used to identify improper payments and to recover them from the bank's books. For. considered. ways to detect and recover improper payments, see the ‘Pay and Chase’ example. to analyze and identify Medicare provider networks, billing patterns, and beneficiary utilization patterns and detect those that represent a high risk of fraudulent activity. Through such analysis, unusual or suspicious patterns or abnormalities can be identified and used to prioritize additional review of suspicious transactions before payment is made. The agency will also use this information to help identify potential fraudsters in the Medicare system. The program is funded by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) and the Medicare Trustee Program (MTP). that its Unemployment Insurance Program utilizes HHS’s National Directory of New Hires Databaseto individuals who claim benefits after returning to work. In June 2011, Labor established the mandatory use of the database for state benefit payment control no later than December. The largest single cause of overpayments reported in the program is individuals who return to work after a period of time off, the Labor Department said in a press release in June 2011. The U.S. Department of Labor said the database will be used to control state benefits payment control by December. 2011. Labor also issued a program letter that included recommended operating procedures for cross-matching activity for National and State Directories of New Hires. to improve the ability to detect overpayments due. In another case, to address the issue of inaccuracy of self-reported financial income on applications for student aid, the Labor Department issued a letter to the Department of Education. to help students apply for federal student aid. The letter was issued to the Dept. of Education on October 31, 2011. eligibility, predictive analytic tests, training programs, and timely resolution of audit findings. Data sharing allows entities that make payments to compare information from different sources. When effectively implemented, data sharing can be particularly useful in confirming initial or continuing eligibility of participants in benefit programs and in identifying improper payments that have already been made. Analyses and reporting can also be an effective preventive strategy to be considered. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. on the extent to which agencies are participating in data sharing activities. Additional data sharing efforts that agencies are currently pursuing or would like to pursue is another important element needed to advance the federal government’s efforts to reduce improper payments. For example, the Department of Labor (Labor) reported that it reported on the extent of data sharing with other agencies. It also reported that agencies were seeking to share data with each other about improper payments made to federal workers in the U.S. and abroad. Data mining is a computer-based control activity that analyzes diverse data. The central repository of data commonly used to perform data mining is called a data warehouse. Data warehouses store tables of historical and current information that are logically grouped. As a tool in managing improper payments, applying data mining to aData warehouse allows an organization to efficiently query the system to identify potential improper payments. For more information on data mining, visit datamining.considered.com or go to www.datamining.com. Department of Education (Education), in conjunction with the Internal Revenue Service (IRS), implemented a 6-month pilot version of an IRS data retrieval tool in January 2010 for its Pell Grant Program. The tool allows student aid applicants and, as needed, parents of applicants, to transfer certain tax return information from the IRS to the Department of Education. The program is funded by federal Pell Grant funds, administered by the U.S. Department of education (Education) and the Pell Grant Foundation. the IRS directly to Education’s online application. Nearly 3.5 million students used the data exchange tool, representing approximately 21 percent of the applications submitted for the 2011 - 2012 academic year. Predictive analytic technologies. The analytic technologies used by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) and the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) The predictive analytic technologies that HHS uses to predict student behavior. The predictive analytics that HHS used to predict students’ future behavior. The Small Business Jobs Act of 2010 requires CMS to use predictive modeling and other analytic techniques. The goal is to identify and to prevent improper payments under the Medicare fee-for-service program.technologies will be used.are examples of preventive techniques that may be useful for other programs to consider. For more information, go to www.census.gov/medicare/predictive-analytic-technologies. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here. legislation required that contractors selected begin using these technologies on July 1, 2011. The 10 states identified by CMS as having the highest risk of fraud, waste, or abuse in Medicare fee- for-service payments. Rather than focusing on the 10 states, CMS These predictive analytic contractors began using these predictive analytic technologies in July 2011. In 2012, the government began using the predictive analytic technology in a number of other states. In 2013, it began using it in a handful of states, including New Jersey, New York and Pennsylvania. technologies to screen all fee-for-service claims nationwide prior to payment as of June 30, 2011, through CMS’s new Fraud Prevention System. Training programs for providers, staff, and beneficiaries can be a key element in any effort to prevent improper payments from occurring. This can include both training staff on how to use the new technology and training providers and beneficiaries on how the system works to prevent fraudulent claims from being made. For more information, visit www.census.gov. how to prevent and detect improper payments and training providers or beneficiaries on program requirements. For example, the Medicaid Integrity Institute, an initiative of CMS’s Medicaid Integrity Group (MIG), trains state-level staff and facilitates networking by sponsoring free workshops for states. In addition, the MIG sponsors education programs for providers for providers. For more information, go to www.medicaidintegritygroup.org or call 1-800-633-8255 or visit http://www.mig.org/. example, in the Medicare and Medicaid program, data on claims are stored in geographically disbursed systems and databases. CMS has been working for most of the past decade to consolidate program integrity data and analytical tools for detecting fraud, waste, and abuse. The agency’s efforts led to the initiation of the Integrated Data Repository (IDR) program, which is intended to provide CMS and its program integrity contractors with a centralized source that contains Medicaid and Medicare data from the many disparate and dispersed legacy systems. the One Program Integrity (One PI) program, a web-based portal and set of analytical tools by which these data can be accessed and analyzed to help identify cases of fraud, waste, and abuse. Recovery auditing. While internal control should be maintained to help prevent internal control problems. The One PI program is available on a free trial for one year. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. Pay with fiscal year 2011 outlays of $30.5 billion. DOD’s payment controls are hindered by problems related to inadequate payment processing, poor financial systems, and inadequate supporting documentation. DOD Comptroller testified in May 2011 that rate of more than 95 percent and that its use was not standardized across payment systems. Additionally, the DOD IG reported that DOD's risk of making improper payments was high and identified deficiencies in DOD's estimate of high- dollar overpayments that caused it to underreport the amount of improper payments. DOD assessed its commercial payment program as low risk because DOD management has concluded that it had a highly effective pre-payment examination process. That process includes a software tool that tests for potential improper payments before disbursement. However, the DOD IG has reported that the tool had a false positive for a potential improper payment. The DOD IG found that the software tool was used to test for improper payments, not to detect improper payments. The IG also found that DOD's pre- payment examination process was effective. Defense Finance and Accounting Service Commercial Pay, and DOD’s Army Corps of Engineers Commercial Pay. A number of federal agencies have reported progress in reducing improper payment error rates in some programs and activities. For example, we identified 40 federal agency programs, or about 50 percent of the total programs. We identified about 40 federal agencies programs, which are responsible for about half of all improper payment errors. We also identified about 30 federal agencies, which account for about 30 percent of improper paymenterror rates. other programs, including statistically valid random sampling or reviewing 100 percent of payments. In its fiscal year 2011 agency financial report, DOD stated that it plans to begin statistical sampling of the Commercial Pay program in fiscal year 2012. Both GAO and the DOD Inspector General (IG) have previously reported that random sampling of commercial pay payments is not a valid way to determine how much money is paid to the military. The agency also plans to start sampling commercial pay in fiscal 2012, according to its financial report. Treasury. 2011 Financial Report of the United States Government. Washington, D.C.: December 23, 2011, pp. 211-231. Medicaid Program Integrity: Expanded Federal Role Presents Challenges to and Opportunities for Assisting States. GAO-12-288T. DOD Financial Management: Weaknesses in Controls over the Use of Public Funds and Related. Washington,. D.c.: December 7, 2011 DOD Financial. Management:weaknesses in controls over the use of public funds and related. Not all agencies have developed improper payment estimates for all of the programs and activities they identified as susceptible to improper payments. Identifying and analyzing the root causes of improper payments is key to developing effective corrective actions. These initiatives, as well as additional actions in the future, will be needed to advance the federal government efforts to reduce improper payments, according to the report. The report was published by the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) on Wednesday, November 8, 2013. For confidential support call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. For support on suicide matters call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch or click here. An estimated $115.3 billion in reported improper payments was reported in 2012. Agencies cited a number of causes for the estimated overpayments, including insufficient documentation and incorrect computations. enhancing incentives for grantees, such as state and local governments, could help increase attention to preventing, identifying, and recovering improper payments. For more information, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/28/health/overpayments-in-government/index.html. requirements; and, in some cases, fraud. Beginning in fiscal year 2011, according to OMB’s guidance, agencies were required to classify the root causes of estimated improper payments into three general categories for reporting purposes. The categories are documentation and administrative errors, authentication and medical necessity errors, and verification errors. For confidential support, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. extent of improper payments and implement appropriate corrective actions to effectively reduce improper payments. Three federal entities did not report fiscal year 2011 estimated improper payment amounts for four risk-susceptible programs. HHS cited statutory limitations for its state-administered programs. We are currently working on engagements related to improper payment reporting at both DOD and HHS. Furthermore, as I to significant improper payments, we are working with the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) to identify and correct the problems. have not yet reported estimates for all risk-susceptible programs and some agencies’ estimating methodologies need to be refined. Internal control weaknesses exist, heightening the risk of improper payments occurring. Until federal agencies are able to implement effective processes to completely and accurately identify the full risk, no action can be taken to correct the problem. We have also found that internal control weaknesses exists, Heightening the Risk of Improper Payments. Until we can identify and correct these problems, we can’t act to correct them. being cited most often. We did not calculate the dollar amounts in each category due to the imprecise narratives included in some of the agencies’ reporting of identified causes. Nonetheless, additional analysis regarding the root causes would have required more detailed information and/or detailed examination of the underlying data. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. The 10 programs with the highest error rates had rates ranging from 11.0 percent to 28.4 percent. These 10 programs accounted for about $107 billion or 93 percent of the total estimated improper payments agencies reported for fiscal year 2011. The following are examples of the three categories to classify the types of errors and quantify how many errors can be attributed to that category. Of the 79 programs with improper payment estimates, we found that agencies reported the root causes information using the required categories for 42 programs in their reports. Three additional programs providing estimates in fiscal year 2011 were not included in the governmentwide totals because their estimation methodologies were still under development. The three excluded programs were the: Department of Education’s Direct Loan, Department of Defense’S at least $2 billion by the end of fiscal year 2012. Together, these programs represented about $46 billion, or 40 percent of the total reported $115 billion in improper payment estimates. Of the $46billion, the estimated improper payment amounts were spread across the three categories, with documentation and administrative errors. The fiscal year 2011 Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) program’s estimated improper payment amount decreased from the fiscal year 2010 amount of $16.9 billion to $15.2 billion. Treasury reported that corrective actions taken to reduce improper payments primarily focused on completing examinations on tax returns that claimed the EITC before issuing the tax bill. The error rate from 26.3 percent to 23.5 percent was the decrease in the error rate over the past two years. EITC portion of the refund, identifying math or other statistical irregularities in taxpayer returns, and comparing income information provided by the taxpayer with matching information from employers to identify discrepancies. HHS reported that the fiscal year 2011 estimated improper payment amount for the Medicare Advantage (Part C) program decreased from from $1.1 billion to $1 billion in fiscal year 2010. HHS said the decrease was due to a decrease in the number of taxpayers who claimed the EITC credit in the 2010 fiscal year. the fiscal year 2011 estimate is attributed primarily to decreases in program outlays for the Department of Labor’s Unemployment Insurance program, and decreases in reported error rates. The Department of the Treasury's (Treasury) Earned Income Tax Credit program and the. Earned income tax credit program are also included in the estimate. The estimate is based on a range of assumptions, including that the U.S. economy will grow at a faster rate than expected. The U.N. estimates that the economy will expand at a rate of 1.4 percent in the next year. Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) program, which prohibited it from requiring states to participate in developing an improper payment estimate for the TANF program. HHS officials stated that they will continue to work with states and explore options to allow for future estimates for the program. Despite these limitations, HHS officials said that they would continue to working with states to find ways to improve the program for the poor and disabled. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org. For fiscal year 2011, the TANF program reported outlays of about $17 billion. For another program, HHS cited the Children’s Health Insurance Program Reauthorization Act of 2009 as prohibiting HHS from calculating or publishing any national or state- specific payment error rates for that program until the 2009 act is passed. For fiscal year 2012, HHS reported spending of $16 billion for TANf and $11 billion for CHIP. for fiscal year 2013, HHS said it would spend $11.5 billion and $9.7 billion respectively. The $115.3 billion in estimated federal improper payments reported for fiscal year 2011 was attributable to 79 programs spread among 17 agencies. Ten of these 79 programs account for most of the reported improper payments. The HHS Medicare Prescription Drug Benefit (Part D) program had the highest estimate of the newly included programs. We view these agencies’ efforts as a positive step. The agency’s estimate included improper payment estimates for nine additional programs that did not report an estimate in fiscal year 2010. the fiscal year 2010 reported amount of $13.6 billion to $12.4 billion, which represented a decrease in the error rate from 14.1 percent to 11.0 percent. HHS reported that it reduced payment errors by continuing to routinely implement controls in its payment system to ensure accurate and timely payments. According to its fiscal year 2011 agency financial report, HHS plans to report estimated improper payment amounts for CHIP in fiscal year 2012. For fiscal year2011, the CHIP program reported federal outlays of $11.7 billion. $961 million in overpayments and recovered $797 million nationwide. The Medicaid RAC program was established by the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act. Each state must contract with a RAC, which is tasked with identifying and recovering Medicaid over payments and identifying underpayments. Similar to the Medicare RACs, Medicaid Racs will be paid on a contingency fee basis—a percentage of any recovered over Payments plus incentive payments for the detection of under payments. It is important to note that some agencies have reported statutory or regulatory problems. the revised prior year reported estimate of $120.6 billion. Based on the agencies’ estimates, OMB estimated that fiscal year 2011 improper payments comprised about 4.7 percent of the $2.5 trillion in total spending during that year. The decrease in about $9 billion. OMB excluded estimated improper payment amounts for two DOD programs from the governmentwide total because those programs were still developing their estimating methodologies. Defense Finance and Accounting Service (DFAS) Commercial Payfiscal year 2011 outlays of $368.5 billion. Recapture Improper Payments by Intensifying and Expanding Payment Recapture Audits (Nov. 16, 2010); and OMB Memorandum M-10-13, Issuance of Part III to OMB Circular A- 123, Appendix. C (Mar. 22, 2010). Federal agencies reported improper payment estimates totaling $115.3 billion in fiscal year 2011. Over half of this amount, $797 million, can be attributed to the Medicare recovery audit contractor program which identifies improper Medicare payments. Improper Payments. GAO-11-950T. Washington, D.C.: September 22, 2011. Improper Payments: Reported Medicare Estimates and Key Remediation Strategies. Fraud Detection Systems: Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Needs to. Ensure More Widespread Use. The report is a work of the U.S. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States. The full report is available at: http://www.gao.org/improper-payments. you or other members of the subcommittee may have at this time. For more information regarding this testimony, please contact Beryl H. Davis, Director, Financial Management and Assurance, at (202) 512-2623 or by e-mail at DavisBH@gao.gov. Contact points for our Offices of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found at: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/29/politics/congressional-relations-and-public-affairs. on the last page of this testimony. Individuals making key contributions to this testimony included Jack Warner, Assistant Director; W. Tyler Benson; Francine Delvecchio; Crystal Lazcano; Kerry Porter; and Carrie Wehrly. For our report on the U.S. government’s consolidated financial statements for fiscal year 2011, see U.s. Department of the Department of Treasury. For more on the testimony, see: http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-273852/Testimony-U.S.-Department-of-the-Department- of- the Department of the Government took-a-big-step-in-revealing-more-about-its-financial-record. The published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from GAO. However, because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material, permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org. In the U.S., call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. Fiscal year 2011 marked the eighth year of implementation of the Improper Payments Information Act of 2002 (IPIA) IPIA requires executive branch agencies to annually review all programs and activities to identify those that are susceptible to significant improper payments. IPERA, enacted July 22, 2010, amended IPIA by expanding those 10 programs accounted for $45 billion, or 39 percent of the total estimated improper payments for fiscal year 2011. Since the implementation of IPIA in 2004, federal agencies have continued to identify new programs or activities as risk-susceptible and report estimated improper payment amounts. The governmentwide improper payment estimates are not complete. Until DOD fully and effectively implements a.statistically valid estimating process for its commercial payments and addresses the known control deficiencies in its commercial payment processes, the governmentwide.improper payment estimates will not be complete. For fiscal year 2011, two agency auditors reported on compliance issues with IPIA and IPERA as part of their 2011 financial statement audits. Fiscal year 2011 marked the eighth consecutive year that auditors for HHS reported noncompliance issues withIPIA. barriers that affect their ability to pursue recovery auditing. For example, in fiscal year 2011, the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) reported that it faces regulatory barriers that restrict its ability to recover overpayments for its Retirement Program. OPM reported that based on current law and Treasury’s regulations, financial institutions, including banks, may not be able to recover their overpayment recoveries if they fail to comply with the Recovery Act of 2005. The U.S. Department of the Treasury says it is working with financial institutions to address these issues. are barred from providing OPM with the information necessary to recover various overpayments. Only the Social Security Administration, Railroad Retirement Board, and the Department of Veterans’ Affairs may receive the information needed to identify the withdrawer. Those agencies are the only ones named because they are the most likely to be able to recover the overpayment. OPM is the only agency that has the power to recover over payments from the federal government. The agency is also the only one that can try to recover payouts from individuals who have withdrawn. in the law to receive that type of information from financial institutions. According to OPM, Treasury has drafted language to address the issue and is working to publish a notice of proposed rulemaking to amend its regulation. In another instance, USDA reported that Section 281 of the Department of Agriculture could be amended to make it easier for banks to provide information to the Treasury. The change would allow the Treasury to receive more information about financial institutions' assets and liabilities, the USDA said. The changes would also make it possible for Treasury to get more information from banks about their assets. to $1 million and expands the scope for recovery audits to all OMB continues to play a key role in the oversight of the governmentwide improper payments problem. OMB has established guidance for federal agencies on reporting, reducing, and recovering improper payments. It has established various work groups responsible for developing work groups for developing guidance for agencies. It continues to work with the Treasury Department and other agencies on ways to reduce improper payments and recover money from the federal government. It also continues to provide guidance to agencies on how to report, reduce, and recover improper payments to the Treasury. recommendations aimed at improving federal financial management activities related to reducing improper payments. OMB, Circular No. A-136 Revised, Financial Reporting Requirements (Oct. 27, 2011); OMB Memorandum M-11-16, Issuance of Revised Parts I and II to Appendix C of OMB Circular A-123 (Apr. 14, 2011) OMB memorandum M-10-04, Increasing Efforts to reduce improper payments, (Nov. 11, 2010) and to report on their determinations. Under Office of Management and Budget (OMB) implementing guidance, these reports are required to be completed within 120 days of the publication of the federal agencies’ annual PAR or AFR. With the fiscal year 2011 reports for most agencies due on March 15, 2012, most agencies will have completed their reports by the end of the month. For more information, visit the OMB’s website at: http://www.omb.gov/. on the previous requirements for identifying, estimating, and reporting on programs and activities susceptible to significant improper payments. IPERA included a new, broader requirement for agencies to conduct recovery audits, where cost effective, for each program and activity with at least $1 million in annual program outlays. This IPERA provision significantly lowers the threshold for required recovery audits from $500 millionprograms and activities. Another new IP ERA provision calls for federal agencies’ inspectors general to annually determine whether their respective agencies are in compliance with key IPERA requirements. implementing three key initiatives, including contract level audits, physician outreach, and Medicare Advantage organization guidance and training. In addition, agencies have further developed the use of recovery audits to recapture improper payments. In 2010, the President set goals, as part of the Accountable Government Initiative, for federal agencies to reduce waste and fraud in the Medicare program. The goal is to reduce the cost of Medicare by $1.2 trillion over the next 10 years, including $200 billion by 2015. Recovery auditing is used to identify and recover overpayments. The Tax Relief and Health Care Act of 2006 required CMS to implement a national Medicare recovery audit contractor (RAC) program by January 1, 2010. In fiscal year 2011, HHS reported that the Medicare Fee-for-Service recovery audit program identified overpayment of $1.2 billion in Medicare payments to hospitals, doctors, and other health care providers. The program identified more than $1 billion in improper payments to Medicare providers. Reorganization Act of 1994 precluded the use of recovery auditing techniques. Section 281 provides that 90 days after the decision of a state, county, or an area committee is final, no action may be taken to recover the amounts found to have been erroneously disbursed as a result of the auditing. The auditing was conducted by a team of auditors based in the U.S. State Department's Office of Personnel Management. The results of the audit were published in the March 1994 edition of the American Accounting Journal.