made out to the Superintendent of Documents, when necessary. VISA and MasterCard credit cards are accepted, also. Orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent. U.S. General Accounting Office P.O. Box 37050 Washington, DC 20013 Room 1100 700 4th St. NW, NW, 20013. For confidential support call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. Each day, GAO issues a list of newly available reports and testimony. Orders may also be placed by calling (202) 512-6000 or by using fax number (202- 512-6061) or TDD (202, 512-2537. To receive facsimile copies of these reports, please call (800) 877-8255 or visit http://www.gao.gov/news/press-releases/news-reporters-and-public-officials-can-subscribe-to-a-daily-list-of-new-reports-and testimony-from-the-general-accountability-office. The first copy of each GAO report and testimony is free. Additional copies are $2 each. Orders should be sent to the following address, accompanied by a check or money order. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. For support in the UK, call 08457 909090. our review from October 1996 through August 1997 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. A detailed discussion of our scope and methodology is provided in appendix III. As arranged with your office, unless you publicly announce its contents earlier, we plan no further distribution of this report until we have completed our review of your office’s records. We apologize for any inconvenience caused by the delay in releasing this report to the public. We are working with you to ensure that this is not the case. 15 days after the date of this letter. At that time, we will send copies to the Administrator of EPA and other interested parties. We will also make copies available to others upon request. Please call me at (202) 512-9692 if you or your staff have any questions. Major contributors to this article include: The New York Times, The Washington Post, The Wall Street Journal, CNN, and The New England Journal. For more, go to CNN.com/sustainability. the daily list or any list from the past 30 days, please call (202) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone. A recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists. The daily list is available on a daily basis. The past 30-day list includes lists from the last three months. The weekly list includes the top 10 news stories of the week, as well as the top ten news stories from the previous week. For the weekly list, please use the daily list and the week-by-week list. FACA workgroup process has been undertaken with significantly increased openness and input from other government agencies, academia, the automobile and oil industries, environmental groups, and others. OMS officials acknowledged that some of the key formulas in the current model have been changed. FACA established a FACA mobile modeling workgroup in July 1995, and has held five meetings since that time to obtain external views by those not involved in the model’s development, according to agency officials. The next MOBILE model is expected to be released in 2015. OMS plans to perform sensitivity analyses for the next emissions model that may one day allow users to model additional parameters, such as the relative emissions impact of sequencing traffic signals to enhance traffic flow. An EPA-sponsored FACA mobile model workgroup made up of representatives from other federal, state, and local government agencies, academia, and the automobile has recommended that EPA more fully document the model’s assumptions. For example, one of the recommendations of the F ACA mobile modeling workgroup—made up of Representatives from EPA, state and local agencies, industry, environmental groups, and academia.address these and other modeling needs. performed any tampering surveys since 1992, and agency officials said that as a result of this lack of data, the tampering assumptions for MOBILE6 will remain unchanged. However, EPA’s goal for MO BILE6 is to provide users with greater flexibility in designing I&M programs, as long as the state is willing to allow it to be used. The new system is expected to be available by the end of the year or early next year, the agency said in a statement. operating an enhanced I&M program. EPA officials said that, in addition to the states’ own studies, the agency currently has I &M effectiveness studies being carried out in three states. Officials said they were unsure whether sufficient data would be available in time to further revise the I & M assumptions in MOBILE6. The agency said it was also unsure if sufficient data will be available to revise the assumptions in the MOBIle6 program in time for the 2015/16 season. EPA’s input on study protocols beforehand and have shared the data collected with EPA afterwards. While concerned about resources, OMS officials explained that making model improvements is an ongoing, continuous process. They pointed out that their goal is for each to be provided to us by EPA or other representatives, as well as through our own efforts as noted above. They said improvements will continue after MOBILE6 is issued in 1998, and that EPA will continue to work with OMS to improve the model. version of the model and to have the studies supporting key changes for MOBILE6 peer reviewed. OMS officials explained that declining modeling resources have been a problem for the agency. Also, as changes are proposed for each area of major limitations in the model, they plan tohave the entire area peer reviewed, officials said. The OMS is a nonprofit organization based in Washington, D.C. that was founded in 1993. It was the first agency of its kind to be established in the United States. Office of Mobile Sources (OMS) officials, they plan to carry out all six of the above activities as part of their improvement process for MOBILE6. Some of these activities are already well under way, such as involving external stakeholders. For example, OMS held its first stakeholder meeting. For more information, visit OMS' MOBIle6 website. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. directive was a follow-on to EPA’s January 1993 agencywide policy requiring peer review of the scientific and technical work products used to support agency decisions. In September 1996 and March 1997, we reported and testified on the uneven implementation of EPA's peer review policy. According to the ORD project director, it is too early in EPA's study to predict whether the agency may recommend that EPA require its offices to follow the other actions listed above when creating or revising models. The MOBILE model had peer review agencywide. underlying theory. Conducting peer review to enhance the quality, credibility, and acceptability of the model’s applications. SAB executive director pointed out that because of continuing concerns with the quasi-regulatory use of agency models, EPA issued agencywide guidance in 1994 specifically calling for the peer review of such models. This not been peer reviewed. EPA agreed with our recommendations for educating staff and managers about the merits of and procedures for conducting peer review and for ensuring that all relevant products are considered for peer review. The agency has set in motion a three-pronged approach to improve the implementation of this guidance. for making model revisions. We also discussed EPA’s past, ongoing, and planned actions with representatives of academia, industry, environmental groups, consulting firms, and other government agencies. We conducted our review from October 1996 though August 1997 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. We obtained documents and discussed EPA's process for improving models in general with the Science Advisory Board and EPA's Office of Research and Development. We observed one process—EPA’S open solicitation of input by external stakeholders not involved in the model’’ development—at work. Several commended EPA’s efforts in recent years to reach out to persons outside of the agency. Some noted that the outreach effort had given them a much greater appreciation of the model. While acknowledging that, historically, there have been few firm criteria on the processes that should be followed, many agreed that EPA has been successful in its outreach efforts. For more information on EPA's outreach efforts, visit www.epa.gov/outreach. For confidential support on suicide matters call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. government agencies. We interviewed officials and obtained documents from EPA’s Office of Mobile Sources in Ann Arbor, Michigan. We also discussed model limitations with individuals identified by the EPA Science Advisory Board in Washington, D.C. and the Office of Research and Development in Research Triangle Park, North Carolina, and Athens, Georgia. The results of the study will be published in a special issue of the journal Environmental Research Letters, which is published by the Association for Environmental Research, a non-profit organization. The EPA agreed with the overall message of the report but expressed concerns with imprecise language. The EPA suggested several changes to clarify information in the report. The report is available online at: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/29/environmental-policies-and-pesticides/index.html#storylink=cpy. It is published with the permission of the Environmental Protection Agency, which issued a statement in response to CNN's request. EPA officials agreed with this assessment, noting that the current model is better than any previous versions. According to agency officials and model experts we contacted, it is the nature of models to have limitations and to be in a continuous improvement mode. As a result, the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has periodically updated the estimating capabilities of its estimating capabilities. Through the to this report are listed in appendix IV. The full report can be downloaded from the EPA's website at: http://www.epa.gov/environmentalprotection. and oil industries, environmental groups, and others has been assisting EPA in improving the current model. Much of the research to fill data gaps and update aging databases was still ongoing at the time of our audit. Agency officials said that it is their plan for each new version of the system. It is still unclear how much of the new data will be available to the public. The agency has not said how much it will cost to update the current system to make it more accurate. The EPA has not released a cost estimate for the new system. needed on the effectiveness of repairs in an I&M program, including the adequacy and durability of these repairs, actual participation rates, and impact of remote sensing efforts. Except for remote sensing, the current model’s estimates for these parameters is based on aging and limited data. For example, EPA has not.needed to estimate how many people would participate in a repair program if it were to be expanded to more areas of the U.S. It has not estimated the number of people who would participate if the program was expanded. EPA has a project under way to develop agencywide procedures for improving models. The SAB executive director and the ORD project director told us that in their opinion, there are specific actions that, when followed, can enhance a model’s predictive capabilities. Among the specific actions are those recommended by the SAB in its 1989 resolution. The Office of Research and Development is available on the processes for creating and improving models in general. The project director said the agency has no immediate plans to change the MOBILE model. (ORD) is planning a workshop in December 1997 to discuss the status of modeling across several media and other modeling issues. The project director also said that the Science Advisory Board’s January 1989 resolution on models was one of the best documents on models. The workshop will discuss the need for better agencywide modeling procedures, among other issues. For more information on the workshop, visit: http://www.ord.org/workshop/1997/modeling-in-the-media-and-others. other things, these actions include the following: Obtaining external stakeholders’ input to ensure that the model’s assumptions and formulas receive critical review by those not involved in the model's development. Documenting the implicit and explicit assumptions so that others can evaluate the basis of the formulas embedded in themodel. The model should be able to be used to make decisions about the future direction of the country and its economy. It should be available to the public at the same time as it is being used by the government. model estimates. They said they are currently saving both qualitative and quantitative descriptors for the data being collected by and for the agency in order to perform these calculations in the future. The Chairman, Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations, House Committee on Commerce, asked us to (1) describe the major problems with the agency's data collection, and (2) describe some of the solutions to those problems. We are happy to share our findings with the committee. We hope to hear from you in the coming days. Performing sensitivity analyses over key parameters to identify the most sensitive parameters and to establish the areas most in need of further research. Verifying the adequacy of the model's mathematical code. Testing the model’s predictions with laboratory and field data to confirm that the model generates results consistent with its predictions. The study was published in the open-source journal ‘The Open Science Journal’ (OSJ), published by the University of California, San Diego. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here. the effects of road grade on emissions are obtained, state and local agencies would have to plot road grades for millions of miles of roadways in their jurisdictions. However, as global positioning technologyfor vehicles becomes less costly and more widely available and used, it is envisioned that the impacts of roadGrade emissions will be modeled in the future. According to EPA officials, the amount of data needed to estimate the impact of roadgrade is still years away. They also noted that time would be needed to develop consistent guidance on how state. According to agency officials, it is not expected that MOBILE6 will have adjustments for road grade. EPA officials explained that obtaining the basic data from instrumented cars and chase cars to make such adjustments would be expensive at this time. Because of the cost and length of time required for these studies, the impact of road grade will probably not be addressed untilMOBILE7. Additionally, an equally important consideration is that once these basic data on road grade are obtained, it will be possible to make adjustments. A sixth concern is the adequacy of the data supporting MOBILE5a’assumptions about emissions for in-use I&M heavy duty vehicles. Agency officials are uncertain at this time whether the correction factors for other evaporative emissions estimates will be revised forMOBILE6. While some studies are under way, EPA does not envision that significant changes in the in- use emissions rates for heavyduty vehicles will be included in MOBIle6. A seventh concern is a concern that much of the fleet characterization data in EPA’s database is inaccurate.  MOBILE5a’ estimates of emissions system deterioration for vehicles with more than 50,000 odometer miles. A special subgroup of the FACA mobile model workgroup has been established to address this issue, and their work is still ongoing. A fourth concern stems from studies that have questioned the rate and quantity of the data supporting EPA’s significantly higher rate of emissionsSystem deterioration once vehicles odometers are lowered. They were uncertain at the time of our audit how much this emissions estimate would be reduced. result in a large impact on emissions estimations. EPA officials pointed out that the agency’s guidance encourages model users to provide their own accumulated mileage estimates. They said the default values for accumulated mileage in MOBILE5a would be a problem only in those cases in which model users fail to provide estimates. The default values would be the same as those used in the current version of the MOBIle5a model, the EPA said. The agency said the change would not have a significant impact on the car's emissions estimates. concern is MOBILE5a’ emissions credits and assumptions about inspection and maintenance programs. According to a 1995 National Research Council report, vehicle condition—whether the vehicle is well maintained, or has been tampered with or is malfunctioning—is more important than vehicle age in determining emissions. Among other issues, there is a need for a more thorough inspection program for smartphones and other mobile devices in the U.S., according to the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) the fleet characterization data for MOBILE6, including reflecting the increases in the heavy-duty vehicle population. Similarly, another fleet characterization issue involves urban buses. For example, the current model does not have a separate classification for urban buses, although this is a growing vehicle category in many urban areas. EPA plans to expand the current list of vehicle categories from 8 to 20, one of which will be a separate category for buses. An eighth concern is an increase in the number of vehicles in the fleet.  MOBILE6 will allow users to separate start emissions from any linkage to urban feeder/collector streets. EPA officials pointed out that MOBIle6 will allowing users toseparate start emissions and any link to other roads. Several model experts have pointed out the same average travel speed would indicate smooth traffic flow on a local street but severe congestion on a freeway. For more information, visit the EPA's website or go to the MoBILE 6 website. for more information on the new vehicle and its features. the FTP driving cycle assumptions and will also provide different correction factors for speed and driving cycle for three different types of roadways. While not planned for MOBILE6, the agency plans to partially fund ongoing research with the Department of Transportation to develop a modal driving cycle assumption. The agency also plans to provide funding for the development of a new version of the MOBIle6 app. The app will be available in the U.S. later this year and in Europe in 2015. FTP parameters include road grade, air conditioner usage, emissions at higher speeds, aggressive driving, and emissions immediately after engine start-up (cold- start) Agency officials have long recognized that some of these original FTP parameters relate to emissions from aggressive driving.MOBILE model relate to FTP parameters. These five are (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), and (5) emissions after cold-start (after the engine is switched on). MOBILE models relate to these five parameters.  MOBILE5a does not account for the impact of road grade, such as when a car climbs a hill. Some studies have indicated that both the increased load on the engine from climbing a hill and the decreased load that accompanies engine deceleration significantly increase vehicle emissions.at the FTP temperatures. However, MOBIle5a doesn't account for road grade or other factors that may affect emissions in a car. At the FTP Temperatures, the vehicle will be at a lower temperature than it would be if the vehicle was at a higher temperature. in all four areas. EPA officials said adjustments had been made to the MOBILE model for most of these activities prior to issuing the revised FTP rule. "Given the state of knowledge today, it appears that these activities may not be adequately represented in MOBILES5a," EPA officials told CNN. "We are working to correct that," they said. "This is an ongoing process," the EPA said in a statement. "It is our goal to make sure that all of the activities in the FTP rule are properly represented," the agency said. bypass emissions controls for an estimated 3 to 5 minutes until the engine reaches normal operating temperatures, and (4) actual air conditioner usage. EPA has not yet revised the MOBILE model to reflect the results of recent studies that have led to these FTP rule revisions. The agency has work ongoing to revise the FTP rule, but has not ruled on any changes to the model for this year's model year. The new FTP rule is expected to come into effect in the summer of 2015. not been properly documented, that full-scale sensitivity analyses have not been performed since May 1990 (when they were performed for MOBILE4.1), that fewer resources have resulted in fewer confirming data, and that the MOBIle model has not been peer reviewed. However, they said they have efforts under way or planned to. However they said that they have no plans to change the way the data is collected or processed. They said that the data will continue to be collected for the foreseeable future. Each new version of the MOBILE model is better than its predecessor. We provided copies of a draft of this report to reflect the latest testing, data collection, and research. While still not able to quantify the improvements, they said that in their opinion, each new versions of the model are better than their predecessor. The report is based on a draft that was provided to us by the MoBILE team. For more information on how to get your hands on a copy of the report, visit www.moBILE.com. parameters were not representative of actual driving conditions. We have added correction factors to the MOBILE model to estimate what emissions would be for speeds in excess of 57 mph, for rapid acceleration beyond 3.3 mph/second, and for other scenarios, such as different temperatures or is used. Increases in speeds above 65 mph have left data gaps in the current model that are not adequately represented by existing correction factors. Some studies have questioned the representativeness of key parameters. Others have recognized that the model’s estimates are inextricably tied to the FTP's parameters. there are significant uncertainties associated with the current MOBILE model’s estimates. One study found that “the range of uncertainty is huge’ for a change in one variable, average vehicle speed. According to the study, most model users generally believe that increasing average vehicle speeds is a good thing for the car industry. For more information, go to www.moBILE.com. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org. The MOBILE6 is due to be issued in late 1998. EPA officials said they plan to address each of the above limitations in the next revision to the model. Except for the impact of road grade on emissions and revising the in-use credits for heavy duty vehicles, EPA plans to address all of the limitations in this revision. For more information on these 14 areas is provided in app. I and app. II of the EPA's MOBIle 6 Guidance Guide, see www.epa.gov/mobile6. analyses (MOBILE4.1, May 1990); relevant EPA guidance and memorandums on the MOBILE model; selected vehicle studies; the results of stakeholders meetings about the model; and the charter, objectives, minutes, and proceedings of the EPA-Federal Advisory Committee Act mobile modeling workgroup. We also attended one mobile sources symposium where modeling issues were discussed; and attended the March 1997 FACA public workshop. We reviewed five electronic databases for studies pertaining to the EPA MOBILES model. items for improvement in the current model, and EPA and workgroup representatives are examining these limitations. EPA is also in the process of developing new procedures for improving models in general, which are discussed below. Several model experts told us that it is the nature of models such as MOBILE5a limitations in theCurrent version of EPA’s MOBIle model that they are examining. We obtained and reviewed the MOBILES Guide; EPA/OMS model documentation; and the most recent published sensitivity data. because precise information about the emissions behavior of the approximately 200 million vehicles in use in the United States is not known. Yet the need exists to estimate the impact of motor vehicles on air quality. For the states, the MOBILE model is a tool for constructing emissions inventories, creating at least as many reductions as required by the Clean Air Act. For EPA, the model’s estimates provide EPA regulators with critical information that is needed to evaluate state emissions inventory estimates and control strategies. factors for other model users. Other state and local agencies typically supply their own estimates of the number of vehicle miles traveled. Many other local area parameters, such as the average ambient temperature, vehicle classifications, and types of fuels sold. The MOBILE model exists to help agencies make better decisions about how to use the data. It is available to the public for free on the MOBIle website and is available for download from the Apple App Store and the Google Play Store. For more information, go to www.mobile.com. The MOBILE model was originally designed only for estimating areawide emissions on the basis of assumptions associated with an entire trip. It was not designed for making decisions for various roadway classifications, such as transportation improvement projects for urban interstate, rural arterial, and urban arterial roads. The MOBIle model is now used to make decisions about road improvements in the U.S. and around the world. For more information, or to download a free copy of the model, visit the MoBILE website. MOBILE5a is a computer program that estimates the emissions of carbon monoxide, hydrocarbons, and nitrogen oxides for eight different types of gasoline-fueled and diesel highway motor vehicles. EPA has updated the estimating capabilities of its MOBILE source emissions model 10 times since the model was first introduced in 1978. The following sections provide additional information on 14 areas in which major limitations exist in EPA’s current MOBIle model, MOBILES5a. The underlying basis for the model is the EPA mobile source emissions factor model. equations and assumptions about the emissions from vehicles manufactured from 1960 to 2020. Generally, the cars produced in the 25 most recent model years are assumed to be in operation in any given calendar year. The first MOBILE model was made available for use in 1978; since that time, major major automakers have used the MOBIle model for all major vehicles. The MOBILES are the most popular models for the U.S. market. The U.K. market has been the largest, with more than a million vehicles sold each year.  MOBILE6 is due to be issued in late 1998. Agency officials announced their plans to substantially revise the cold-start segment of the next model, moving—for the first time ever—from an emissions estimate to a new estimate. The agency has said that incorporating new estimates for these emissions-producing activities would be a high priority for MOBIle6, due for release in 1998. For example, in March 1997, agency officials announced plans to significantly revamp the cold start segment of MOBILES, moving from an estimate to an estimate. estimate of mobile modeling needs in response to the mobile source requirements envisioned for the 1990 Clean Air Act amendments. This June 1990 analysis indicated that the Office of Mobile Sources would need about $60 million for the modeling improvements known at that time. Since then, because of higher priority, higher priority has been given to other areas of the agency's work. For more information, go to: http://www.nasa.gov/mobile/mobile-source-modeling-and-evaluation. cars to travel up to 67.2 mph (versus 57 mph for the FTP), allows for acceleration at a rate of up to 6.9 mph/second. Several model experts believe studied had acceleration rates of more than 7 mph/ second. Another 1993 EPA-sponsored study of instrumented vehicles in the Baltimore area found that 18 percent of total driving time in the area was composed of higher speeds and sharper accelerations than the FTP's maximum of 3.3mph/second rate. urban area in the late 1960s. Such a trip is known as a driving cycle, which can be approximated on a dynamometer. The FTP driving cycle parameters stipulate, among other things, that vehicles average 19.6 miles per hour (mph) over the 7.5-mile distance. It is not known if this is the actual average speed of a car on the road at the time of the test. The test took place in the early 1960s in a suburb of Los Angeles, California. mile trip, do not exceed 57 mph, accelerate gradually (not to exceed 3.3 mph/second), and travel on a flat surface. EPA added 10 percent to the FTP dynamometer load in an attempt to simulate the effects of air conditioner usage. However, five of the major limitations in the current FTP are still in place. The current FTP has a maximum speed of 50 miles per hour and a top speed of 57 mph. The new FTP will go on sale in 2015. Sierra Research study of 75 vehicles with over 100,000 odometer miles questioned whether EPA had perhaps adjusted the formula too much. Researchers since then had had more time and more vehicles to test than were available to EPA. They also said the model’s correction factor for vehicles with 50,000 or more was too high. The study was published in the journal Environmental Research, published by the University of California, Los Angeles, in 1996. It was published on the basis of limited data and that only recently have 1990-technology vehicles become old enough to accurately assess their emissions deterioration. currently overestimates the emissions from vehicles with 50,000 or more odometer miles. EPA’s current model estimated that 80 percent or more of these higher mileage vehicles would be high emitters. Study found that only 32 percent of the vehicles fell into this category. Similarly, an April 1997 study of 227 vehicles (model years 1991 to 1993) found no significant changes in emissions or deterioration as indicated by the current model. OMS officials said they used all the data they could find. EPA adjusted the deterioration rates for vehicles with more than 50,000 miles beginning with MOBILE5 (Dec. 1992) EPA acknowledges that these adjustments were made on vehicles that reach 50,00 odometer miles. For example, prior to MOBIle5, the model assumed that a vehicle with 100,000. miles emitted about 1.0 grams of hydrocarbons for each mile driven, or about 4 times the amount a new. car would emit. Now, the same car is emitting about 2.0grams for eachmile driven, which is about 8 times as much as a new car.  MOBILE5a’ estimates are based on the assumption that, on average, light duty vehicles are driven about 14,000 miles annually when new. More recent data from the U.S. Department of Transportation indicates that passenger cars are driven 2,000 more annually than currently estimated by EPA. According to a 1996 report, because of the linkage between odometer mileage and I&M program assumptions, a small change in mileage accumulation rates can lead to a significant change in estimates. and others have concerns that the existing database may underrepresent high emitters. Owners of such vehicles may avoid surrendering such vehicles for inspection and maintenance (I&M) and other testing at a higher rate than the normal population. As noted in a February 1996 study, “individuals concerns with the study, its reliance on remote sensing devices, and its applicability to other states.” EPA officials believe that the larger data sets provided by their ongoing I&M lane testing in three other states properly identify most high emitter. with intentionally tampered or poorly maintained vehicles may be less likely to offer their vehicles for testing. A 1993 CARB study of 186 vehicles indicated that high emitters could represent 16.8 percent of the California fleet, or nearly 5 times the assumption in the California model. EPA officials have some ideas on how to address the problem, but are waiting for more information from CARB before making a move on the issue. For more information on CARB, visit their website or call the National Institute of Standards and Technology at 1-800-477-8255. In-use credits for heavy duty gasoline-powered vehicles are based on data approximately 20 years old. Heavy duty vehicles are generally older and driven more miles annually than their light duty counterparts. EPA officials said that testing heavy duty vehicles is difficult and quite expensive and agreed that there is a lack of recent data on the in-use emissions from this category of vehicles once they have been tested and approved for use. The certification standards are higher for heavyduty vehicles than theirLight Duty counterparts. The standards for heavy Duty vehicles are higher than those for light duty vehicles. Heavy duty gasoline-powered vehicles, which have higher certification standards than their light duty counterparts, are believed to comprise a significantly larger percentage of the overall vehicle fleet than currently estimated by the MOBILE model. According to OMS, the agency plans to update their own accumulated mileage estimates to provide their own estimate of the fleet's overall mileage. The agency also plans to release a new report on the state of the U.S. vehicle fleet in the coming months. The report is expected to be released in early 2015. Current model provides no additional I&M credits for vehicles equipped with on-board diagnostics. OBD is a requirement for all 1994 and later light duty vehicles and trucks. This vehicle computer technology alerts a car owner when an emissions system malfunctions, permitting quicker repairs than when such malfunctions or local programs’ estimates can be substantiated with state or local data. Because of the limited data on the longer-term emissions impact of this technology, the agency has provided credit for these OBD-equipped vehicles equal to that provided for older vehicles. are identified through an I&M testing program, and diagnostic trouble codes assist mechanics in making better repairs. Newer vehicles have up to 8 years or 80,000-mile emissions control system warranties for two components (the on-board computer and catalytic converter), which should equate to less-polluting vehicles as a result of the warranties. The warranties can be extended to 10 years or longer for certain vehicles. The warranty can also be extended for vehicles with up to 10,000 miles on the odometer. more durable emissions control systems and the requirement that manufacturers cover the costs of certain repairs. The current model does not provide specific credits for this growing population of OBD-equipped vehicles designed and believed to have less in-use deterioration than their predecessors. Also, more recent and more complete data are needed to provide a more accurate picture of the state of the OBD system. For more information, go to the U.S. Department of Energy's OBD website or go to OBD.gov. to update the basic data supporting I&M emissions reduction credits to reflect a growing population of vehicles in which rates of tampering may be diminishing. tampering with newer vehicles adversely affects gas mileage and vehicle performance. Also, vehicle owners often replace older, carbureted vehicles with newer fuel-injected vehicles. Additionally, vehicle owner often replace old, carbured vehicles with new fuel-Injected vehicles, which may be more efficient and fuel-efficient for the road. The data will also be updated to reflect the growing number of vehicles that may be tampering. FTP may underestimate hydrocarbon, carbon monoxide, and nitrogen oxide emissions by 27, 68, and 17 percent, respectively. A 1995 National Research Council report noted that aggressive driving with many accelerations resulted in hydrocarbon and Carbon Monoxide emissions being 14 and 15 times higher, respectively, than the emissions from average driving over the same 7-mile trip. More than one-third of the trips those represented on the FTP test.these parameters more closely approximate actual driving conditions today, according to a 1993 CARB study. different fuels. For example, the impact of temperature on emissions can be substantial. While FTP testing has been performed between 68 and 86 degrees Fahrenheit, EPA’s MOBILE model used a correction factor to estimate that 1995 exhaust emissions of hydrocarbons would be 3 times greater at 25 degrees than in 1995. The EPA estimates that the emissions would be at least twice as high at 25 degree Fahrenheit than at 68 degree Fahrenheit, and at least three times as much at 86 degree Fahrenheit. of average driving patterns. The Congress has also recognized that the FTP may not reflect actual driving conditions. Concerned about the gap between emissions as measured by the FTP and actual, real-world emissions, in 1990 the Congress added Section 206(h) to the Clean Air Act, which required EPA to review the FTP. The FTP is a measure of how much emissions are produced by a vehicle, rather than the amount produced by the vehicle itself. The EPA uses the FTP to measure the emissions of vehicles. and revise the FTP within 18 months “to insure that vehicles are tested under circumstances which reflect the actual current driving conditions under which motor vehicles are used.” EPA’s October 1996 final rule on FTP revisions addressed four emissions-producing activities that, according to the rule’S preamble, are not adequately represented in the test results. The EPA issued a final rule in October 1996 on revisions to the Environmental Protection Agency's standard for vehicle emissions testing. The final rule was released in October 1997. EPA suggested that in lieu of describing some limitations associated with its use of the Federal Test Procedure as a basis for estimating emissions as “FTP assumptions,” these would be better described as ‘FTP parameters.’ EPA also suggested that since the FTP is a specific, codified test cycle, it should be called a ‘federal test cycle’ rather than a “federal testing regime’ or ‘ federal test procedure’ The agency also suggested changing the name of the ‘Federal Test Procedure’ to ‘ Federal Test parameters’ for EPA’s original model, and all subsequent versions, has been the Federal Test Procedure (FTP), a laboratory dynamometertest used to certify new cars against new-car emissions standards. The FTP is roughly based on a typical urban area trip, complete with starts and stops, covering 7.5 miles in the Los Angeles area. For more information, visit the EPA's official website or the National Institute of Standards and Technology's official automotive blog, Automobility.org. estimates. EPA has testing under way to determine how to better define this category of vehicles with significant fuel leaks. The agency also plans tests to estimate their distribution within the current fleet, rate of occurrence as a function of accumulated mileage, vehicle age, and/or vehicle technology, such as fuel tank, the EPA says. The EPA says it has no immediate plans to increase the number of vehicles in the U.S. with fuel leaks to make it easier to detect and fix the problem. California Air Resources Board (CARB) commissioned Sierra Research in 1993 to develop an improved driving cycle. The Unified Driving Cycle was developed by using an instrumented ‘chase car’ to better characterize typical urban driving patterns. Among other things, this driving cycle allows for more accurate assumptions about traffic patterns in urban areas. For more information, visit Sierra Research’s website, or go to www.sierryresearch.org/fTP. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. Research Council report, “Virtually all motor vehicle testing has been based on a limited set of driving test cycles that inadequately represent current urban driving conditions” However, one model expert told us that it took more than 1 year to evaluate one component of the model and that collecting vehicle data can be difficult and time-consuming. However, it is possible to test a vehicle for up to a year before deciding whether it should be tested for a certain amount of time or not. control strategies, producing state implementation plans (SIP), and demonstrating control strategy effectiveness to EPA and others. For example, the states are allowed to vary a number of control strategy features, including the types of fuels used, the type of inspection and maintenance (I&M) testing network, the frequency of I&M testing, and so on. The states are also allowed to test the effectiveness of their control strategies on a range of other issues, such as air quality and road safety. the ages and types of vehicles to be inspected, the stringency of the tailpipe test, the number and percent of inspected vehicles that may receive a waiver,and a host of other factors. The states may choose among a number of control options as long as the state’s control strategy achieves the desired goal. The state's control strategy must be based on the number of vehicles that can be inspected and the amount of time it will take to inspect them. It must also be based upon the state's ability to obtain a waiver from the federal government. Reducing fuel volatility by 1 psi, from 9.0 to 8.0 psi, may reduce hydrocarbon and carbon monoxide exhaust emissions from 18 to 27 percent more than the model estimates, respectively. The January 1997 Auto/Oil Air Quality Improvement Research Program (AQIRP) Final Report suggested that reducing fuel volatility. by 1psi, from 8.5 to 9.5 psi, could reduce hydrocarbons and CO2 emissions by 18 and 27 percent, respectively, according to the QIRP report. would reduce exhaust CO by 9 percent, exhaust HC by 4 percent, and total evaporative HC by 34 percent (NOx remained unchanged) The RVPs for most fuels used to be higher than 9.0 psi, but today they can go lower than 7.0 psi. Similarly, the model currently has no emissions, and the car has no CO2 emissions. The car has a top speed of 155 mph (250 km/h) and a top fuel economy of 18.5 miles per hour (25 km/hr) February 1989, when limited data on fuels with RVPs lower than 9.0 pounds per square inch (psi) caused EPA to place a constraint code in the model precluding users from being able to calculate reductions below this level. The limited data collected since that time indicate that reducing fuel RVP is not an effective way to reduce greenhouse gas emissions from cars and trucks. The U.S. Department of Energy has no immediate plans to change the way it calculates RVP in the future. reduction credits for low sulfur fuels. EPA officials said that they plan to eliminate the constraint code for the lower sulfur effect in reformulated gasoline. Recent studies suggest that lowering the concentration of sulfur in fuel reduces the emissions of hydrocarbons and nitrogen oxides, the EPA said. The EPA said that it plans to remove the constraint codes for low-sulfur fuels in the near future. The change is expected to be implemented within the next few months. It is not yet clear if the change will be implemented in time for the 2014 election. are limited. In addition, a 1996 National Research Council study suggested that the model may overestimate the benefits of oxygenated fuels. EPA officials agreed that this is also an area that needs more study, but one which is one which needs to be studied more. The study noted that EPA’s MOBILE model “apparently overpredicts the oxygenated fuel effect by at least a factor of two” when the model’‘s estimate of carbon monoxide reductions is compared with observed data. is important to the model’s emissions estimates and noted that this is also a high priority issue currently being addressed by EPA. A second concern is the current correction factors for lower volatility fuels and for oxygenated fuels. They noted that work in this area is still ongoing and that the data on the emissions benefits of lower RVP fuels, as well as low sulfur fuels, are still being compiled. For example, in the next model, MOBILE6, which will allow users to receive credit for correction factor for fuels lower than 9.0 psi. a February 1997 report by Sierra Research found, among other things, that MOBILE5a likely underestimates the impact of low reid vapor pressure (RVP) fuels on hydrocarbon and carbon monoxide emissions at temperatures above 75 degrees. The report notes that the correction factor for low RVP fuels has not changed since the 1997 report. The MOBIle5a system is now being used in the U.S. by more than 100,000 cars and trucks. It is expected to be rolled out to other countries by the end of the year.  EPA officials agreed that the limitation is an area of concern. In most cases, they noted that the agency has ongoing work to address the issue. One concern is the representation of high emitters in EPA’s list of high-emitting emitters. The agency has not yet released a list of the high- emitters it has included in its list of emitters, which is expected to be released in the coming months. The list is not expected to include any high- emitting emitters at this time. The nonfederal co-chair also noted that if the occurrence of such vehicles is not properly represented in the model, the model’s emissions estimates can be seriously flawed. He said the single greatest issue that EPA faces is how to identify and repair high emitters and properly represent them in the modeling database. The nonf federal co- chair also said the issue of how to detect and repair such vehicles could be the single biggest issue for the agency in the next few years. The issue of identifying and repairing high emitrs is the single largest issue for EPA, he said. have led to the new data that now question the old estimates and assumptions. EPA has work under way to address most of these limitations. For example, since its formation in September 1995, an EPA-sponsored Federal Advisory Committee Act (FACA) subcommittee workgroup has identified 47 high-priority high-risk areas. For more information, visit the EPA's website at: http://www.epa.gov/environment/environmental-impact-monitoring-and-assessment. are not accounted for in the current model and that other emissions-producing activities are not adequately represented. EPA officials said that it is important to note that EPA has conducted and/or partially funded some of the studies that are part of this report. The report was compiled on the basis of the most recent information, EPA said. It was also based on the information that EPA received from the U.S. Department of Energy. The study was part of the EPA’s Office of Energy Policy and Research. needs, OMS has been allocated only $21.8 million, cumulatively, for modeling improvements, although the research needs have increased. Many more groups have become involved in non-EPA-funded vehicle emissions studies than in the past, allowing EPA to benefit from their studies and observations. Additionally, in some instances, researchers have sought funding from the federal government to improve their models of vehicle emissions in the U.S., the EPA said in a statement. The agency said it will continue to seek funding for vehicle emissions research in the future. that we provide specific citations for four studies referred to in appendix I. We made the language changes suggested by EPA, including adding the citations. EPA was also concerned that the report did not clearly distinguish between limitations that may result in only trivial emissions impacts and those that could have a significant impact. We also added the citations to the appendix I section of the report, which was published after the EPA requested it be updated. The full report is available online at: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/29/science/science-and-biologics-report/index.html#storylink=cpy. and local agencies should go about collecting these data. With respect to the representation of other emissions-producing activities not represented by the FTP, EPA officials have made periodic adjustments but recognize that the current model’s correction factor adjustments may not reflect the most up-to-date information. For example, as noted in, the EPA has made periodicadjustments to the way it calculates the correction factor for emissions from vehicles and other vehicles. The EPA has also made adjustments to how it calculates other emissions from other vehicles, such as trucks and trucks. 1995 that the worst polluting 22 percent of the vehicles produce about 50 percent of emissions. EPA estimates that, overall, from 10 to 30 percent of vehicles cause the bulk of the pollution problems. As noted by the nonfederal co-chair of the FACA modeling workgroup in a 1995 report, the U.S. is in the midst of one of the worst air-pollution cycles on record. The U.N. has been in the process of developing a plan to address the problem since the 1990s. issues facing EPA today, primarily because a very small number of vehicles can potentially be responsible for unusually high levels of pollution. This was also a significant issue for one of the Session Chairs for the Coordinating Research Council’s (CRC) April 1997 Workshop, who noted that, in his opinion, this was a very significant issue. He noted that this was also an important issue for the EPA to address in the future, as it could have a significant impact on air quality. 1993 study, “The general problem of failing to control for significant factors is compounded by the likelihood that a small fraction of the vehicle fleet are currently responsible for a large percentage of vehicle emissions.” He told us that he still believes this to be one of the most significant studies of emissions in the history of the industry. “It’s a very serious problem,” he said. � “I’m very concerned that we’re not doing enough to address it.’ the EPA-FACA materials disseminated in March 1997, the 10-percent additional load intended to simulate the effect of air conditioner usage “is obsolete.” More recent information indicates that nitrogen oxide emissions may be from 30 to 75 percent greater at some speeds than the current model’s estimates when the airconditioner is used, the EPA says. The EPA says the current estimate is “inadequate” and “unrealistic.�” evaporative emissions (such as occur when the fuel tank and fuel system heat up on a hot summer day); for the uncorrected in-use deterioration (wear and tear) that results from poor vehicle maintenance or tampering; and for other factors. In its simplest form, EPA’s MOBILE model allows the model user to check the vehicle's emissions, wear and tear, and other factors before using it. The model user can also check the car's tire pressure, tire temperature, and tire pressure. emissions estimates were collected during a 1-hour period during which temperatures were forcibly increased over a range of temperatures. More recent testing over 24-hour and longer periods without constraining temperature increases to a one- hour period indicates some differences from the MOBILE5a estimates for such evaporative emissions. Also, evaporative. emissions from the mobile phone are different from those from a car. For more information, visit the MoBIle5a website or go to: www.mobile5a.org. fifth concern is the proper representation of diurnal emissions. Diurnal emissions refer only to hydrocarbons and are a form of evaporative emissions that occur when a vehicle is parked and the ambient temperature is fluctuating. For all previous versions of the MOBILE model, the data supporting these 8- to 24-hour data was available. For the latest version of theMOBILE, all the data is available for the 8-to-24-hour period. The data supporting the data for the previous versions was not available for this version. vehicles with fuel leaks are now believed to be so significant that, for MOBILE6, EPA plans to model these emissions separately from other evaporative emissions. According to EPA’s most recent data, indications are that some vehicles with fuelLeaks can exceed the evaporative emissions of other vehicles. While they may develop a separate category for some vehicles, this does not necessarily mean there will be a significant overall increase in evaporative estimates. Until more data are collected, there is no clear indication that these emissions were significantly underestimated in prior diurnal emissions. corresponding vehicles by one to two orders of magnitude. A 1996 automotive industry study of 150 vehicles found that 24-hour diurnal emissions ranged from 0.6 grams of HC to 777.2 grams ofHC, with vehicles with liquid fuel leaks providing the vast majority of the emissions. EPA officials explained that vehicles with Liquid Fuel Leaks provide the vast most of the methane emissions, which are linked to climate change. The EPA says it is working with the industry to address the problem. areawide, trip-based model to a roadway-specific model. Under this revised model, the magnitude of start-up emissions will not depend on vehicle speed or the driving cycle. Instead, EPA is proposing to allow model users to model the emissions impacts of cold starts on roadways in the U.S., the agency said in a statement on Tuesday. The proposal is expected to be approved by the end of the year. The agency said it will consider the proposal in its next round of vehicle regulations. the basis of local areas’ estimates of the number of such starts. Model users will be able to estimate emissions for three different types of roadways—freeways, arterials, and local roadways. In addition to concerns about the representativeness of the FTP parameters, the following issues were also identified by model users. The following issues include the following:  “The number of vehicles that start in a given area is not considered to be representative of the overall population.” “The amount of traffic that starts in a certain area is also not counted as part of the model’s emissions estimates” in the current FTP. These emissions-producing activities include (1) aggressive driving behavior (such as high acceleration rates and high speeds), (2) rapid speed fluctuations, and (3) emissions immediately after engine start-up. Because of the fact that engines are designed to operate at higher temperatures, these emissions typically occur during the engine's first few minutes of operation. The current FTP does not address these emissions- producing activities in any way. It does, however, address the emissions produced during the first three minutes of the engine’s operation. officials pointed out that there is substantial variability across vehicle types, operating conditions, and driver behavior. There is also variability across the external environment, such as road grade, temperature, humidity, altitude, and vehicle fuels, they said. They also said that driver behavior is a major factor in the variability of vehicle performance. They said there is also substantial variability in the vehicle operating conditions and operating conditions of the vehicle's engine and other factors such as cold start, load, speed, and fuel use. have affected the pace of model improvements over the years, particularly their ability to confirm the model’s estimates with large numbers of vehicle tests. For example, a study of the emissions characteristics of 100 passenger cars for both exhaust and evaporative emissions could cost from $1.4 to £1.6 million, according to a report by The Wall Street Journal. The report said the study could cost as much as $2.5 million to $3 million. The study was commissioned by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. to the agency’s current estimates, and still not address the emissions impacts of road grade, air conditioning, or most fuel studies. Studies of heavy duty trucks and other larger vehicles would cost considerably more. As an illustration of the magnitude of the task compared with available resources, we obtained EPA’S current estimates of the cost of such studies. We obtained EPA's current estimates for road grade and air conditioning studies, as well as fuel studies, to get an idea of how much it would cost. updates and improvements to the model have been made as more has become known about the complexity of the factors affecting vehicle emissions. According to agency officials, these improvements have resulted in the refinement of emissions estimates for of the cost and time associated with such quantification. Agency officials say the on-road vehicle population is a constantly changing universe of differing emissions control devices and levels. They say there is substantial naturally occurring variability in vehicle emissions (leading to further data gaps/limitations). Agency officials: to produce a number—an estimated quantity of emissions for the three pollutants of concern. Over the years, researchers have learned that vehicle emissions are highly complex. For an average urban trip, multiply the estimated emissions per mile by the estimated number of trip miles traveled in an area. For a large city, multiply emissions per miles by the average number of trips made in the city. For smaller cities, divide emissions permile by the number of average urban trips taken in a city, and so on. emissions data on large data sets is very costly. EPA officials pointed out that there is not a consistent definition of what constitutes aggressive driving. aggressive driving happens only over a portion of the trip and is highly variable among drivers, they said. The above observations are not representative, the EPA said in a statement. The agency also said that aggressive driving is a highly variable phenomenon and that it is difficult to define the exact definition of aggressive driving in the U.S. and around the world. used to evaluate the adequacy of a state’s program and the relative benefits of various policies to control motor vehicle emissions. Today, its estimates have a substantial influence not only on state and local programs but also on the automobile and oil industries, environmental and trade organizations, the public, and others. According to estimates derived partly from the MOBILE model, motor vehicles are the biggest source of greenhouse gases in the U.S., according to a report by the Center for Automotive Research. 1991 Intermodal Surface Transportation Efficiency Act (ISTEA) required, among other things, that state transportation improvement programs in certain nonattainment areas conform with the applicable state implementation plan developed under the Clean Air Act. Although the model’s original purpose was to support the development of mobile source emissions inventories, over the years it has been used for a variety of other purposes. The model was originally designed to help develop a mobile emissions inventory for the U.S. Air Force. example, EPA and others have indications today that as much as half of all hydrocarbon emissions from motor vehicles are evaporative emissions. To compensate for the complexities of these and other emissions-producing activities, EPA has periodically adjusted its basic formula. In essence, the correction factor is a multiplier added to the basic formula (miles traveled times emissions rate per mile) to adjust the model’s output to more closely reflect actual emissions. Except for California, EPA supplies the baseline emissions rates and correction. vehicle activity, activity-specific emission rates, and emission rate correction factors. Uncertainty is compounded in the methodologies used to develop the emission inventory. That is, vehicle activity uncertainty is combined with emission rate uncertainty that has already been combined with correction factor uncertainty. Additionally, the limited work in this area indicates that there is still a lot of work to be done in the area of vehicle emissions.’’ ‘‘Uncertainty’ is the key word here. A 1996 study of EPA’s speed correction factors for vehicle exhaust emissions found substantial uncertainty in the current MOBILE model. A 95-percent confidence interval is applied, the change in emissions can range from a 72-percent decrease in carbon monoxide emissions to a 75-percent increase in such emissions. According to Office of Mobile Sources officials, EPA has been unable to quantify the model's uncertainty primarily because it is difficult to quantify uncertainty in such a large number of variables. The study concluded that the MOBILES model may significantly underestimate carbon mon oxide and hydrocarbon emissions by up to 3 orders of magnitude. average vehicle speed from 30 mph to 50 mph will reduce vehicle emissions. Less congested driving, with more driving at cruising speeds. EPA’s MOBILE model estimates a 24-percent reduction in carbon monoxide emissions by increasing average vehicle speed to 50mph. It will reduce emissions by 24 percent, according to the study. The study was published in the Journal of the American Society of Civil Engineers. For more information, go to www.acse.org or go to http://www.acsu.org/. EPA officials are examining 14 areas in the current MOBILE model in which major limitations exist. According to agency officials, it is their plan to replace the current model with a new one. The new model is expected to be unveiled in the fall of 2015. The current model is due to be replaced by a new model in the spring of 2015, the EPA says. It's expected to cost about $1.5 billion to $2.6 billion, according to the agency's estimates. be significant. Where it was possible to do so, we believe the estimated emissions impact had already been quantified or qualitatively described in the report. One of the 14 limitations of the MOBILE model is that it does not currently have information about, nor estimates of, the uncertainty associated with its emissions estimates. “Uncertainty is pervasive in all three emission modeling components.” “The agency will not be able to quantify the uncertaintyassociated with its MOBILES model estimates, primarily because of the complexity and timing of factors affecting vehicle emissions” OMS officials say they do not plan to develop uncertainty ranges with the next revision to the MOBILE model. Similar to the global positioning issue for road grade, they said significant technological advancement may be needed before the model can be updated. OMS officials said they don't plan to release uncertainty ranges for the next version of the model until after the next generation of the mobile phone is released in 2015. The new mobile phone model will be available to the public in 2015 and will include a number of new features. it becomes cost-effective to address this issue. For example, future vehicles may have on-board computers with the ability to instantaneously record and later report emissions under different operating scenarios. EPA officials pointed out that it is their plan, at some point in the future, to report uncertainty ranges for some emissions levels. It is not known when this plan will be implemented, but it could be in the next few years. It's also not clear when this issue will be addressed by the EPA.