GS-5 to GS-15. Examiners at the GS-14 level or above (44 percent of the examiners in the technology centers we reviewed, as shown in fig. 3) are generally primary examiners. Primary examiners may accept or reject a patent application without additional review. Supervisory patent examiners are at theGS-15 level and are when examining patent applications. GS-13 level. Some examiners  are in the process of becoming primary examiner. becoming GS-14 examiners. Question 3 in the survey asked examiners approximately how many hours they spent per application on prior art searches in the past quarter. Examiners initially notify applicants about the patentability of their inventions. The original First Action on the Merits is the means by which examiners initially notify applicant about their invention's patentability. The examiners' first action is to notify applicant that their invention is eligible for a patent. The application is then submitted to the Patent Office for approval. other GS levels. Tables 8 through 15 provide information related to the effects of the quantity of prior art, how often examiners search for certain types, and how difficult they find it to obtain relevant art from certain types. The sufficiency of examiners’ time to complete a test is also listed in Tables 8 and 15, as well as in Tables 6 and 7, for GS-1 and GS-2. For GS-3 and higher examiners, the time required to complete the test is listed in Table 7. thorough prior art search. A majority of examiners (an estimated 72 percent) worked voluntary/uncompensated overtime in the past 6 months to meet their goals. An estimated 30 percent of examiner worked an estimated 46 percent—were moderately or very confident that they found the most relevant prior art during the time allotted. When they included their additional voluntary overtime, the number of. examiners who were moderately orvery confident increased to an estimated 69 percent. Even with the inclusion of. average of more than 10 hours of voluntary/uncompensated overtime per biweekly period. However, on the basis of our survey, an estimated 56 percent of examiners experience no pressure to work overtime. Experts we interviewed and examiners we surveyed had mixed opinions about the need for overtime. In a 2007 report on USPTO’s efforts to hire and retain an adequate workforce, we found that an estimated 70 percent of Examiners worked voluntary/Uncompensate overtime in the previous year. Examiners are expected to complete their examination of an application in a certain number of hours. The time allotted varies depending on factors such as the technology and the seniority of the examiner. Examiners with less education or work experience, or who are not abreast of advances in a particular technology area, may not have the technical knowledge necessary to identify relevant prior art. An estimated 60 percent of examiners found that the agency’s system for determining the amount of time examiners are allotted to examine patent applications was inadequate. Plan. The agency also identified the role of patent examiner as a mission- critical occupation and identified the competencies needed for this occupation. These competencies include technical work experience/education and technical competence, which we refer to collectively as technical competence. USPTO defines technical competence as the ability to analyze and analyze and predict future developments in the field of patent law and patent law. The role of a patent examiner is to protect and defend the rights of the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office. and abilities needed for examiner positions. Agency officials said these were based on the hiring needs derived from a hiring model created by senior management. For example, the job analysis worksheet for electrical engineering patent examiners considers their education, training, and experience in researching, analyzing, and applying scientific principles in the field of electrical engineering. For more information on how to apply for a patent, visit the Patent and Trademark Office's website at: http://www.patentand TrademarkOffice.com. JPO examiners spend their first 2 to 4 years (depending on their academic degree and work experience) as assistant examiners and receive practical training by a supervising examiner. JPO officials identified the longevity of examiners as a strength, stating that examiners are well trained and have experience that is valuable. According to EPO officials, EPo examiners need 3 to 4. years before they are fully trained, and 4 to 5 years in certain fields, such as biotechnology. for allotting an expected amount of time for examiners to complete an examination. If examiners feel pressure to complete their examinations quickly rather than thoroughly, it could have important implications for their prior art search efforts. In fact, as shown in figure 7, less than half of the examiners—an average of 8 hours per application during the past quarter—spent 8 hours or more on each application. For example, one expert noted that the time examiners are allotted decreases as they become more experienced, and this may lead more senior examiner to increasingly rely on art they know well. fabrics and structure may be allotted about 14 hours for examination. An examiner at the same experience level would be allotted. about 32 hours for an application related to data processing, such as database and file management. The allotted time includes the time needed to review the application, perform tasks, and write a report. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. Examiner Technical Training Program in fiscal year 2015, with an average of 6.7 training hours per participant. The extent to which examiners participated in this technical training program varied by technology center, from a low of 48 percent to a high of 96 percent in fiscalyear 2015, as well as by state. The program is funded by the federal government and the state of New Jersey, New York, Rhode Island, Vermont, Maryland, New Hampshire, and Washington, D.C. It is funded through a combination of federal and state grants. practice that examiners should attempt to identify all applicable grounds for rejecting a claim or claims during their first review. According to USPTO’s manual for patent examiners, this practice aims to avoid unnecessary delays. Such delays could be caused by examiners waiting to continue examining an application until previously identified issues are resolved. However, the practice of compact prosecution may discourage examiners from resolving any issues of clarity or ambiguity before conducting their initial searches for relevant prior art. For example, as one examiner commented in our survey, in order to follow the compact prosecution practice, a search for prior art, and complete all office actions. Examiners have minimum production goals, based on the time allotted, for the number of office actions they must complete. USPTO anticipates that a pilot system will be available to a limited number of examiners, agency officials told us. Such a system could improve the search tools available to examiners and help address the challenge of managing the quantity of potentially relevant prior art. It could also be used to help examiners manage the quality of their searches. USPTO officials estimate that 83 percent of examiners have rarely or never seen an application with a third-party submission. According to these officials, while the number of audits is not large enough to allow tracking of individual examiner performance, it allows for statistical monitoring of examination quality overall. USPTO has taken or begun planning various actions that may help address challenges in identifying relevant applications.not conduct additional searches. However, evaluations of third- party submissions found that they were generally useful to examiners. Worksharing can ameliorate the challenges posed by the quantity of potential prior art that examiners must search and the time pressure examiners face. Because the underlying invention is the same, the search and examination results at one office may be useful to examiners in another office. For more information, visit worksharing.offices.com. for more information on how to work with Worksharing, including how to use it in your own office, or for help with working with other offices. performs the bulk of the search and administrative tasks, with the other two examiners actively discussing and approving office actions. Examiners from a particular technology area are assigned to each panel randomly. An individual examiner may serve as first examiner on some applications and second examiner or chair on others. A panel member may also serve as a chair or second examiner on certain applications. The panel is made up of four examiners: one from each panel, two from the same panel, and one from a different panel. the challenges described above as well as the thoroughness of searches. USPTO’s Office of Patent Quality Assurance (OPQA) conducts audits of a random sample of office actions. Some of these audits will review examiners’ prior art searches. Prior to recent changes in their audits, reviewers in OPQA performedPrior art searches at the technology center or art unit level. Using the 400 audits OPQa performed annually, USPto officials said that they could perform statistically valid assessments of prior art searched only for the examiner corps as a whole.  OPQA made changes to its review processes in November 2015. The changes, along with an increase in staff, should allow the office to perform more art searches. If finalized, the changes could enable monitoring of prior art search trends at the technology center or art unit level, officials say. The agency is based in Washington, D.C., but has offices in New York, Los Angeles and San Francisco. For more information, go to opQA.org or go to www.opqa.org. In recent years, the number and consistency of OPQA staff and supervisory patent examiners’ reviews have not been sufficient to examine trends in the thoroughness of may have included an independent search to discover prior art missed by the examiner. Department noted that a great deal of information on examiners' prior art searches is potentially available from primary examiners, supervisors, OPQa, and others. In comparison, according to a USPTO training document, supervisory Patent examiners should check draft of the new master review form. Supervisory examiners do not need to perform an independent search for prior art. Supervisory examiner may document errors found during their reviews to inform individual employee performance assessments but should also adjust their reviews based on an examiner’s skills, abilities, and performance history. That search should be done after a thorough search was conducted, but after a review has been conducted to ensure that no errors have been found. The search should also be conducted after areview has been performed to ensure. that a thoroughsearch was conducted. and (3) recorded his or her search strategy. If a reviewer finds that the examiner should have made a rejection but did not, the form asks the reviewer to identify the source of prior art needed for the missed rejection. The March 2016 draft of the form does not include, and does not record the examiner’s search strategy for the book. The form also does not list the reviewer's name or contact information for the author or author's agent. The draft form is available online at www.academyonline.com. about 12,000 audits in 2016, according to OPQA officials. In 2015, USPTO drafted a master review form that could standardize OPQa and supervisory examiner reviews with a single, consistent approach and documentation. As of March 2016, U.S. Patent and Trademark Office had not made a decision about the final content of the review form, when supervisory patent examiners might begin to use the new form, or how the data from the reviews would be used. about 400 audits per year that focused on assessments of examiners’ prior art searches. In November 2015, USPTO’s Commissioner for Patents affirmed the agency's intent to examine this system and told us that he had committed to the examiners' union to do so. We identified criteria in the federal standards for internal control; the Government Performance and Results Act of 1993, as amended. We reviewed the results of the survey of examiner. We also looked at the Manual of Patent Examining. 22 percent of examiners had not taken such training or had not been offered such training. We found in 2005 that examiners were reluctant to attend voluntary training. USPTO does not require examiners to complete a minimum amount of ongoing technical training. However, based on information from US PTO officials, 74 percent of testiners participated in at least one of the 153 technical training events held through the agency’s Patent’S Office of Patent and Trademark Enforcement (PTO) of May 2015, approximately 39 percent of all examiners in the technology centers we reviewed had been at the agency for less than 5 years. In addition, USPTO has reported that examiner attrition has increased over the past five years. As we found in 2007, attrition of less experienced examiners is a significant loss for the agency, in part because examiners require 4 to 6 years of on-the-job experience before they become fully proficient in conducting patent application reviews. When these staff leave USPPO, the agency loses as much as 5 years of training investment in them. The April 2016 changes to the time allotted for approximately 1,000 examiners were based on an initial evaluation of the time examiners need to perform a thorough prior art search. This initial evaluation stemmed from feedback from examiners during the transition to CPC. The time pressures created by USPTO’s system for determining allotted examination time have important implications for examiners, the department said. We are happy to clarify that the changes were made after an initial investigation of time needed to perform prior art searches in these technologies. technology was determined when the examiner performance and production system was first created in the 1970s or when subsequent art units were added. USPTO adjusted the time allotted to examiners between fiscal years 2010 and 2012 and gave all patent examiners a total of 2.5 additional hours per application. The agency did not evaluate art unit or technology-specific factors prior to making this change. USpTO has not evaluated the agency’s system for determining time allotted for examination could help the agency better understand the time pressures examiners face. faced a backlog of applications, and changing the time allotted may make it more difficult for the agency to address this backlog. As of May 2016, USPTO had not clarified how it would address the backlog. Changing the time to examiners may address the challenge of time pressures on examiners that we discuss above, but it may not address the problem of backlogs of applications. The agency has not clarified this issue as of May 2015, and it is not clear how it will address it. requires that agencies establish objective, quantifiable, and measurable performance goals. The limitations to USPTO’s ability to monitor examiners’ prior art searches at a technology center or art unit level may hinder the agency's ability to identify and as by art unit, according to information from USP TOe. USP Toe officials told us that the agency has not conducted an analysis to identify any gaps in examiners' competence, either for the agency as a whole or for individual examiners. are otherwise not required to record their reviews. Because USPTO does not require supervisory examiners to document these reviews in a consistent form, the agency cannot analyze the data to examine issues with prior art search quality in specific technology centers and art units. Early in fiscal year 2016, USpTO began requiring supervisory exams to document their reviews on a consistent basis. The agency has not yet implemented the new rule, but it is expected to come into effect in the summer of 2016. to find because patents issued before then have not been fully digitized. This is a particularly challenging issue for examiners in the mechanical technology centers because those examiners tend to use older art more often than other examiners. USPTO examiners we surveyed also reported difficulties obtaining patents issued prior to the 1980s and 1990s. We are happy to share our findings with you. We hope you will use this information to help examiners with their work. We would like to hear from you if you have any questions. occurs in the course of normal operations. Without consistently collecting the information needed to assess the thoroughness of prior art searches and monitoring at a technology center or art unit level, the agency cannot identify and address issues that are more prevalent in certain technology centers or art areas, such as graffiti and drug use in the art world. The agency's goal is to improve the quality of art in the U.S. and reduce the amount of graffiti in the arts and entertainment industry, among other things. USPTO expects examiners to examine an report to analyze the time examiners need to perform a thorough examination. To ensure that examiners have the technical competence needed to complete thorough prior art searches, USPTO should assess whether the technical competencies reviews can be used to monitor the thoroughness of examiners’ prior Art searches and improvements over time. The Department concurred and stated that USPto intends to further investigate the time needed to conduct a thorough prior Art search for different technologies. expected to review within a specified period of time. The agency has not identified plans to assess the amount of time examiners in different technologies need to perform thorough prior art searches. Without this information, the agency does not know if it is allotting examiners appropriate amounts of time to complete their work. Based on our survey, most examiners find that they do not have sufficient time for thorough prior Art searches. We continue to believe that the agency should review the time allotted for all technologies. CMH test. The test statistic is Wald Chi-Square. We also performed CMH tests on responses to questions on how often examiners search for certain types of prior art. The types of art included were foreign patent literature, scientific articles or presentations, foreign- language nonpatent literature, and industry-related nonpatents. We found that examiners were more likely to search for prior art that they had not previously seen or that they were less likely to have time to complete a thorough search. often search for foreign patents. More examiners also find that foreign patents and foreign-language nonpatent literature are difficult to obtain. In analyzing our survey results, we of examiners in the Biotechnology and Organic Chemistry technology center found that how often examiners searched for foreign patent literature, scientific articles or presentations was statistically associated with their description of the sufficiency of time they had to complete a test. The results were based on a survey of more than 1,000 examiners across the U.S. 51 percent of all examiners find it somewhat or very difficult to obtain relevant art from searches for foreign-language nonpatent literature. Difficulties obtaining certain types of prior art may influence how often patent examiners search for them. 8 of the 18 experts we interviewed suggested that examiners focus on searching patent literature and may not thoroughly search nonpatents. How often examinersSearch for certain types. of prior. art may lead examiners to conduct less thorough searches of. nonpatENT literature, potentially missing relevant prior art. Nonpatent literature overall and software-related prior art are more difficult to find, experts say. Foreign-language prior art is also difficult to access, according to some experts. Experts: Nonpatent prior art can be difficult to obtain, especially in the U.S. and Europe. For more information, visit the National Institute of Standards and Technology's Prior Art database. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org. 2012, and found 753 unique, English- language prior art documents (30 percent of the submissions received) that were otherwise not available to examiners. These documents were mostly journal or other scholarly articles, but also included other types of nonpatent literature, such as marketing materials, book chapters, conference proceedings, presentations, and other documents. The U.S. Patent and Trademark Office is the world's largest patent office, with a patent portfolio of more than $1.2 billion. commonly known in this field but may not be found by searching a public database. In addition, one expert we interviewed suggested that examiners do not have ready access to textbooks that are a good source of prior art. Another suggested that prior art from before the mid-1970s is difficult to find. For more information, go to the National Gallery of Art's website or the Museum of Art, Science and Culture at the University of California, San Diego. for more information on the museum, visit www.museumofart.org. Patent literature consists of previously issued U.S. or foreign patents and published patent applications. Nonpatent literature can include product manuals, standards established by international organizations, textbooks, periodicals, or conference presentations. Currently, relevant nonpatent Literature may appear in different journals or databases that cannot be searched with a single search function. examiners commented in our survey about the difficulty of searching nonpatents literature or requested an easier way to search for it. For example, examiners requested a method to search the Internet for nonpatented literature. officials, publishers of academic journals and other nonpatent literature often raise subscription prices annually, so the office must decide what to exclude. According to JPO officials, JPO has internal databases of both patent and nonpatents literature. JPO’s internal databases include JPO patent literature and some foreign patent literature, and selected nonpatENT literature. The office also subscribes to external databases for nonpatented literature. In addition, the office annually selects useful nonpatenting literature to add to its database based on recommendations from an internal committee of examiners and officials. worksharing could give offices access to search reports of unpublished applications at other offices. These search reports may include prior art relevant to similar applications filed with EPO. Creating internal databases of nonpatent literature. EPO and JPO incorporate specific nonpatents literature resources into their offices’ main search tools, such as the JPO’s ‘nonpatent search’ tool, which can be used to search for non-patent works of art, for example. USPTO has not developed and documented a strategy to identify and assess the optimal means of incorporating new sources of art into these tools. Such a strategy would be consistent with federal standards for internal control. Neither the current nor planned systems provide USPTO examiners with the as helping examiners consider a wide array of nonpatent literature sources. While we did not receive evidence of such assessments during our review, they may be a useful step. The Department concurred and stated that USP TOe’s STIC analyzes nonpatents literature sources used by examiners and assesses them for incorporation into USPto’S search system. USPTO requested information on a search system that uses the claims and specification within a patent application to search for patent and nonpatent literature automatically, without human involvement. In its request for information, USPTO described the intent of the system as providing a useful prior art baseline for patent examiners patent literature. The new search system has the potential to integrate additional sources of nonpatents literature, EPO and JPO have taken and cited toward a strategy to periodically assess the optimal means of providing examiners access to key nonPatent literature sources. USPTO examiners may not be able to use public search engines because searching for specific terms or concepts from an unpublished application may put the confidentiality of the application at risk. Examiners also may allow examiners to more efficiently search both patent and nonpatent literature by keyword, rather than searching multiple sources individually. According to EPO officials, capability to efficiently search for prior art using a single, integrated search that includes both patent literature and multiple sources of nonPatent literature. The time it takes examiners. to search the large and increasing volume of nonpatENT literature and the inefficiency of having to search many different sources individually may. in conducting prior art searches. For example, to search U.S. patent literature, examiners use two systems, the Examiner’s Automated Search Tool (EAST) and the Web-Based Examiner Search tool (WEST) To search the full texts of published patent applications since 2001, patents granted since 1970, and optically scanned U.s. patents granted in the last 20 years, use EAST or WEST. To search full text of published patents, use the EAST search tool or the WEST search tool. EPO officials identified their search engine and the large number of indexed prior art resources as strengths of the office in addressing the quantity of prior art available. EPO officials said that the office prefers to have internal searches for prior art.through larger quantities of Prior Art. The office's search engine can be used to find prior art through a variety of search engines, including Google, Bing, and Yahoo. It can also be used through a number of other search engines to search prior art online. Some sources remain external and separate from EPO’s search systems. The office needs a strong business case to justify the expense of bringing these sources into its search system. According to these sources, the cost of bringing sources into EPO's search systems is high, and the office needs to make a strong case for why it should do so. Some sources are.collections of these resources so they may be integrated into its. search tools, but some sources remain. external and keep them out of the system. EPO’s primary search tool allows examiners to use a single interface to search through all of EPO's internal databases as well as some external databases of prior art. In addition to creating an internal database of nonpatent literature documents to facilitate examiners’ searches, EPO also added descriptive metadata to index these documents to help examiners find the most relevant documents. The system also incorporates features that make it user-friendly—for example, grouping documents to avoid examiners facing dozens of copies of the same article from different sources. EPO and JPO examiners use classification and keyword searches instead of more complex search tools. EPO uses some automated tools that assist in keyword-based searches or provide automated search results. One EPO tool provides recommended search terms in its three official languages to examiners, based on a database of examiners’ past searches. This tool can improve search efficiency by providing additional search terms, such as synonyms or translations, that the examiner may not have initially considered. It can also provide results of an automated search based on the concepts and words drawn from the claims in applications. efficient access to foreign patent literature and help JPO examiners more easily see foreign examiners’ work. In the pilot with the Korean Intellectual Property Office, examiners perform independent searches and examinations, then compare results prior to final office actions. An EPO official also noted that examiners consider prior art from both JPO’s search results and their own search results before responding to the applicant with the first office action. According to USPTO, the new system will be in place by the end of 2014. rather than permanent employees, and JPO has begun outsourcing aspects of prior art search. JPO officials stated that outsourcing some aspects of. prior art searches based on instructions from a government examiner frees up the examiners’ time and allows. the office to review more applications. Table 1 describes the workload, and it includes the workload of the JPO’s art examiners. The JPO is a government agency based in Washington, D.C., with offices in New York, Los Angeles, and San Francisco. EPO and JPO have procedures to review examiners’ work before issuing or denying a patent. At EPO, applications are examined by a panel of three examiners: a first examiner, second examiner, and chair. EPO examiners spend their first 2 years in training, alternating periods of classroom training with periods of on-the-job training. Incorporating review and audit procedures. helps ensure examination consistency. Expertise from JPO experts may enhance the quality of patent application examinations. EPO and JPO have systems to share search and examination results. The exchange of prior art searches or patent examination results among patent offices is called worksharing. The results are in the form of a ranked list of potentially related documents, which provides a starting point for examiners before they begin a manual search. EPO only recruits students with at least a master’s degree and almost all JPO examiners join the office after graduate school, according to EPO officials. JPO's outsourced aspects of priorArt searches are often carried out by retired engineers or technical. EPO and JPO have about one-half and one-fifth as many examiners as USPTO. There is a limit on the number of federal employees JPO can have. 494 of its 1,702 examiners are fixed-term sent to the applicants. In 2014, examiners recorded approximately 83,000 consultations and received approximately 243,000 new applications, JPO officials say. The manual also encourages examiners to consult with their directors or other examiners who may be able to provide guidance in examining an application. EPO’s quality management system also calls for random audits, including a minimum of two prior art search audits for each examiner per year. JPO officials also reported taking steps to ensure that the serve as quality management officers also perform quality audits on randomly selected applications. According to J PO officials, the office has around 90 such officers in particular technology areas who review entire examinations and complete independent searches. The office also has 4 wide-area officers who focus on the appropriateness of examiners’ decisions but do not do quality audits. Patents it issues are of high quality. These steps include a director quality check, consultations with other examiners, and quality audits of a sample of examinations. According to JPO’s quality manual, JPO directors conduct a quality check on examiners’ decisions to grant or reject applications before the office actions are taken. The JPO is a government agency that issues patents to companies around the world. It is based in Washington, D.C. and has more than 1,000 employees. USPTO provides suggested search areas of related classes. These suggestions do not specify what USPTO would consider a thorough prior art search for each class or describe the sources of prior art the examiner should consider. As of March 2016, USPto’s did not recognize that USP TOs definitions of CPC classification areas include suggestions for related classes for search. We adjusted our report to acknowledge the information US PTO provides on these suggestedSearch areas. However, these suggested Search areas do not fully establish what constitutes a thorough Prior Art Search for each Class. search would make it somewhat or much easier to complete a thorough prior art search in the time allotted. USPTO’s 2014-2018 Strategic Plan includes an objective to ensure optimal information technology services, including upgrading search systems and prior art access. Develop written guidance on what constitutes a thoroughPriorArt search within each technology field (i.e., mechanical, chemical, electrical), and indicators for improving prior art searches. Develop technology-based search training guidance and establish enhanced goals and indicators. art searches. USPTO is not required to establish goals or indicators for improving prior art searches. We have previously reported that establishing program goals and associated indicators constitutes a leading practice for planning within federal agencies. Among other things, the Government Performance and Results Act Modernization Act of 2010 is responsible for setting goals and indicators for art searches in the U.S. It is also responsible for establishing goals and metrics to measure the effectiveness of the art search system in the United States. For more information, visit USPto.org. in a language other than English, referred to as foreign-language art in this report. unclear patent applications, difficulties identifying or accessing relevant nonpatent literature and prior art in foreign languages, and limits on the time available to search for relevant prior art. Some of these challenges may reinforce one another or affect examiners in some technology centers more than others. We performed these tests on responses overall as well as conditional on the examiners’ technology center. To describe how selected foreign patent offices have addressed challenges, we first reviewed information identifying the world’s five largest patent offices. It also requires examiners to consider U.S. patents, foreign patents, and nonpatent literature, unless they can justify with reasonable certainty that no more pertinent references can be found. USPTO has no single method for assessing the thoroughness of prior art searches because it has no questions assessing if search queries were likely to result in identification of relevant prior art. Without greater clarity on what constitutes a thorough prior art search in different technologies, it will be difficult for USPto to assess the adequacy of examiners’ searches. Of the 18 experts, 10 agreed that the search tools and capabilities available to examiners create challenges to conducting thorough prior art searches. Examiners have access to guidance and training on classification-based searches, but USPTO has not documented technology-specific guidance on what constitutes a thorough search. Without collecting such information at the technology center level, U.S. may be challenged to use its search tools to monitor the thoroughness of examiners’ priorArt searches. USPto uses two methods to review examinations, which may help the agency monitor the effects of be used to assess examiners. using keyword searches will not identify documents that use a different term. Examiners reported that issues with the clarity of the application make it more difficult to complete thorough prior art searches. Integrating additional sources of prior art into USPTO’s search tools is one way USPPO could increase the types and sources of Prior Art that examiners consider. Such a strategy could help USPto take full advantage of its investment in its new information technology tools to address some of the challenges examiners face. Without evaluating the technology-specific time pressures examiners face in their efforts to identify prior art in patent examination, USPTO does not have assurance that the time allotted to examiners application within a specific amount of time. This means that examiners may need to make trade-offs among the amount and types of prior art sources they consider. However, as we also note in our patent quality report (GAO-16-490), USPto has yet clarified the extent to which the evaluation will look at any differences among art units and technologies in the time needed for thorough prior art searches. USPTO examiners face a variety of challenges in identifying relevant prior art during patent examination. Time pressures for prior art searches, USPTO search tools and capabilities, the misclassification of patent applications, and examiners’ technical competence are among the challenges. Examiners face a number of challenges, including the large volume of prior art from multiple sources to search for. USPto may not have reasonable assurance that examiners in all technology centers have the skills and knowledge to identifyrelevant prior art. art, but some of these actions have limitations that may hinder their effectiveness. As part of its Enhanced Patent Quality Initiative, USPTO is procuring an automated prior art search capability that could enhance examiners’ ability to identify relevant prior art. The agency has not yet established performance goals and indicators for improving prior art searches. One of the stated objectives in USPPO’s 2014-2018 Strategic Plan is to in their thoroughness. To enhance USPto’S ability to identified relevant priorArt, we recommend that the Secretary of Commerce direct the Director of US PTO to take the following seven actions. our survey. On the basis of survey responses from our random probability sample of examiners, we found that some examiners find that the CPC classifications make it somewhat or much more difficult to complete a thorough prior art search in the time allotted. In response to an open- ended survey question, one examiner described their difficulty, saying that proper classification of prior art is essential to quality and efficiency of examination. USPTO officials we interviewed also told us that they find the CPC system to be inconsistent. sometimes difficult for examiners to find, according to experts we interviewed and our survey of examiners. However, the CPC system’s usefulness to examiners depends, in part, on the consistency with which the system is applied by its users. Inconsistently applying the classification system to applications undermines its usefulness because it is difficult to apply to all applications at the same time. The CPC system is designed to help examiners make more informed decisions about what to look for in an application. Examiners we of time for completing thorough prior art searches varies by technology center. For example, an estimated 37 percent of examiners in the Mechanical Engineering, Manufacturing, and Products technology center reported having much less time than needed. Supervisory patent examiners we interviewed told us that it would be more efficient to search for prior art in one tool, with a single search method that covered multiple sources of prior art, including prior Art searches. We estimate based on our survey that a higher percentage of examiner in the Mechanical Engineering technology center find that they have much lessTime than needed, compared to examiners  in other technology centers. encountered misclassified applications sometimes, often, or always in the past quarter. An estimated 76 percent of examiners find that the misclassification of patent applications makes it somewhat or much more difficult to complete a thorough prior art search in the time allotted. According to our survey, how often examiners prior art searching is the most time-consuming aspect of patent examination. Based on our survey,. on average, from 6 to 20 hours initially examining patent applications and completing a first office action. Survey: 45 percent of all examiners in the eight technology centers we reviewed find that the large quantity of art makes it somewhat or much more difficult to complete a thorough prior art search in the time allotted. As to use the new system for every application, 12 percent of examiners expect that an automated pre-examination will have implications for examiners’ ability to conduct thorough Prior Art searches. About two-thirds of examiner responding to our survey reported having insufficient time to complete prior art searches given their typical workload. number of submitted art references in the past quarter. We estimate that for most examiners (64 percent), excessive references make it somewhat or much more difficult to complete a thorough prior art search in the time allotted. Based on our survey, we estimate that 88 percent of examiners sometimes, often, or always encountered applications with irrelevant references. Most examiners find that irrelevant references make It harder to complete prior art searches in the allotted time. Considering all of the prior art references submitted by applicants can be particularly art references, of which only a handful were relevant. challenging for examiners because applicants are generally not required to explain the relevance of the references. In commenting on this issue in our survey, one examiner recalled often receiving information disclosure statements from applicants with numerous prior prior references. One examiner recalled receiving information Disclosure statements from Applicants with Numerous prior References. In the survey, we asked examiners to share their experiences with applicants with Numerous Prior References (NRCs) and NRCs with Multiple References (NCs) NRCS: NRC: NSC: NCC: NARCs with multiple References. or often search for U.S. patents and applications (an estimated 99 percent); we also found that nearly all examiners view this as the most relevant type of art they consider. In the past quarter, less than half of examiners—an estimated 42 percent—always or often encountered applications with a subject matter in which they were interested. Agency officials answered “always’ for five centers, “often” for three centers, and “sometimes’s for one center. the quantity makes it somewhat or much easier. However, responses varied among technology centers, as shown in appendix III. For example, 30 percent of examiners in the Computer Networks, Multiplex Communication, Video Distribution, and Security technology center find that the quantity of art makes it slightly or much more difficult to do a task. For more information, visit the U.S. National Gallery of Art and the National Museum of Art in Washington, D.C., or the Museum of Modern Art in New York, New York. encountered misclassified applications in the past quarter varied by technology center (see app. III). Misclassified applications pose particular challenges for examiners, according to examiners’ comments to our survey. This is because when applications are routed to the wrong art areas, they can negatively affect examiners' confidence in their work and the quality of the examination. For example, while examiners can request that an application be transferred to a different art unit, they may encounter difficulties doing so. may be reviewed by examiners who do not have appropriate knowledge and experience to understand the invention or relevant prior art. misclassified applications that are never corrected could be difficult for examiners to subsequently use as prior art in later examinations. This similar applications may not be placed in the same category by USPTO and EPO. Also, misclassified applications may require examiners to familiarize themselves with new technologies, which increases the amount of time it takes for them to conduct their prior art searches.  examiners may face difficulties associated with applications that have been translated from a foreign language. About half of examiners (an estimated 50 percent) find that additional translators would make it somewhat or much easier. According to examiners, another challenge they face is misclassification of patent applications. Misclassification occurs when an application is not classified into the group most closely associated with the application. All data was taken from a survey of more than 1,000 patent examiners in the U.S. and Canada. different applications may use different terms to describe the same thing. Inconsistent terminology can make it more difficult for examiners to find relevant prior art because searching for one term can be difficult. According to four of the experts we interviewed, the absence of standard terms is particularly a challenge for software-related applications. For more information, go to examiners.org or go to the examiners' website. for more information on prior art, visit the examiner's website or the prior art website. non-standard terms also make searching in foreign collections exceptionally challenging because it is not possible to anticipate which synonyms to use. In our patent quality report (GAO-16-490), we provide additional information on how the clarity of applications affects patent quality. The effect of unclear applications may be exacerbated by USPTO’s decision to change the definition of ‘standard’ to ‘non- standard’ in its patent applications.’ ““” Classification systems allow examiners to conduct prior art searches based on the classes assigned to an application, independent of its language and wording. This can improve search quality by producing results that would not be found from a specific keyword search but are nonetheless closely related. Reducing the number of results an examiner needs to consider decreases the time needed for the prior art search, thereby improving efficiency. According to the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office, the average time it takes to search for a patent is about three minutes. make prior art searches somewhat or much easier, including a search engine that (1) can automatically search for concepts and synonyms related to the search terms entered by the examiner (an estimated 76 percent of examiners), and (2) automatically generates relevant art, without keyword entry, based on all the claims. The search engine can also generate relevant art based on the claims it has searched for, without the need for a keyword entry. For more information on the search engine, go to: http://www.artsearch.org/search. The USPTO and patent examiners have experienced some challenges with this effort. Ensuring examiners’ technical competence is also important, experts say. misclassified applications may be difficult to find when examiners search for patent literature using technology-specific patent classification categories. By grouping similar patents, classification systems allow examiners to conduct prior art searches independent of an application’s application's. The U.S. Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) and other patent offices that adopt the system have experienced challenges with the effort. EPO and JPO use several approaches that may help their examiners address challenges in identifying prior art. These approaches include worksharing, creating internal databases of nonpatent literature and using patent classification systems. These efforts may help address several of the challenges we identified relating to prior art and applications, including the large quantity of art available and the availability of prior art, particularly foreign patents and art. We are happy to help EPO with any questions you may have about prior art search. uses inconsistent terms or is written in a foreign language. EPO and JPO classify applications and patents into groups that describe specific components of the invention. Examiners may then look at other applications and. patents within the same group to find similar inventions. A system that has more groups— sometimes sometimes more than one— is sometimes more difficult to use than one that has fewer groups. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. includes prior art searches that examiners use to determine whether an invention is novel and not obvious. USPTO’s manual for patent examiners requires examiners to conduct a thorough prior art search by identifying the field of search, the appropriate tools, and a search strategy. If examiners do not have a clear understanding of the scope and claims of the invention, they may not choose the most appropriate keywords for conducting their priorArt searches. The agency has not clearly defined what constitutes a thoroughPriorArt search. The large volume of prior art available from multiple sources makes searching for relevant prior art challenging. 87 percent of examiners find that an application with relevant references makes it somewhat or much easier to complete thorough prior art searches in the time allotted. For example, one expert noted complete a thorough prior Art search in thetime allotted. Some relevant prior Art may require a fee to access, may not be in a text- searchable format, maynot be in database, or may otherwise be difficult to access. of an application. Prior art submitted by third parties can help identify prior art that is not immediately available to examiners. By potentially reducing the need to search for this prior art, these prior art can be more easily identified. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. that the amount of patents, publications, and other nonpatent literature has grown exponentially, making it harder to find relevant prior art in the time allotted. Another expert said that technological innovations are occurring at a tremendous rate, and that the growing volume of prior art domestically and worldwide can be helpful in the search for prior art. The U.S. Patent and Trademark Office has no immediate comment on the claims made in this article. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. difficult to find include product documentation and summaries, product databases, and user manuals. Prior art related to computer technologies has also been difficult to find, according to one expert we interviewed, in part because a lot of information is difficult to come by. It's also difficult to get information from standards-setting organizations, an expert says. It can be difficult to obtain information about a product that's been made available to the public for years. It also can be hard to find information about the products that have been made for the public. Clarity of applications can pose a challenge to finding relevant prior art. There often are no standard terms to describe technologies, and technology center, art area, or art unit, as appropriate. Establish goals and indicators for improving prior art searches. Ensure that sufficient information is collected to assess the quality of searches at the technology center level, including how often examiners search for U.S. patents, the report says. Technology center (see app. III) is a government-funded program that provides grants and loans to companies seeking to develop new technologies. of examiners in our study and, when reported by technology center, for each of the technology centers we reviewed. The agency has not established goals or indicators covering prior art search performance. Monitoring the thoroughness of examiners’ prior art searches at a level of rigor and consistency to assess trends within individual technology centers would better enable challenges in identifying relevant prior art, we found. We reviewed documents from the agency related to prior artSearch procedures and capabilities. We also interviewed or interviewed or. CPC class, and they do not provide guidance on examiners’ searches for nonpatent literature. In regard to our recommendations to ensure that reviews of examiners' prior art searches collect sufficient information to assess search quality at the technology center level, we recommend that these reviews be used to monitor examiner’s Prior Art searches. We also recommend that the review be used as a tool to monitor the quality of prior art search results at the tech center level and use these reviews to monitor search quality. over time, the Department concurred. The Department said it would ensure adequate search data are collected to assess the quality of searches at the technology center level. It would investigate using audits and reviews to monitor the thoroughness of examiners’ prior art searches over time. In its written comments, the Dept. of Justice concurred with the Department of Justice’s decision. The department said it will investigate using auditing and reviews. It will also conduct an internal review of the searches to ensure they are thorough. in the United States, China, Japan, South Korea, and Europe. These five offices, including EPO and JPO, each receive hundreds of thousands of patent applications each year. EPO issues patents that cover 42 countries, most of which are member countries that are party to the European Patent patent offices to leverage others’ work and knowledge. The IP5, a multilateral forum of the five largest patent offices, identified worksharing as the main tool for addressing an increasing number of applications. USPTO has taken actions to leverage the work of foreign patent offices. The agency has experienced challenges working with EPO on a new offices similar in size to USPTO. We selected the European Patent Office (EPO) and the Japan patent Office (JPO) based on comments observers made about the quality of their work. We conducted site visits with EPo and JPO, during which we interviewed officials from these offices and reviewed documents they produced. We also conducted interviews with officials from both offices. JPO and one with the Korean Intellectual Property Office. Applicants who file related patent applications with USPTO and either JPO or the Korean IP Office may request to enter the pilot. In the pilot with JPO, USPPO and JPO will review the applications in a matter of days. In a pilot with the Korea IP Office, the review will take up to three weeks. The pilot is known as the Collaborative Search Pilot Program and is open to all patent applicants. Organization has estimated that approximately half of all applications worldwide are repetitive filings in a patent family. According to the World Intellectual Property Organization, around 2.7 million patent applications were filed worldwide in 2014. To gain patent protection in multiple countries, inventors may file applications for the same invention in several different countries. The rest of the time, patent applications are filed with patent offices art searches for applications filed in several countries. In the U.S., patent applications can be filed in multiple offices at the same time. Convention. Applicants may apply to national patent offices or apply through EPO for coverage in some or all of these 42 countries. EPO has three official languages, one of which must be used for processing an application. These three languages are English (about 80 percent of applications), French (about 5 percent) and Spanish (about 3 percent) The EPO is a non-profit organization based in Geneva, Switzerland. It was established in 1946 to promote the development of the European Convention on Patents. USPTO has found that classifications for some U.S. patent applications under the CPC system are inconsistent with EPO’s classifications. USPTO examiners have reported difficulty with the system. Officials from both the number of documents in some CPC categories was greater than those in comparable categories under the previous classification system. The CPC system helps examiners give greater consideration to foreign patent documentation.to foreign patent literature compared to the prior system and can be expanded more easily to include new technologies. USPTO has contributed data to information technology systems that share published information among patent offices. USPTO is collaborating with foreign patent offices to give examiners access to examination files from those offices. These collaborative efforts could improve searches for patent and nonpatent literature in foreign languages, as examiners from multiple countries will perform searches in their native languages and share the results. The joint patent classification system was designed and implemented to improve examiners’ examiners' ability to search for patent literature. USPTO contributes data to three worksharing systems that make applications, prior art citations, and examination results from foreign patent offices available to examiners and the public. One system, the Common Citation Document, provides bibliographic information, such as title and source, of patent and nonpatent prior prior art. Examiners may access additional foreign patent documents through other web-based tools. USPTO’s Scientific and Technical Information Center (STIC) operates systems that can search U.S. patent literature and that store somenonpatent literature. USPTO, EPO, and JPO launched this system in 2011. Another system, Global Dossier, provides access to the examination history of applications. A third system, PATENTSCOPE, run by the JPO, is available to USPTO and EPO examiners. The systems are complimentary, with each system providing advantages based on the specific search task involved.art citations. For more information on these systems, visit patentscope.org. For additional information on the USPTC, visit the patentcite.org website. responsible for the day-to-day management of examiners. In addition to applying for a patent from USPTO, an inventor may also seek patent protection in other countries for the same invention by filing in multiple patent offices. Such interrelated patent applications are described as a patent family. By allowing examiners to review prior art that examiners from other offices found useful in examining patent applications, these systems may be more effective. The World Intellectual Property Organization, provides access to applications filed with multiple offices under the Patent Cooperation Treaty. USPTO’s current search tools do not provide examiners with immediate access to computer-generated translations. examiners can request human and machine translation services from STIC and three contracted translation vendors that currently cover 35 languages. As of May 2015, USPTO had nearly 8,300 patent examiners across the eight technology centers we reviewed (see fig. 2). USPPO uses the General Schedule (GS) classification system for patent examiner, whose levels range from requested improvements to current translation capabilities. On the basis of our survey, a majority of examiners agree that having access to immediate machine translation of foreign-language documents would make it somewhat or much easier to complete a thorough prior art search. wide array of nonpatent literature sources. As of March 2016, USPTO had not established a documented strategy to identify and assess new sources. The agency does not currently have specific plans to add additional nonpatents literature sources to its new system because of its initial focus on developing parity with the existing system. In addition, as of March 2015, the agency had not determined the most optimal means of providing access to the new Patents End-to-End system. The new system can be expanded in the future to include additionalNonpatent. USPTO should develop and periodically update a documented strategy to identify key sources of nonpatent literature for individual technology centers. To improve its monitoring, USPTO could include these sources in its search system, the authors say. The authors say this could be an effective way of providing access to non-patent material for the technology industry. They say it could also be a way to improve the monitoring of the industry's non- patent literature for the benefit of the U.S. government. The U.S. Patent Classification system became outdated following budget constraints in the early 2000s. USPTO expects years 2015 through 2018, replace nearly 20 systems currently used to search patent applications. The new system will initially replicate the prior art search capabilities of USPto’s current systems, such as EAST and WEST, which focus on U.s. patent literature and include only one source of nonpatent literature. The current system performs searches for about one-tenth of the agency's incoming applications. The new system could expand upon the capabilities of a currently available system. According to USPTO officials, the Patent Linguistic Utility Service has been in use for 20 years. That system has limitations that prevent it from being used in new ways.that they anticipate awarding a contract in late summer 2016. The new system is expected to be available by the end of the year, according to the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office. For more information, visit the USPPO website. GAO-10-946R. Washington, D.C.: September 24, 2010. Intellectual Property: Enhanced Planning by U.S. Personnel Overseas Could Strengthen Efforts. GAO-09-863. Washington: September 30, 2009. U.s. Patent and Trademark Office: Hiring Efforts Are Not Sufficient to Reduce the Patent Application Backlog. GAE-05-1008T. Washington,. D.c.: September 8, 2005. Intellectual property: Key Processes for Managing Patent Automation Strategy Need Strengthening. D.C.: June 17, 2005. Intellectual Property: USPTO Has Made Progress in Hiring Examiners, but Challenges to Retention Remain. GAO-05-720. Washington, D.C: June 17-20, 2005, "USPTO has made progress in hiring examiners," but challenges to Retain retainers remain," said the GAO. The GAO's report was published the same day as the report was released to the public. report. GAO staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix V. This report (1) describes the challenges examiners face in identifying relevant prior art. (2) describes how selected foreign patent offices have addressed challenges in identifyingrelevant prior art, and (3) assesses the extent to which the U.S. patent office has addressed challenges to identify prior art in the past. The report also describes the extent of which the United States has addressed these challenges in the recent past. GAO: Assessing Factors That Affect Patent Infringement Litigation Could Help Improve Patent Quality. GAO-13-465. U.S. Patent and Trademark Office: Performance Management Processes. Washington, D.C.: August 22, 2013. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the United States, contact the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline on 1-800-273-8255. of this report earlier, we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date. At that time, we will send copies to the appropriate congressional committees, the Secretary of Commerce, the Director of the USPTO, the Commissioner for Patents, and other interested parties. In addition, the report will be released to the general public and the public at large. The report will also be made available to the public via the Internet. It will be available for download at the following sites: www.cnn.com and www.theguardian.com. be available at no charge on the GAO website at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staff have any questions about this report, please contact me at (202) 512-3841. Contact points for our Offices of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of this report. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. submissions may address challenges related to the quantity and availability of prior art. According to information from USPTO, third parties submitted prior art for less than 1 percent of the approximately 600,000 patent applications received per year since third-party submissions began in 2012. An internal review of 300 randomly selected applications for which a third party submissions prior art found that examiners used a submission to reject a patent application in 20 to 25 percent of such cases. Furthermore,USPTO reviewed approximately 2,500 submissions of nonpatent literature prior art it received since September. Since 2012, USPTO has had authority to receive submissions from third parties that may help identify potentially relevant prior art for published patent applications. The agency created a subscription service, whereby users will be notified when applications are published that contain user-chosen keywords. It is unclear if requests for third-party submissions on a specific application could be viewed as allowing opposition, officials say. According to US PTO officials, the agency is making improvements to its prior art search tools to help examiners identify relevant art. decided not to pursue this option, at least in part, because the agency is uncertain about its legal authority to do so. While statute allows USPTO to collect third-party submissions, the law requires the agency to establish procedures to ensure that no protest or opposition is initiated during examination, the agency says. The agency says it has no immediate plans to pursue the option of collecting submissions from third parties. The law requires that no protests or opposition be initiated duringexamination, according to the agency. USPTO has experienced some challenges working with EPO to adopt and consistently implement a new patent classification system. USPTO and EPO should identify a target level of consistency of Cooperative Patent Classification decisions and develop a plan to monitor consistency to achieve the target. To ensure that US PTO is able to take full advantage of its investment in prior art search, USPto should work with EPo to identify a targets for consistency. To find relevant prior art, US PtoT should find relevantPrior art.to address prior art. surveyed reported difficulties with the amount and relevance of prior art references provided by applicants. USPTO requires applicants and others assisting in filing an application to submit all information known to be material to patentability. This information may include search results from foreign patent offices or publications known to the help address the challenges related to managing the large quantity of Prior Art. Second, to enhance collaboration on related patent applications filed in multiple countries, USPto has entered into two pilot programs to jointly examine certain applications. The U.S. Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) has taken steps to address any challenges in identifying relevant prior art. USPTO’s goals for patent quality in the strategic plan and for the quality initiative do not currently include goals or indicators assessing the thoroughness of prior recognizing the importance of issuing quality patents. To describe the challenges examiners face in identifyingrelevant prior art, we reviewed relevant laws and UPTO documents. The GAO-16-490 report was coordinated with our report on patent quality. The focus of patent examination is to determine whether the invention in a patent application satisfies the legal requirements for a patent, including that the invention be novel and not obvious. USPTO’s patent examination process involves a variety of steps, at least one of which on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions. This appendix provides details on steps in the patent process at the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) (Corresponds to Fig. 1) and interviewed USPTO officials; a group of four supervisory patent examiners; officials of the examiners’ union, the Patent Office Professional Association. We also conducted semistructured interviews with subject matter experts (experts) active in the intellectual property field and knowledgeable about the subject of prior art. We selected and interviewed 18 experts to obtain views of different stakeholder communities, including four academic experts and four patent holders from the following technology fields: chemical technologies, electrical. We obtained written responses to our questions from officials from USPPO’s Office of the Commissioner for Patents. technologies, and mechanical technologies, based on data from USPTO that identified the companies receiving patents in these fields from 2010 through 2014. Five attorneys based on their leadership (e.g., as chairs or co-chairs) of patent-related committees or sections of various bar associations. Representatives of three nongovernmental organizations we identified during the year based on the number of patents they received in their respective fields. We also looked at the number and type of patents issued by the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office. provided. We also interviewed stakeholders knowledgeable about the offices’ practices, such as academics who study these offices. Because these individuals were not necessarily knowledgeable about USPTO practices, they are not included among the 18 experts discussed above. To assess the extent to which USPto has taken steps to address any problems, we interviewed 18 experts. We interviewed these experts on a variety of topics, including the role of the U.S. Postal Service in the Postal Service and the impact of the Postal Act. survey population, we obtained from USPTO a list of patent examiners as of May 2015. We excluded examiners from the following 3 technology centers: We excluded the Designs technology center because these examiners work on design patents instead of utility patents; design patents are outside the scope of this engagement and have different statutory and administrative requirements than utility patents. We included examiners who perform “reexamination” work and not initial patent examinations. We exclude examiners in the patent training academy becauseThese examiners are recent hires who are in a 12-month training program. USPTO policy requires examiners to consider prior art references. 82 percent of examiners sometimes, often, or always encountered applications with what they considered an excessive with the invention. This can result in applications being routed to the wrong USPTO technology center or art unit for examination. Although only 2 of the 18 experts we interviewed raised concerns about the misclassification of patent applications, on the basis of our survey, an estimated 75 percent of Examiners misclassified applications, we found. background research that had activities or publications related to patents; and two patent data experts who were listed in a 2015 USPTO analysis evaluating search technologies. In addition, we conducted a web-based survey of a stratified random sample of 3,336 eligible patent examiners from across 8 of the 11 totaling 7,825 eligible examiners. From this list, we drew our stratified Random Sample of Patent Examiners, which had an 80 percent response rate. Because we used a probability procedure based on random selections, our sample is only one of a large. Patents End-to-End will provide examiners with a new system to manage all aspects of patent examination, including certain aspects of their prior art searches. USPTO will not have the assurance that it is taking full advantage of its information technology investment to help examiners more efficiently access a variety of resources, the agency says. The new system will cost $405 million over the next five years, USPtoE says. USpTO is taking steps to strengthen monitoring of the new system. Survey was designed to collect information on challenges USPTO faces in finding relevant prior art. To identify our examination process, including rollover information, depicted in figure 1. Based on our survey results, U.S. Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) patent examiners in some technology centers or at some General Schedule (GS) levels face certain challenges in identifyingrelevant prior art more than Examiners in other technology center or at other GS levels. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. USPTO has taken several actions related to the challenge of ensuring that the agency has an examiner workforce with the technical competence needed for identifying relevant prior art. USPTO does not have a process to identify issues that vary by technology center and develop appropriate responses as called for by federal internal control standards. Examiners’ technical competence is an important factor in understanding patent applications and locatingrelevant prior art in the time allotted. US PTO to reflect evolving technologies and workforce changes, as called by federal standards for internal control. to USPTO officials, an examiner’s technical knowledge enables him or her to understand the invention being searched, and if the examiner does not understand the Invention, he or she may not know what to search for, where to look, and when to stop searching. In addition, we estimate on the amount of time it will take for the examiner to complete the search. We estimate on an average of three to four hours for the search to be complete. The search will take place over a period of time of up to 24 hours. for 95 percent of the samples we could have drawn. Within each stratum and overall, the confidence intervals for survey results for percentages are generally within +/- 5 percentage points. The only estimates for which the confidence interval exceed 5percentage points are certain results for the business methods stratum. For other estimates in the report, we have not provided the upper and lower bounds for estimates at the 95 percent confidence interval. In this report, our figures containing survey results show the upper & lower bounds. question 3 based on the midpoint. The 95 percent confidence intervals for these results are within +/- 10 percent of the estimates themselves, except for the estimate for technology center 2100. The estimate forTechnology Architecture, Software, and Information Security (CASIS) has a 95 percent probability of being within the range of 10 percent or less of the estimate. The estimates are based on a range of computer architecture, software, and information security models. The results are for the CASIS model, which is based on an estimate of the total number of computers. number of samples that we might have drawn. Since each sample could have provided different estimates, we quantified the sampling error. We express our confidence in the precision of our particular sample’s results at a 95 percent confidence interval. This is the interval that would contain the actual population value. We are confident that our results are representative of the population as a whole, not just a small fraction of the people in the U.S. as a result of our sample. The results are published in the latest edition of the American Sociological Journal. within +/- 18 percent of the estimate itself. For some other survey questions, we also reviewed examiners’ open- ended responses on selected topics. We selected those topics based on our interviews with experts and USPTO officials as well as our analysis of closed-ended survey responses. Examiners’ responses to open-ended questions are not generalizable to other examiners. In addition, we do not report the exact number of examiners who provided responses on the topics we reviewed. which examiners’ responses most frequently included keywords we identified for each topic. An analyst conducted a keyword search of all responses to the selected open-ended questions and coded responses containing the keywords. A second analyst verified the initial analyst’s coding. Our report provides some examples or summaries of examiners' comments on the selected topics. We also provide some examples of how examiners responded to specific questions and answers. We have also provided some examples, summaries and other information on how to use the data. pretested the survey in person with five USPTO staff: three examiners who are also representatives to the examiners’ union, a supervisory patent examiner, and a quality assurance specialist. We used these pretests to check that the questions were clear and unambiguous, used correct terminology, requested information that could be feasibly obtained, and were comprehensive and unbiased. We also obtained comments on the survey from U.S. Patent and Trademark Office management and leadership from the examiner’s union. a variety of contacts with the sample of examiners during the survey, including follow-up e-mails to encourage responses. In addition, we attempted to follow up via telephone calls to all 1,102 examiners who had neither completed the survey nor told us that they were We analyzed the responses to the survey for all examiners, as well as responses by technology center and by the General Schedule (GS) level of the examiners. We selected three categories of GS levels because examiners at these levels have different responsibilities and authorities. no longer examiners. To adjust the sampling weight for potential nonresponse bias, we used standard weighting class adjustments. The weighted response rate was also 80 percent. In this report and in the related e-supplement, we present the survey results using the nonresponse adjusted weights, which are generalizable to the eligible population of examiners and are based on USPTO years of experience at the agency. We also analyzed nonresponse biases to assess whether any factors were associated with examiners’ propensity to respond and (2) allow our analysis of respondents to properly reflect the sampling universe. policies, search tools, and human capital management. Our survey results show the extent of the challenges may vary by technology center or examiners’ GS level (see app. III). Because we surveyed a generalizable stratified random sample of examiners and adjusted for nonresponse, our results provide estimates for the entire population. The results are based on a survey of more than 1,000 examiners in the U.S. and Canada. The survey was conducted in June and July 2013. addition, we conducted statistical tests of association on the results of certain survey questions; all tests were independently verified to ensure their accuracy. All tests were carried out at the 5 percent level of significance and were Cochran-Mantel-Haenszel (CMH) Chi- square tests of general association. The testing was carried out on more than 2,000 people across the U.S. and Canada. The results were published in the latest edition of the British Journal of Sociology, published by Oxford University Press. carried out in SUDAAN, which is statistical software appropriate for the analysis of survey data. The null hypothesis was that there is no association between the two tested variables. When the association between two variables, conditional on a third variable, is of interest, this is referred to as the stratum-adjusted. This is when the association is between the variables, and the third variable is not of interest to the user. The study was carried out on 1,000 people aged 18 and over. nonresponse errors, and data collection and processing errors. To minimize nonsampling error, we worked with our survey professionals to draft questions that were clear and unbiased. To account for the complex sample design, we used survey software in our analyses to produce appropriate estimates and confidence intervals. The programs we used to process and analyze the survey data were independently verified to ensure the accuracy of this work. The results were published in the Journal of Social and Economic Research, a peer-to-peer journal. in the text or tables; however, those details for all survey results are available in the e- supplement related to this report. The quality of survey data can also be affected by nonsampling error, which includes, for example, variations in how respondents interpret questions, respondents’ willingness to offer accurate responses, and variations in the way respondents respond to questions. For more information, visit www.surveymonkey.com/s/S/SVVJJJ. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here. a web-based survey provided several advantages, including allowing examiners to enter their responses into an electronic instrument that created an automatic record for each respondent. This eliminated the potential for errors that could have resulted if we had used a manual process to enter respondents’ data from paper surveys. In the end, we decided to go with a web- based survey to avoid the need to use paper surveys in the first place. The results of the survey were published in a book called ‘Survey the World’. for less than 1 year. We then defined nine strata by technology center, with one technology center separated into two strata, as described in table 6. Specifically, the Transportation, Construction, Electronic Commerce, Agriculture, National Security and License and Review technology center includes a diverse set of technologies, including transportation, construction, and Electronic Commerce. For more information, visit the U.S. Department of Transportation’s Technology Center of Excellence website. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. provide estimates for each technology center included in our study. See the related e-supplement, GAO-16-478SP, for the original survey language and more detailed results. In addition to the contact named above, Chris Murray (Assistant Director), Tind Shepper Ryen, Krista Breen Anderson, Hilary Benedict, Richard Burkard, John Delicath, Alice Feldesman, Armetha. The study was based on a survey conducted by the Government Accountability Office. agriculture, and business methods. In our review, we separated the art units—subunits of a technology center—focused on electronic commerce and business method. This resulted in nine strata with a target survey population. In light of recent legislation and court decisions related to business methods, these strata have been created. We have also created a separate section for business methods in light of these recent decisions. This section has been created to focus on business methods and electronic commerce in the technology center. provided a variety of open-ended responses. Some respondents chose to provide a range, such as “5 to 10,” while others provided a single number for hours spent per application on prior art searches. Some examiners also provided responses that did not clearly indicate the approximate hours per application spent on prior searches. The results of the survey were published in the June 2014 issue of the magazine, “Art in America,’’ which also appeared in the July 2014 issue. prior art searches in the past quarter; we excluded those responses. Where possible, we coded responses to reflect a range of numbers by assigning a low and a high value; when a single number was provided, wecoded that number as both the low and the high value. A second round of questions was asked of people who had searched for art in the last three months. The results were published in the weekly Newsquiz, which is open to the public. For more information, go to newsquiz.com. analyst verified the initial analyst’s coding. We checked the sensitivity of results overall, within strata, and within GS level categories. Results were not statistically different when using the low value, midpoint (average between low and high values), or high value of a range. As a result, we present results for the first time in this report. We present results from the second and third quarters of the 2012/13 fiscal year, as well as the second quarter of 2013/14. occurrence, and deciding what actions should be taken to manage the risk. In USPTO’s 2014-2018 Strategic Plan, the agency indicated its intent to evaluate changes to the its system for Procedure. We conducted this performance audit from November 2014 to June 2016 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on the audit. We are happy to share our findings with the public. to obtain a workforce with the skills required to achieve organizational goals. Management also needs to provide employees the right training to develop and retain skill levels to meet changing organizational needs. USPTO developed a human capital strategy, its 2015-2018 People Plan, which replaced its 2011-2015 Strategic Human Capital. The strategy was developed to meet the needs of the organization and its employees. The plan was designed to meet USPto's needs and goals for the next five years. It was developed as part of the organisation's 2015- 2018 People Plan. USPTO partnered with EPO to create a new system to be jointly used by both offices. USPTO officially adopted the Cooperative Patent Classification (CPC) system in January 2015. CPC gives examiners greater access to information, officials say. However, USPPO is updating its contract for initial classification services to require a higher level of expertise and is drafting a plan to assess performance under the new contract. The agreement between USPto and EPO that supports the CPC system commits both offices to exchange best practices. USPTO provided examiners and classification contractors with training on how to classify applications and how to search results. At USPTO, classification contractors apply an initial classification to applications before they are routed to an examiner. The examiner may revise the classification during examination. To help transition to the new system, USPto provided examiner and classification contractor with training. On the web, go to: http://www.uspTO.org/news/press-releases/2013/01/27/uspto-provides-training-on-how-to-classify-applications-and-how to search-results. for references using the CPC system, assigned lead quality experts to each technology center to provide training and assistance, and established a feedback tool for examiners to report issues with the new system. According to USPTO officials, the agency has not identified specific reasons that account for differences between its CPC system and the one used by examiners in the U.S. The new system is expected to be in place by the end of the year, according to the agency's website. For more information, go to: http://www.uspTO.org. the Department of Commerce’s written comments, reproduced in appendix IV, the Department concurred with our recommendations. USPTO provided additional technical comments that we incorporated, as appropriate. We also provided a draft of this report to EPO and JPO for their views and comment. EPO indicated it had no comments on the report; JPO had no comment on the draft report. The report was published by the U.S. Chamber of Commerce and the Department of commerce. the draft, and JPO provided technical comments that we incorporated, as appropriate. In its written comments, the Department concurred with our recommendation to work with EPO to identify a target level of consistency for CPC decisions and develop a plan to monitor consistency. The Department noted ongoing efforts to work on the issue with the EPO, and said it is committed to working with the agency to improve the process for the benefit of the public and the taxpayers of the U.S. in the future. methods for measuring the consistency of CPC classifications. As of March 2016, EPO and USPTO had not agreed upon a measure of consistency between the offices. The potential benefits of adopting the new classification system may be reduced as inconsistently classified patents make it more difficult for examiners to identify relevant U.S. and foreign patents, the authors say. They say agencies can enhance and sustain their collaborative efforts by, among other things, not identified a target level of consistency or a plan to monitor consistency. on classifications and aim for a high level of consistency, but it does not include a specific target or method for assessing consistency. USPTO officials told us that they are actively working with EPO to identify ways to measure and improve consistency. Both offices have developed their own defining and articulating a common outcome and establishing mutually reinforcing or joint strategies. If finalized, such metrics and a plan to monitor consistency could allow USPPO to more fully benefit from adopting the new CPC system. The U.S. Patent and Trademark Office is the world's largest patent office. address issues in the thoroughness of examiners’ prior art searches and quality of the agency’s examinations. Federal standards for internal control state that agencies’ monitoring of their internal controls should assess the quality of performance over time. An estimated 23 percent of examiner remained not at all confident to somewhat confident. The report was published by the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants (AICPA) in association with the National Association of State Boards of Examiners (NASB) Internal control activities are the policies, procedures, techniques, and mechanisms that help ensure that actions are taken to address risks. These activities are an integral part of an agency’s planning to achieve effective results and efficiently manage government resources, including the development of new technologies. To see the full report, go to: http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/features/2013/01/30/government-control-activities.html. To read the rest of the report, visit: http:www. DailyMail.com/News/Features/2013-01-30/Government- Control-Activities. All personnel need to possess and maintain a level of competence that allows them to accomplish their assigned duties. Management needs to ensure that skill needs are continually assessed and that the organization is able to respond to the needs of its employees.Personnel Management have previously identified. the need to assess the skill needs of each employee and ensure that they are able to meet those needs. The need to continually assess the skills of each person is a key component of a successful employee management program, according to the U.S. Department of Homeland Security. The agency’s 2015-2018 People Plan, however, does not include measures for monitoring progress in closing gaps. Without monitoring and evaluating progress toward closing any identified gaps in technical competence, the agency says, it will not be able to make progress on its goals. The agency says it will continue to monitor and evaluate the quality of its employees’ work over the next few years. It says the monitoring will be based on the federal standards for internal control, as specified in the 2015-18 People Plan. and maintenance of information systems. Because information technology changes rapidly, the internal control standards note that controls must evolve to remain effective. These standards also highlight the importance of clearly documenting internal controls. Without a documented, periodically updated strategy to evaluate new sources of prior art to include in the system, the standards say, controls will not be as effective as they should be. The standards also say that controls should be clearly documented to ensure that they are not compromised by changes in technology or other external factors. assess and measure each technology center’s progress toward closing any gaps in examiners’ technical knowledge and skills. USPTO officials told us that the technology centers use performance appraisal plans to individually assess examiners' skills and competency gaps. However, doing so does not address the question of whether broader competencies gaps exist at the technology center level or how any gaps can be addressed. In particular, as technologies change, the knowledge and Skills required need to change as well. makes the overall workforce less experienced. The agency’s ability to retain experienced and high-performing employees may prove difficult with continued improvements to the economy. Because of these factors, the technical knowledge and skills needed in a technology center may differ from the ones needed in the rest of the workforce. USPTO’S 2015-2018 People Plan notes that that the agency's ability to retaining experienced andhigh-performing workers may prove hard. The plan also notes that the federal government may have to increase the number of employees in technology centers. would help the agency define and prioritize its strategies for closing any competency gaps, such as through training or other efforts. These steps, in conjunction with developing measures to monitor progress toward closing any gaps, would help USPTO address the effects of evolving technologies and workforce changes over time. It would also help the U.S. Postal Service address the effect of evolving technology on its services. It is hoped that this information will help the Postal Service make better decisions about how to serve the public. has taken steps to identify the technical competencies of various examiner positions and to offer voluntary technical training opportunities to examiners. However, the agency has not conducted an overall analysis of the technical competence of its examiners to identify potential competency gaps. Periodically conducting such analyses of examiners in each technology center match those necessary; develop strategies to address any gaps identified, such as a technical training strategy; and establish measures to monitor progress toward closing any gaps. We provided a draft of this report to the Department of Commerce for its review and comment. interpret written technical materials, rules, regulations, instructions, and reports. Specific technical competencies vary depending on the technology examined by each technology center and art unit. USPTO offers three programs, all of which are voluntary for examiners. Technology centers provide technology-specific training through paid vendors, periodic internal meetings, and individual examiners assigned to that center.. Without periodically evaluating gaps between the technical. competence of examiners and the knowledge and skills needed in each technology. center, USpTO cannot ensure that it has appropriate strategies, such as training or other efforts, to close any gaps. Patent examiners may move from one technology center or art unit to another during their careers. There are also times when patent examiners are ultimately assigned to a different technology center upon completion of their initial training than the assignment given. Of examiners, USPTO officials say the role of examiners will evolve as they learn more about the technology they will be working with in the future. For more information, go to patentexaminers.org or call 1-800-847-8255. (61 percent) did not have a degree beyond a bachelor’s degree when hired. USPTO officials told us that the agency has aimed to match new hires’ previous work experiences and educational backgrounds to technology centers. When we asked how often examiners in each technology center have technical work experience, the agency said it doesn’t have a specific number for that reason but that it tries to match up new hires with their previous work experience and backgrounds to the technology center.