matter, according to State.matter. Phase I of mandate review covered all mandates 5 years old or older and not renewed that originated from the General Assembly. Member states agreed to set aside 74 completed mandates and requested more information from the Secretariat on 15 mandates. No agreement was reached on the remaining mandates, and no mandates were consolidated or eliminated as a result of the review. Phase II review of mandates to include mandates both renewed and not renew. The planned approach was to review mandates by thematic cluster.  Phase II was delayed by the lack of a co-chair on the Informal Working Group on Mandate Review from January 2007 to April 2007 and again from July to October 2007. In October 2007, the process was far from complete, with only one person remaining on the Working Group. For more information on the Mandate review process, visit the Mandate Review Project website. for more information, visit the MandateReview Project website or visit http://www.mandatereviewproject.org/. and activities (known as mandates) in 2007, no actions have been taken to eliminate or consolidate mandates. Member states continue to disagree on the scope and process of the review and lack the capacity to carry out the review, according to State. Consultations among member states on how to move of the organization have diminished substantially due to member states’ ongoing disagreements, State says. In addition, the review has not advanced due to the lack of capacity among memberStates to evaluate the mandates in a substantive way. new approach is necessary for the review and that it would be meaningless to proceed unless member states identify a process that can achieve meaningful results. State also informed us that there was no implementation plan for mandate review. New parameters for the continuation of the mandate review process have been set out by the European Commission. The European Commission has been asked to provide a report by the end of the year on the progress made in the review of the EU's mandate. The report is expected to be made public by end of July. in the review and what to do with any savings generated by the potential elimination or consolidation of mandates, which led to limited or slow progress. Members of the G-77 contended that the scope of the review should include only those mandates 5 years old or older that have not been eliminated or consolidated. The review is expected to be completed by the end of the year or early next year, according to a report by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) The report is based on a request from the HHS. has not developed comprehensive long-term implementation plans for some management reform proposals. Establishing implementation plans is a practice that increases the transparency and accountability of the reform process. We previously recommended that State work with other member states to encourage the General Assembly and the Secretary-General to include cost estimates and expected time frames for implementation and completion of each reform effort as it is approved. During our current review, we found little evidence that time frames, completion dates, and cost and savings estimates for completing the long- term implementation of specific management reforms had been established. management reforms, including (1) disagreements among member states about the implications of the reforms. The difficulty of holding managers accountable for completing reform efforts due to the absence of time frames and cost estimates, and (3) administrative policies and procedures that could complicate the implementation process. Since October 2006, since the start of the reform process in 2006, the European Commission has been working with the European Union on a number of key issues. The European Commission is currently working on a plan to implement the reforms by the end of 2012. for certain administrative services, such as payroll processes, staff benefit administration, and information technology support. The overall restrictiveness of these policies and procedures continues to complicate the management reform process. Since our October 2006 report, competing priorities within the Secretariat and General have become more pronounced. The Secretariat is responsible for managing the National Security Agency. The General has responsibility for overseeing the NSA’s operations in the United States and around the world. The NSA has a budget of more than $1.2 billion. of the approximately 20 cost-benefit analyses and other assessments of management reform issues that the Secretariat had planned to complete by March 2007 have not yet been submitted to the General Assembly. As a result, the total long-term costs of the reform efforts, including the U.S. government’s share, remain unclear. certain management reform initiatives were approximately $40 million. Since then, due to additional actions taken during the 61st session, the revised cost estimate, as of October 2007, had risen by about $13 million to approximately $53 million. the full implementation of the 1997 reforms, the Secretary- General released a second set of reform initiatives. In February 2004, we reported that 60 percent of the 88 reform initiatives in the 1997 agenda and 38 percent of. the 2004 agenda had been implemented. We reported in February 2004 that 60% of the 1988 reform initiatives had been completed and 38% had been. implemented. In March 2004, the U.N. Secretary-General announced a new set of reforms, some expanding on those introduced in 1997 and others reflecting new priorities. some steps have been taken on the reform effort, while others remain. Substantial progress: There is evidence that the reform efforts have been mostly or fully implemented. Some progress has been made, but there is still work to be done. There is still a long way to go before the reforms are fully implemented, but some steps have already been taken. There has been significant progress in some areas, but more work is needed in other parts of the country. There are still many challenges to be overcome, however. by reducing the number of sections in the budget from 35 sections to 13, and provided detailed information on this proposal in May 2006. However, as of October 2007, the General Assembly had not taken action on the proposal. Other financial management reform proposals that have not been adopted include reducing the size of the state budget by 20% and reducing the state's share of the national budget by 10%. The proposal was not adopted. The proposal also proposed reducing the amount of state-owned property to be sold to the private sector. believe that the cost estimates and the associated funds that the General Assembly has appropriated to date for reform efforts are sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report. We conducted our work from March to November 2007 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. 1. During our review, we found no evidence that any of the claims made in this report were substantiated. 2. We found that no evidence of any wrongdoing by any member of the House of Representatives or the Senate. 3. We did not find any evidence of wrongdoing by anyone in the House or Senate. The UN has taken actions to improve some of the management operations of the Secretariat. Many reform proposals still have not moved forward. Issues that are currently unclear include operational procedures, such as establishing lines of did not submit the reports mainly because the reorganization of the DPKO created several procurement-related concerns that have not yet been addressed. Some progress has been spring 2007 session, as planned. The General Assembly did not address these issues because the new Secretary-General concurrently proposed a reorganization. human resource issues such as recruiting and staffing, conditions of service, and contractual arrangements. The General Assembly did not consider these issues, which are currently rescheduled for consideration during the next General Assembly. However, because of the General Assembly’s focus on the reorganization of the DPKO and other issues during that time frame, the issues were not considered. The issue of the future of the Department of Public Works was not discussed during the session. The next session of the Assembly will be held on November 14. as meeting the development needs and aspirations of the staff. A one-time staff buyout could enable the Secretary-General to realign staff to meet the UN’s changing priorities, while facilitating retirement or separation of staff who can no longer meet their career aspirations. The General Assembly considered the report during its meeting in New York last week. The report was presented to the General Assembly by the UN's Human Rights Council and the UN Human Rights Commission. It was presented as part of a wider report on the future of the UN. the 61st session and, in large part, postponed making decisions on key issues. For example, in a January 2007 resolution, the General Assembly postponed decisions regarding streamlining contractual arrangements and harmonizing conditions of service. Also, since its May 2006 rejection of the concept of a one-time staff buyout, the Assembly has rejected the idea of such a move. The General Assembly has also rejected the proposed one- time staff buyouts. The Assembly has postponed decisions on streamlining contracts and harmonized conditions ofService. The Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions is a subsidiary organ of the General Assembly. It consists of 16 members appointed by the assembly in their individual capacity. The functions and responsibilities of the advisory committee include advising the General assembly concerning any administrative and budgetary matters referred to it. The committee advises the assembly on all matters relating to administrative and budgetary matters. The members of the committee are appointed in their own capacity by the general assembly and serve until the end of the Assembly's five-year term. Fifth Committee is the General Assembly’s committee for administrative and budgetary matters and is composed of all 192 member states. Figure 6 depicts the typical management reform decision-making process at the UN for issues requiring General Assembly approval. We reported in October 2006 that the Secretariat's estimated costs for implementing management reform were in excess of $1.5 billion per year. The figure is based on a report by the UN Secretariat that was leaked to the press in April 2006. The report was based on an anonymous source who was not authorized to speak for the UN. of the nine clusters addressed. On September 17, 2007, the General Assembly adopted an oral decision to continue consultations among member states on how to proceed with mandate review in the 62nd session. State officials told us that a mandate review would take place in the next session of the United Nations General Assembly, which will be held in September 2009. The U.N. General Assembly is expected to hold its 62nd General Assembly in September, and will consider a new mandate for the UN Security Council. retaining budget surpluses for use in subsequent periods, charging interest on arrears of member states’ assessed contributions, and creating a separate account to cover certain unanticipated expenditures arising from exchange rate fluctuations and inflation. The Secretariat has prepared a number of reports that the General Assembly is scheduled to review. The reports are to be published in advance of the Assembly’s next session on September 26 and 27. The General Assembly will also consider a proposal to create a special fund to cover unanticipated expenses. accountability, delegation of authority, and the responsibilities of the Departments of Management and Peacekeeping Operations. Because of the reorganization, announced by the Secretary-General in February 2007, the Secretariat did not submit several reports on procurement during the 61st session. According to Secretariat officials, they the General Assembly has not taken steps to redefine the role of the Deputy Secretary- General to assume formal authority and accountability for the management and overall direction of the operational functions of the secretariat. General Assembly has rejected some proposed reforms and taken no action on others. For example, to improve cash management and operational flexibility, the Secretary-General proposed that peacekeeping accounts be consolidated. In July 2007, the General Assembly rejected this proposal. The Secretary-general also proposed to improve strategic budgetary planning and implementation. The General Assembly also rejected a proposal to consolidate peacekeeping funds into a single account. The proposal was rejected in July 2007 and no action has been taken on it since. For more information, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/07/30/world/united-keeping-peacekeeping-reforms-reform. Assembly have limited the capacity of General Assembly members to address the remaining management reform issues. In February 2007, for example, several procurement-related reform issues were not taken into consideration by the General Assembly during the session. Some issues, such as clear lines of responsibility and accountability, delegation of authority, and internal controls, weren't taken into account by the Assembly. The General Assembly is expected to meet again in February 2009 to discuss the future of the United Nations in the Middle East and North Africa. reorganize the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, that limit the capacity of General Assembly members to address management reform issues. Disagreements within the General Assembly continue to limit the implementation of management reforms. Progress on UN management reform efforts is dependent in large part on member states reaching consensus, which can only be reached if there is a consensus on the issue. The UN is committed to working with member states to improve the quality of peacekeeping operations and to ensure the safety and security of the world's troops. been made in strengthening the procedures for its procurement staff and suppliers, developing a comprehensive training program for procurement staff, and developing a risk management framework. However, the UN has made little or no progress in establishing an independent bid protest system and creating a lead agency concept for procurements. Assembly’s approval of the creation of an independentbid protest system was a critical first step toward enhancing transparency in the UN's procurement award process. Per our methodology, approval of a protest system, while demonstrating intent, is not equivalent to actual implementation of the system. for consideration of subsequent legal action. It has also recommended civil recovery of monetary damages. As of October 2007, an independent bid protest system had not been established. It limits the transparency of the procurement process by not providing a means for the protest of a bid to be heard. The lack of an independentbid protest system limits the Transparency of the Procurement Process. It does not provide a Means for the Protest of a Bid to be Heard by the Bidder. It also does not allow for the Protests of a Proposal to be considered. vendor to protest the outcome of a contract decision to an independent official or office. Such a system would provide reasonable assurance that vendors are treated fairly when bidding. It would also help alert senior UN management to situations involving questions about UN compliance. According to the UN Procurement Division, the system would be in place by 2017. The system would also be in operation by 2018, according to the Procurements Division, by which time the UN would have a more robust system in place. The UN Secretariat has improved the UN procurement process, but a number of reform issues have not moved forward since our October 2006 report. OIOS concluded that its dependence on extra- budgetary funding significantly affects its independence. Some progress has whereby specific UN organizations would procure certain goods and services in order to enhance division of labor, reduce duplication, and reduce costs. The management reform decision-making process at the UN involves multiple entities. For example, when a management reform has budgetary implications, the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions and the Administrative andbudgetary Committee (the Fifth Committee) are involved in the process. transparency in the UN’s procurement award process. However, per our methodology, we categorize this reform effort under “little or no progress” because there was evidence that few or no steps had been taken towards actual implementation of the system. State said it understood that this assessment was consistent with our assessment and understood that it understood the assessment to be consistent with the UN's objective of transparency in the procurement process. The report was published by the U.S. State Department on Wednesday. whose bids were unsuccessful. The UN has made little or no progress in establishing a lead agency concept. Specific UN organizations would procure certain goods and services in order to enhance division of labor, reduce duplication, and reduce costs. For example, the World Food Program might be best suited to provide food aid to developing countries in the region. For more information, visit the UN's website or go to: www.un.org.uk/en/news/features/features-top-stories. to procure items for air transport needs, while the UN Inter-Agency Procurement Services Office might be best at procuring certain vehicles. In a report on procurement reform submitted to the General Assembly in June 2006, the UN projected that implementation of the lead agency concept would take 6 to 12 years. The UN has not yet decided how it will implement the new model of government procurement. The agency is expected to be in place by the end of the year, according to the UN. The UN Secretariat has made some progress in strengthening the operating procedures for its procurement staff and suppliers. In December 2006, the Secretariat issued a bulletin on postemployment restrictions for former UN staff involved in procurement. The bulletin was issued following several incidents in recent years in which of others in procurement- related matters. In May 2007, the UN also issued a revised supplier code of conduct. The code requires that suppliers are responsible for adhering to the post Employment restrictions by not employing ex-UN staff members for at least two years. UN officials and former officials were involved in unethical and improper procurement activities. The December 2006 bulletin requires that former UN staff members, for 1 year following UN employment, are prohibited from accepting employment or compensation from any UN contractor. For 2 years, they are also prohibited from acting on behalf of the UN for the next two years. The bulletin was issued in December 2006 and is available on the UN's Web site. It is available in English and Spanish. For more information on the bulletin, visit: http://www.un.org.uk/news/press-releases/2006/decision-to-eliminate-the-university-of-scientists-and-technologists-from-the United Nations. months. The General Assembly did not approve a proposal to adopt the concept. In the absence of the General Assembly’s approval, Procurement Division officials told us they have established informal relationships with several UN organizations that, under current rules and regulations, facilitate the procurement of certain items. The U.S. government has not said whether it plans to use the concept in the future, but officials say they are looking into the possibility of using it in the near future, if it becomes necessary. The UN Procurement Division has made some progress in developing a comprehensive training program. The program is not expected to be formally in place until early 2008. The training is part of a development plan to provide a career path for procurement staff. Those who complete the training will be eligible to be certified by internationally recognized procurement institutions. In addition, according to UN procurement officials, all procurement staff will be trained in contracting, acquisition, and other specialized subjects. It is expected that the training program will be completed by the end of the year. a draft process, which includes an emphasis on best practices from public- and private-sector procurements, is expected to be finalized by the first quarter of 2008. Procurement Division officials told us that, in the meantime, they have enhanced communications with vendors, including developing a more systematic debriefing procedure for vendors. The draft process will be released to the public by the end of the year, and to the vendors by the beginning of next year, officials said. For confidential support, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org. progress in its efforts to develop a risk management framework. In July 2007, a Planning, Compliance, and Monitoring Section was established. A chief was appointed to establish tools to detect potential transaction problems and minimize risks. Also, a proposal for implementing the concept of best-value-for-money is under development. The U.S. Federal Reserve Bank of New York is the largest bank in the world by assets, with $1.2 trillion in assets. The bank has a market value of more than $1 trillion. and expected to be put into practice by the Procurement Division in March 2008. In addition, the UN Department of Management is in the initial planning stages of establishing a UN-wide risk management framework, known as the Enterprise Risk Management concept. However, as of September 2007, the concept is still in the planning stages and is not expected to become a reality until at least 2008. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. The position of chief information technology officer (CITO) was created by the General Assembly in August 2006. The official took office in September 2007. The leadership of a CITO is necessary to help ensure greater integration of the Secretariat’s workflow and knowledge management by allowing it to be managed by a single person. The position was filled in July 2007, and the official was sworn in on September 1, 2007. For more information on the position, visit www.citto.org.uk. program objectives to be integrated with budgetary and financial data into one process. The goal is to enable the Secretariat to act more transparently and efficiently in managing staff and procuring goods and services of greater quality and quantity, at lower levels of risk. The CITO is especially important at a time when the country's economy is in a recession and the country is facing a financial crisis. It is also important at the time when many of the world's economies are in a downturn and the world is facing an economic crisis. The UN is in the process of developing a new organizationwide information system. Creation of the ERP has been in the planning process for several years. The Secretariat plans to present reports on information technology to the General Assembly during the 2014 session of the UN General Assembly. The ERP planning process was ongoing, a CITO had not yet been named, and the Secretariat was still collecting data on technology and other issues, officials say. The report was not submitted to UN officials, according to Secretariat officials. Secretariat had not selected the firm that will implement the new system. According to UN officials, the Secretariat is expected to announce a decision in 2008. The Secretary-General did not submit a comprehensive report on information management, including cost estimates, in March 2007, as requested by the General Assembly. according to the UN officials. The decision on the new information management system will be made in 2008, the UN said in a statement on Monday. It is expected that the decision will not be made until the end of the year. The Secretary-General released a report entitled Investing in People that included a human resources management framework. The report included discussions of several human resources issues and specifically stated that staff mobility is essential to creating a more-versatile, Assembly. Such guidance, some of which has been in existence for decades, is part of the UN’s existing resource management framework that still lacks flexibility and is largely headquarters-based, though more than more than a decade old. The UN has a long history of developing human resources policies and programs. has issued several reports with proposals that, if implemented, could improve some human resource functions. However, the proposals are, in large part, still awaiting General Assembly review. In late September 2006—too late for inclusion—the Secretariat has not completed reviews and analyses of other human resource reform proposals. In addition, the Secretariat hasn't completed analyses and reviews of other proposals that have been submitted to the General Assembly in the past. The Secretariat also has not yet completed analyses of proposals that were submitted in September 2006. capacity of its evaluations and inspections sections. The office has shifted several nonoversight related functions to the UN Department of Management, including its consulting function. In 2006, in 2006, the evaluation capacity of the office was increased to 1.5 million people, up from 1.2 million in 2005. The evaluation capacity was increased by 1.4 million people in 2005, up by 1 million from the previous year. It was also increased by 2,000 people in 2006. In 2007, it increased its evaluation capacity by 1,000 to 1,500 people. multiskilled, experienced staff capable of handling the UN’s operations, which have changed dramatically in the last 20 years. An effective career development policy serves both the UN and its staff members by building and maintaining an international civil service capable of meeting the UN's present and future needs, as well as meeting its future needs. The UN is committed to building a world that is safe and secure for all, with a focus on women and children. It is also committed to creating a more secure and prosperous world for all. management operations that the General Assembly is expected to consider during the current (62nd) session. Various factors have slowed the UN’s efforts to improve the management of the Secretariat. Many remaining UN management reforms cannot move forward until these factors are addressed. The UN has made some progress in improving human resource functions. Since we issued our October 2006 report, the UN Secretariat been proposed, but progress remains to be seen. Half of the UN's staff are currently serving in the field. The Secretariat has not addressed several other administrative policies and procedures issues. into an efficient organization focused on achieving results as it carried out its mandates. In May 2000, we reported that while the Secretary-General had substantially reorganized the Secretariat’s leadership and structure, he had not yet completed reforms in human resource management and planning and budgeting. In September 2002, to encourage more efficiency, we published a report entitled ‘The Secretariat: A New Look’. The report was based on interviews with senior officials at the U.N. Office for the Coordination of Human Resources. In October 2006, we reported slow progress in five key UN management reform areas. We selected ethics, oversight, management operations of the Secretariat, and review of programs and activities (known as mandates) The UN has taken steps to improve organizational ethics since the reforming UN management. Numerous reform proposals were put forward by the UN, but none have been implemented. The progress of UN reform efforts has varied from little or no progress to substantial progress in the five areas we reviewed. The UN is committed to improving its procurement workforce, and had not adopted specific ethics guidance. In April 2006, we reported on weaknesses in the UN’s oversight and procurement systems. We found that UN 2007 session, without which member states told us they were unable to formally consider certain procurement-related reform issues. Reforming the management of the United Nations has been a priority of the U.S. government for many years, as long-standing weaknesses and inefficiencies in UN management functions have persisted. Although there has been some progress, there is still a long way to go. The UN has made little or no progress in reforming its internal justice system. A 2006 report by an independent external panel of experts said the system was outdated, ineffective, and compromised. The panel’s report concluded that effective reform of the UN is not possible without an efficient, independent, and well-resourcedInternal justice system that safeguards the rights of staff members and effectively helps ensure the accountability of managers and staff members. Although the General Assembly agreed on the need for reform, little progress has been made. whether certain UN services could be improved. Among the services are internal printing and publishing processes; medical insurance plan administration; information technology support; payables, receivables, and payroll processes. Subsequently, the Secretariat initiated several projects to address these reform proposals but has not completed its analyses. The Secretariat has not issued a comprehensive report on public access to UN documentation, which the General Assembly requested be submitted during the 61st session. It is currently collecting data from staff participants in the UN medical plan and reviewing alternative delivery methods for payroll and other functions. In addition, the office reported that it is conducting a review to determine whether financial disclosures should be required of officials other than those of the Secretariat. Steps have been taken to improve UN oversight capabilities. After almost 2 years of discussions that included negotiating its composition and responsibilities, member states have agreed to a new UN Security Council resolution. The resolution was approved by the UN General Assembly on July 31, 2013. It was the first vote in the new council's history and the first since it was created in 2003. the Secretariat’s Office of Legal Affairs, despite a July 2006 external evaluation's recommendation to shift the investigations function to a department in the Secretariat. OIOS argued that such a shift would significantly diminish the UN's oversight functions by potentially compromising the independence of investigations and creating a potential conflict of interest. The Secretariat's Office of legal affairs argued that shifting investigations to a separate department would diminish oversight functions and create a potential Conflict of Interest Problem. The UN's Office for Legal Affairs argued that a shift to a new department would compromise the independent nature of investigations. The Secretariat developed a detailed policy proposal that includes resource requirements, financing mechanisms, and proposal of a fee structure. However, according to Secretariat officials, the Secretary-General intends to discuss the proposal with member states before formally submitting it. Although UN member states agreed to continue a review of UN programs, they said they would continue to look at how to improve the effectiveness of the UN system across the globe. The proposal is expected to be submitted to the UN Security Council by the end of the year. UN mandates, and some member states are concerned that mandates important to them will be eliminated. For that reason, no mandates have been eliminated or consolidated as a result of the reviews. Representatives of member states we spoke with repeatedly stated that they are not concerned about mandates being eliminated or consolidating. The goal of the process is to make sure that mandates are not eliminated, or consolidated, but rather, to make them more effective. The U.S. State Department says the goal is to improve the efficiency of the United Nations. 1 year following a staff member’s separation from the UN. A proposal to increase the minimum threshold for contracts required to be reviewed by the Headquarters Committee on Contracts from $200,000 to $500,000 has not been approved. OIOS previously recommended that the threshold be increased, and, according to Procurement, the committee has not yet approved the increase. The threshold has been set at $100,000 for the first year, and $150,000 after that. efforts because of the recentness of their implementation. Little or no progress: There is evidence that few or no steps have been taken on the reform effort. Some progress: Some progress has been made in establishing an independent bid protest system for the UN. We categorize this reform effort under “little or no Progress’ because there was evidence that little or no implementation steps had been taken. As State notes in its comments, our assessment is that the UN has made little orno progress in establishing a bid protests system. Social Council, and the Security Council. We did not include in our review reforms targeted at UN specialized agencies or UN funds and programs. We also excluded efforts such as the UN Peace Building Commission and Security Council and governance reforms. We didn't evaluate the effectiveness of the reform. The report was published by the United Nations Human Rights Council on Tuesday. It was published in response to a request from the UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for a review of the UN's human rights record. awaiting General Assembly review or had been recently approved. Many of the proposed or approved reforms lacked an implementation plan with time frames and cost estimates for the goals stated in the 2005 outcome document. We also identified several factors that could affect the UN’s ability to fully implement the goals of the 2005 outcomes document, such as lack of funding and lack of time frames for implementation of the goals. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. during the current (62nd) session and is reviewing other proposed reform actions, such as the management of trust funds. The UN has made little or no progress in improving the delivery of certain services. In May 2006, the General Assembly asked the Secretary-General to conduct several cost-benefit analyses to determine the best way to improve the UN's services to the poorest people in the poorest parts of the world. The U.N. has been criticised for not doing enough to help the poor in the developing world. observers of the UN system, including nongovernmental organizations and members of academia. Many cost estimates for the proposed reform initiatives are preliminary, and detailed longer-term cost estimates are being developed. We did not analyze the assumptions underlying these estimates to determine whether they are reasonable and reliable. However, we did look at some of the preliminary cost estimates and found them to be reasonable and accurate. We also looked at the cost estimates of the proposed reforms and found that some of them were accurate. of the system is expected to start in 2008. During the planning process, the UN has worked with potential vendors to help ensure that the new system, when implemented, will adequately support the global functions of the UN. As of October 2007, the system was expected to be fully operational by the end of the year. The system will be used to support the UN's ever-growing number of peacekeeping missions, including a number of new peacekeeping operations. It will be available to the world's governments and military forces. the Ombudsman would be nominated and selected, and what resources would be needed. According to the Secretariat, member states aim to implement the new system by January 2009. Since our October 2006 report, the UN has made little or no progress in improving certain budgetary and financial management functions. The UN has also failed to make any progress on a number of other key issues, such as child protection and the environment. The U.N. has also been slow to act on a raft of other issues, including climate change, the environment and human rights. The UN is composed of 192 diverse member states that have differing views on a wide array of issues. In October 2006, we reported that disagreements between A State official told us the process appears to be a “credible effort” by member states. However, he added that other member states’ views on this initiative and the potential of the initiative to overcome disagreements among member states are unclear. The UN’s management reform decision-making process for issues requiring General Assembly approval. Calls to reform the UN began soon after its creation in 1945. Despite cycles of reform, UN member states continue to have concerns about inefficient management operations. As the largest contributor of 192 member states, the U.S. has played a significant role in promoting UN management reform, including calling for reform of the UN Security Council. The United States has called for the UN to be reformed to make it more accountable and accountable to its member states. The U.N. has been criticized for failing to address the problem of inefficient management in the past. 62nd session. reforming these and other human resource functions is likely to continue to be difficult because of long-standing disagreements among member states. U.S. and UN officials and most of the 17 member state delegates we spoke with said reforming these will be difficult. The UN has made some progress in improving information technology. But the UN has not made any significant progress in reforming its human resource function since the 1970s. The U.N. has a long way to go before it can make any real progress on these issues. 15 of the 17 delegations told us that the number one challenge to continued progress on management reform efforts is member state disagreements on the priorities and importance of the remaining reform efforts. For example, member states continue to disagree on the scope and process of the review of the management of the Eurozone. The European Commission is working with member states to agree on a framework for future management reform of the eurozone. The aim is to make the eurozone a more open and transparent place for business and investment in the long term. Completion of the reform agenda will require overcoming several factors, particularly disagreements among member states. Some past reform efforts remain incomplete because they did not get sustained and broad support. The current effort faces this same risk. While implementation is a necessary element in meeting the goals of the 2005 World Summit outcome document, it is not in itself sufficient. It is important to ensure that the reforms are implemented in a way that meets the needs of the world. The reform agenda should be completed by the end of the year or early 2015. G-77 and developed countries over the broader implications of management reforms may affect the UN’s ability to fully implement them. In these a clear need for more constructive engagement on reform efforts, particularly between the United States and G-77 countries. For example, four member states have launched the Four Nations Initiative in an effort to provide new ideas and perspectives on governance and management of the UN Secretariat. The initiative is led by Chile, South Africa, Sweden, and Thailand and aims to improve governance at the UN. the 66 initiatives in the 2002 agenda were in place. In 2004 and 2005, a series of UN and expert task force reports recommended a comprehensive reform of UN management and the UN human rights apparatus. In September 2005, world leaders gathered at the UN World Summit in New York to discuss global issues such as UN reform, development, and human rights. The outcome document from the World Summit, endorsed by all members of the UN, outlines broad UN reform efforts in areas such as oversight and accountability. reforms: (1) disagreements among member states on UN management reform efforts. (2) lack of comprehensive implementation plans for some management reform proposals. (3) administrative policies and procedures that continue to complicate the process of implementing certain complex human resource initiatives. (4) competing UN priorities, such as the proposal to. The UN currently has no formal plan to evaluate the effectiveness of its management reform. efforts to determine whether they have achieved the goals set out in the 2005 World Summit outcome document. Oil for Food Program Provides Lessons for Future Sanctions and Ongoing Reform. United Nations: Internal Oversight and Procurement Controls and Processes Need Strengthening. UN: Funding Arrangements Impede Independence of Internal Auditors. U.N.: Lessons Learned from Oil for food Program Indicate the Need to Strengthen UN Internal Controls and Oversight. U,N.: Preliminary Observations on Internal Oversight. andprocurement Practices. U Nations: Preliminary observations on Internal. Oversight and. Procurements Practices. Practices. GAO-07-597. Washington, D.C.: June 18, 2007. United Nations: Management Reforms. Progressing Slowly with Many Awaiting General Assembly Review. U.N.: Oil for Food Program Audits. GAE-05-392T. Washington,. D.c.: March 2, 2005. United States: U.S. Oil for food Program Auditors. GAo-06-877t. Washington. D.S.: June 20, 2006. United. Nations: Sustained Oversight. forward on the issue will continue into the 62nd session. Progress in reviewing UN programs and activities is shown in figure 5. In 2005, UN member states agreed to complete a review of all UN mandates with the goal of strengthening and updating them to more accurately reflect the needs and the U.S. Permanent Representative to the UN include in State’s annual report an assessment of the effectiveness of the reforms. We requested comments on a draft of this report from the Department of State and the UN Secretariat. The UN Secretariat did not provide written comments. State endorsed the main findings and conclusions of our report and noted that our assessment of UN progress on management reform efforts was accurate and balanced. To identify factors slowing the progress of the UN reforms we examined, we reviewed reports and documentation of the Secretariat, General Assembly, OIOS, and the ethics office. State also agreed fully with the need any differences in their initial assessments. Finally, they met with us and confirmed that we were all in agreement on our assessments. evaluation methodology. State and the UN Secretariat provided technical comments that we have incorporated into the report, as appropriate. We are sending copies of this report to interested congressional committees, the Secretary of State, and the U.S. Permanent Representative to the United Nations. We will also make copies of the report available to interested members of Congress and the public, if they wish to see it. The report will be released to the public on Monday, November 14. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. We obtained and reviewed official reports of the Secretariat and the Office of Internal Oversight Services (OIOS) We also interviewed senior officials from addition, we spoke with UN officials in New York. We also met with representatives from several member states and spoke with U.S. officials in Washington, D.C., and New York, among other things. In addition to the documents, we also interviewed outside officials from the United Nations, including the U.N. Security Council, the European Union, and other countries. In July 1997, the Secretary-General proposed a broad reform agenda to transform the UN UN departments in New York City. The United States, through the Department of State in Washington, D.C., and the U.S. Mission to the United Nations in New New York, continues to advocate reform of UN management processes. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. For support on suicide matters call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. to keep Congress informed of the effectiveness of management reforms, adding that the department will continue to monitor and inform Congress, as we recommended. State agreed with us that more could be done to ensure credible oversight at the UN. Furthermore, State noted that we correctly recognize the importance of the UN as a source of humanitarian aid to the world, and that we should continue to work with the UN to improve the quality of humanitarian assistance to the region and around the world. The U.S. State Department also agreed that we need to do more to ensure that the UN is transparent and accountable to the international community. This report was written by Sarah Chankin-Gould, Debbie J. Chung, Lyric Winona Clark, and George Taylor. Michael Derr, Etana Finkler, Grace Lui, Amanda Miller, and Jena Sinkfield provided technical assistance. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. 5 individuals, preferably from a pool of at least 10 candidates proposed by member states, based on regional and geographical representation and selected by the General Assembly. An evaluation process for candidates through consultations with an external relevant institution, such as the International Organization of Supreme Audit Institutions. membership of the European Economic Community, the European Union and the Council of Europe. The European Union is the largest economy in the world, with a GDP of more than $1.2 trillion, according to the World Bank. The EU is the second largest economy after the United States. "We also met with representatives from 17 of 192 member states representing various geographic regions," he said. "We wanted to obtain a balance of views on the most critical challenges to the world," he added. The UN has 192 members, including Africa, Asia, Europe, the Middle East, North America, and South America. The U.S. is one of the largest economies in the world, with more than 1.2 billion people, according to the U.N.'s World Economic Forum. The report will be available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staffs have any questions about this report, please contact me at (202) 512-9601 or melitot@GAo. Department of the Treasury's Office of Inspector General for Standards and Practice at (844) 615-4157. The report will also be available on the U.S. Treasury Department's website at www.treasury.gov/ inspectorgeneral for standards and practice. had with State, UN, and other officials. After we made our initial assessments of progress, three other GAO staff members not involved in this review used the evidence and the categories to make their own assessments independently of each other. These staff members then met with each other to reconcile the two sets of assessments. The GAO and the State Department are working together to find a solution to the problem of U.S. underfunding of the U.N. peacekeeping force in Afghanistan.  IAAC would focus primarily on the work of OIOS while taking into account the work plans of the other UN oversight bodies. State Department officials told us they were satisfied overall with the creation of IAAC despite the various compromises. The five members of the newly created IAAC were elected for a term of 3 years, with the possibility of one- time re-election. The IAAC’s responsibilities include, but are not limited to examining the adequacy of OiOS's budget. states established an Independent Audit Advisory Committee (IAAC) in June 2007. The UN has made some progress in creating IAAC, but the committee is not expected to be operational until January 2008. The Office of Internal Oversight Services (OIOS) has strengthened the capacity of its internal audit, investigation, and evaluations and inspections sections. However, OIOS funding arrangements continue to constrain the office’s ability to audit high-risk areas, and the General Assembly has not authorized OIos’‘s financial and operational independence. Member states disagreed on some of the initially proposed responsibilities of IAAC. The U.S. wanted IAAC to be responsible for assessing the work of all UN oversight bodies, including the UN Board of Auditors and the UN Joint Inspection Unit. Both bodies strongly resisted having IAAC oversee their respective functions, and it was ultimately decided that IAAC would not be responsible. The United States and several other countries had originally favored that candidates for membership be referred by the International Organization of Supreme Audit Institutions. Other member states disagreed. of UN oversight capabilities based on best practices in the private sector as well as the experiences of other international institutions. membership of the committee based on the committee’s terms of reference. These terms include the following guidelines and requirements: membership of IAAC, based on its terms ofreference, and membership of a panel of experts from the UN, the EU, and other countries. The committee will have the power to make recommendations to the UN Security Council on issues relating to human rights and the rule of law. must negotiate funding for nearly two-thirds of its budget with the entities it is chartered to audit. Without operational independence, OIOS is constrained in its ability to prevent or mitigate risks to the UN’s resources and personnel. These risks include fraud, waste, abuse, inefficiencies, and mismanagement. In April 2006, we reported that UN funding arrangements adversely affect OI OS’S budgetary independence and constrain its able to audit high-risk areas. For example, the managers of the funds, programs, and other entities it audits can deny OIos permission to perform work or not pay. OIOS has strengthened the capacity of its internal audit, investigation, and evaluations and inspections sections. Funding arrangements at OIOS continue to impede the independence of internal auditors. OIos is designed to be an operationally independent entity responsible for assisting the Secretary-General in fulfilling his internal oversight. It has combined two previously separated internal audit divisions in New York and Geneva within its New York-Geneva section. The Geneva-New York section was strengthened by the addition of two posts to increase the number of evaluations that can be undertaken. plan; advising on the effectiveness, efficiency, and impact of OIOS’s audit and advising the General Assembly on potential oversight issues. The guidelines and requirements represent a compromise among the member states, according to member state representatives and State responsibilities of the resources and staff of the UN through internal audit, monitoring, inspection, evaluation, and investigations. However, OI OS faces two conflicts that have been impeding its independence: (1) OIos’ budget is subject to the review of the Department of Management, and (2) the Board of Auditors has oversight responsibility. and communication technology section, which has developed an audit strategy and conducted risk assessments. Several steps have also been taken to improve OIOS’s investigations division. Member states decided to keep investigations in OI OS rather than move it to a portion of its functions. This reliance does not allow the division to focus its attention on the areas of highest risk and constrains the implementation of its audit work plan. For example, it reported that OiOS is unable to provide reasonable assurance that all high-risk areas have been identified. a single division. OIOS established a professional practices section. The section is fully staffed with six regular staff and three general services staff. It is responsible for (1) implementing the risk assessment framework, (2) implementing a quality assurance program, (3) devising productivity tools, and (4) improving performance reporting to management. It also established an information division. The information division was responsible for developing the company’s information technology platform. It was fully staffed and fully equipped with seven full-time employees. Since 2006, about 16 new posts have been created for the investigations division. OIOS has established a separate special investigations task force for sexual exploitation and abuse. The organisation has also made progress in reducing its range of functions and improving the quality of its services. It has also established a procurement investigationstask force. The organization has also created a special investigation task force to look at procurement issues. It also has a new special investigations team to look into the procurement process. The new special investigation team will focus on procurement and procurement-related issues. OIOS for services. Discussion of the revision of OIOS’s funding arrangements was deferred from the 61st to the 62nd session of the General Assembly due to a lack of consensus on funding issues. State and OIos generally agreed with our overall findings and recommendations. In its report to the 63rd General Assembly, OI OS said it was ‘unconvinced’ of the need to revise its funding arrangements. The General Assembly is expected to vote on a new funding formula in the coming months. funding arrangements constrained the ability of the UN Secretariat’s Office of Internal Oversight Services (OIOS) to operate independently. OIOS pointed out that serious deficiencies in internal controls have left the UN susceptible to mismanagement and fraud, particularly regarding procurement activities in Sudan and Congo. The UN lacked an effective organizational structure for managing procurement, had not demonstrated that it was effective, and had not shown that its internal audit division was performing as it was supposed to. The report found that the UN continues to rely directly on organizations funded from extra-budgetary resources to provide the resources. session on its activities between July 1, 2006, and June 30, 2007. OIOS reiterated that the UN does not yet have a formal and structural internal control framework that would provide reasonable assurance to management that its financial resources are being handled effectively and that its objectives are being achieved. The UN has been accused of mismanaging its finances since the financial crisis of 2008. The U.S. government has accused the U.N. of mismanagement since the 2008 financial crisis. The United States has also accused the UN of misusing its funds since 2008. in the planning stages, time frames and costs for its implementation have not been established, and risks associated with procurement activities remain. For example, the OIOS Procurement Task Force reported in October 2007 that it had found multiple instances of fraud, waste, and mismanagement. The task force also found 10 instances of corruption and fraud in the government's procurement process. The Task Force's findings were published in the October 2007 issue of OIos.com, a quarterly publication of the International Organization for Supply Chain Management (OIOS). in cases with an aggregate value of over $610 million—resulting in misappropriation of resources or the unjust enrichment of vendors and their agents in excess of $25 million. The task force reported that a number of cases have been referred to national authorities for criminal prosecution or to the UN. It said the cases involved individuals who had misappropriated or unjustly enriched their vendors and agents over a period of several years. The cases involved people who were involved in the procurement of goods and services, as well as those who were employed by them. need for the UN to establish a formal internal control framework. State notes that the General Assembly’s approval of the creation of an independent bid protest system was a critical first step toward enhancing whistleblower protections. State did not agree with our statement that successful whistleblower protections cannot be established without substantial reform of the UN's internal justice program. We agree with these concerns. As we state in our report, without a fair and impartial whistleblower protection system, it is impossible to have a successful whistleblower protection policy. The UN has made substantial progress in enforcing a whistleblower protection policy. Concerns have been raised about the policy’s lack of jurisdiction over the near future. The ethics office has begun receiving complaints of retaliation, and several concerns have arisen during the handling of cases. The Secretary-General recommended that the General Assembly consider broadening the jurisdiction of the ethics office to UN funds and programs and possibly to specialized agencies. In the past year, the ethicsOffice has hired a permanent director and additional staff and has developed and provided ethics standards, training, and guidance. UN and Government Accountability Project staff told us that some UN staff members might not trust the programs. In August 2007, after initially reviewing a whistleblower retaliation case of an employee at the UN Development Program, the ethics office and the Office of Legal and Procurement Services concluded that the UN’s whistleblower protection policy applies only to employees directly under the Secretary-General. UN and State officials tell us that the whistleblower Protection policy is limited in its effectiveness if it is not applied to the entire UN system. UN and State officials told us another concern about the whistleblower protection policy is its lack of jurisdiction over UN funds and OIOS funds. The office expressed the importance of its inclusion in the justice reform process. In relation to other offices, such as OIos and the Office of the Ombudsman, and the office said it would be important to include the whistleblower policy in the reform process in the future. The whistleblower policy is currently being reviewed by the UN's Human Rights Council and the UN Human Rights Commission. 31, 2007, the ethics office received 52 complaints of whistleblower retaliation. 16 complaints warranted a preliminary review. Two cases were referred to OIOS for further investigation following a determination that a prima facie case of retaliation was made. The ethics office determined that 16 complaints were warranted a Preliminary Review. Of these 16 complaints, two were referred for further Investigation by the Office of the Ethic and Ethical Code of Conduct (OIOS) and the Office for the Ethical and Ethic Code of Practice (EthIC) had been established. Of the remaining 36 complaints, the ethics office determined that 19 fell outside the scope of its responsibilities and/or referred them to other offices. In addition, the office was copied on six complaints that that were outside the office's scope of work. The ethics office provided advice and guidance on more appropriate actions to address 11 complaints. The office was also given guidance on how to respond to six other complaints that were not within its scope of duty. The complaints were filed with the U.S. Department of Justice. current system to be fair or impartial and, consequently, might not come forward with claims of retaliation. 2. Staff may not submit cases to the ethics office. 3. protection against retaliation is linked to the internal justice system. 4. The General State notes that the General. State is considering a new internal justice. system that effectively executes corrective action in cases of. retaliation or threatened retaliation. 5. The proposed new internal. justice system justice system will be based on a new system of internal. accountability. in April 2007 to establish a new internal justice system. Many issues involving organizational relationships, personnel, and funding of the new system are still unclear. As of October 2007, the General Assembly had yet to decide who would be covered by theNew system, how judges within the Office of Justice would be chosen, and how the system would be funded. The new system is expected to be in place by the end of 2007. It will replace the current system, which was in place until the early 1990s. training within the organization, including half-day ethics training workshops for over 3,000 staff members at all levels of the Secretariat. The office has also developed new ethics standards, such as postemployment restrictions standards. In staff in headquarters received ethics training in 2007. As of October 2007, some field staff had received the ethics training and, according to UN officials, the UN expects to have provided the training to all field staff by the end of March 2008. The UN Procurement Division has made some changes to its procurement procedures. reported that it had received 287 requests for services from staff at different levels of the Secretariat between August 2006 and July 2007. These included ethics advice on issues such as potential and actual conflicts of interest, protection against retaliation for reporting misconduct, and training. The ethics office has increased ethics training for staff at all levels of government. The Secretariat has also increased the number of staff who are trained in ethics and conflict of interest issues. The office has also made a number of changes to the way it operates, including the creation of a new ethics unit. May 2007, the ethics office published, and disseminated throughout the Secretariat, the booklet Working Together: Putting Ethics to Work. This guide highlights the main challenges to professional and ethical conduct, clarifies the reasons behind ethical standards in the context of the UN’s mission and values. The ethics office has begun to develop a systemwide code of ethics for all UN personnel, including staff members. In August 2007, in addition, the office published four brochures that have been used in outreach, training, and communication activities. In the past year, the UN has made substantial progress in staffing its ethics office. In the fall of 2006, we reported concerns of UN experts that the newly created UN ethics office was insufficiently staffed with a temporary director. In May 2007, a new director was appointed to a 3-year term. As of October 2007, the ethics office had six professional and three administrative staff. The office had made some progress in developing and circulating ethics standards and guidance and had begun to develop a systemwide code of ethics. Development of a systemwide code of ethics is one of his top priorities, says ethics office director. The development of the code was requested by the General Assembly in the 2005 World Summit outcome document. The code would apply to all UN bodies and agencies other than the Secretariat, says the director of the ethics office. He says the code would be developed over a period of years and would be drawn up in a joint report with the UN ethics office and the UN Human Rights Council. The report is expected to be completed by the end of 2014. The primary purpose of the financial disclosure program is to identify potential conflicts of interest arising from staff members’ financial holdings, private affiliations, or outside activities. About 1,700 staff members were required to file financial disclosure. The current UN Secretary-General and Deputy Secretary- General voluntarily made their recent financial disclosure forms public. The financial disclosure statements for 2005 were reviewed by the United Nations Office for the Prevention of Money laundering (UNOPM) and will be released to the public in due course. declaration of interest statements for 2005. About 98 percent of staff complied, and the remaining 2 percent were referred to the Office of Human Resources Management for disciplinary action. A total of 2,548 staff members were required to file forms for 2006. The office reported that the increase in staff was due to an increase in the number of full-time staff members in the office for the first time in more than a decade. The number of staff members increased from 2,500 in 2005 to 2,550 in 2006. a private contractor and analyzed to determine any potential conflicts of interest between the staff members’ confidentially disclosed private interests and their official duties and responsibilities. Of these cases, 14 cases, or about 1 percent, were identified as potential conflicts. In May 2007, the contractor identified potential conflicts  in 17 of the cases reviewed, orAbout 1 percent of cases reviewed were considered potential conflicts, the report said. The report also said that the report found no evidence of a conflict of interest in any of the other cases reviewed. staff members accepted the advice of the private contractor to address the potential conflict. 3 cases were referred to the ethics office for final resolution due to disagreements with the contractor. The 2006 review is not yet complete. The deadline for submitting forms for 2006 was delayed until May. It was originally scheduled to be in April but has been pushed back to May. The review of 2006 is still ongoing and is expected to be completed by the end of the year. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. The UN has made some progress in collecting and analyzing financial disclosure forms for 2005 and 2006. Financial disclosure forms have been collected from UN staff members, and a private contractor. A private consultant has begun to review them, but the review has been delayed by the development of an e- filing system for the the jurisdiction of the ethics office to cover all UN entities. UN funds and programs and weaknesses in the UN’s internal justice system have been highlighted. The UN has been criticized for its lack of transparency. The ethics office plans to review the online financial disclosure form and accompanying guidelines in consultation with other UN offices to decide whether modifications need to be made. The process for the 2006 review was ongoing, and, as a result, the compliance rate was not finalized as of September 2007. The U.N. ethics office will make a decision on whether to make changes to the form in the coming months. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. 31, 2007, as a consequence of the development of an online e-filing system. In order to enhance efficiencies and standardize procedures, the private contractor developed an online E-Filing system in liaison with the ethics office to simplify and expedite filing requirements. The director of the ethicsOffice told us that the system was designed to make it easier for people to file their tax returns online. The system was developed by a private contractor and used by the Ethics Office to help people file their taxes online.