checklists, risk registers, and other tools for conducting various types of risk assessments. Nearly all of implementing partners in our sample (seven of nine) have policies, procedures or guidance specifically aimed at assessing risks of fraud. Most of the implementing partners have conducted formal risk assessments for at least one type of risk. Several maintain risk registers that assess a wide variety of risks. For example, one implementing partner maintains a risk register that is updated on a quarterly basis and contains an analysis of ten risks. categories of risk, such as funding, program governance, and logistics. Another partner based in Damascus has a risk register which, according to the partner, assesses 28 different risks. As shown in table 1, most implementing partners have conducted risk assessments for staff safety risks (seven of nine) or security risks (six of nine). The risk register is based on a risk assessment conducted by one of the partners in Damascus. The partner in Damascus is based in the Syrian capital of Damascus. Fraud risk management involves fully considering the specific fraud risks the agency or program faces. Risk assessment is essential for ensuring that partners design appropriate and effective control activities. Control activities to mitigate the risk of fraud should be and evaluation of fraud risk management activities with a focus on outcome measurement, and using the results to improve prevention, detection, and response. The monitoring plan associated with the contract contains guidelines for field monitors to document their assessment of the project at the completion of a site visit. However, the monitoring plan does not provide for a risk assessment at the end of a visit. directly connected to the fraud risk assessments. Over time, managers may adjust the control activities if they determine that controls are not effectively designed or implemented to reduce the likelihood or impact of an inherent fraud risk to a tolerable risk level. Although most of the implementing partners in the U.S. are banks, many of them are also in Europe and the Middle East, where fraud is more common. The U.K. is one of the most fraud-prone countries in the world, with a fraud rate of more than 20 per cent. USAID OIG has conducted fraud awareness training for officials in the region to improve their ability to detect fraud, such as product substitution. Field monitors have not received the USAID Oig fraud Awareness training, according to USAID officials. Leading practices in fraud risk management suggest evaluating outcomes using a risk-based approach and adapting activities to improve fraud risk Management. This includes conducting risk- based monitoring. In contain specific guidance on how to recognize fraud, and field monitors haven't received the training. Training categories in the curriculum include basic monitoring and verification vocabulary, sampling of records and other secondary data, and color coding issues of concern. However, the curriculum lacks specific courses for recognizing potential or actual instances of fraud that may occur on site. Additionally, USAID officials say they have not been able to provide specific training courses for fraud detection and reporting, which is a key part of the program. The U.S. Agency for International Development has a program that provides training on fraud detection, reporting and monitoring. its field monitors are trained in methods to identify fraud risks. Based on USAID’s comments, we clarified the language of this recommendation. We agree that the field monitors do not audit the program, but they provide a crucial on the ground presence in areas unavailable to U.S. government employees. In addition to the contact named above, Elizabeth Repko (Assistant Secretary of State for Homeland Security) has been in contact with the agency to discuss this issue. We fraud risks, we agree. it lacks specific guidelines to identify potential fraud risks during site visits. For example, the guidelines in the monitoring plan instruct field monitors to use color-coded indicators, one of which states that issues at a project site require immediate attention and action. While fraud is mentioned with the indicator, it is presented as one of several examples of highly concerning findings to document, and could potentially be overlooked by the field monitor. Additionally, the templates created by the third party monitoring organization to document site visits instruct field monitor to document fraud. The monitoring plan contains a training curriculum for field monitors, which has several objectives designed to familiarize them with the protocols, procedures, and instruments used for data collection. However, the template lacks specific indicators to alert field monitors to collect information on and identify potential fraud. The monitoring plan also does not provide specific indicators for alerting field monitors that there is a potential for fraud. It does, however, provide a template to help field monitors identify and prevent potential fraud in the first place. For more information, visit www.fraudmonitoring.org. monitors to verify the presence or absence of supplies, and the quality of them, among other instructions. Field monitors must verify that water was delivered to a location, and that water quality tests had been conducted, when applicable. For example, templates related to water and sanitation projects instructed field monitors to check that water had been delivered and that tests were carried out. For more information, go to www.waterandsanitation.org or call 1-800-622-8255. are sending copies of this report to appropriate congressional committees, the Secretary of State, the Administrator of USAID, and other interested parties. In addition, the report will be available at no charge on the GAO website at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staffs should have any questions about this report, please contact me at (202) 512-9601 or melitot@gao,gov. GAO staff who made key contributions to this report are listed in appendix IV. Director), Jennifer Young, Justine Lazaro, Cristina Norland, Kyerion Printup, Karen Deans, Kimberly McGatlin, Diane Morris, Justin Fisher, and Alex Welsh made key contributions to this report. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. For support in the U.S., call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. To determine the of implementing partners, we interviewed officials from State and USAID in Washington, D.C. and Amman, Jordan. We also reviewed USAID’s contract with the third party monitoring organization, and supporting documentation, such as the monitoring plan, site visit template, and a complete monitoring report for February 2016. We interviewed USAID and implementing partner officials based in Antakya and Ankara, Turkey. In addition, we traveled to Geneva, Switzerland, and Ammen, Jordan to interview officials. monitoring data on individual activities, and assessing the quality of monitoring data reported to USAID. In the absence of direct program monitoring, USAID and State officials noted that they utilize information provided by implementing partners to help ensure effective delivery of assistance and to help their financial oversight. For example, one implementing partner provided frequent updates to State on losses it sustained from its transporters until the issue was resolved. USAID officials conduct random spot checks of aid packages at warehouse facilities, and coordinate activities among partners to reduce or eliminate duplication of assistance. officials in the region conduct quarterly meetings with partners and collect information on programmatic objectives and on partner programs. State also has enhanced monitoring plans in place with its implementing partners to augment quarterly reporting with information on risks of diversion of assistance. State officials also told us that they conduct quarterly Meetings with partners to collect information about program objectives and partner programs, as well as risk of diversion, diversion and effectiveness of assistance programs. The State Department has a program that monitors the effectiveness of its assistance programs in the Middle East and North Africa. State asks its implementing partners to have internal control policies in place and report of State take the following action: Include in its voluntary contribution agreements with implementing partners a requirement that the partner conduct risk assessments addressing the risk of fraud. USAID drafts memoranda highlighting potential risks for material support to terrorist groups and identifies the mitigation strategies implementing partners will use to reduce those risks. State and USAID provided written comments it would include provisions in future voluntary contributions agreements that refer to risk assessment requirements, including fraud. implementing partners may not have all of the information needed to design appropriate controls to mitigate fraud risks. State and USAID might not have visibility into areas of risk, such as fraud and loss due to theft and diversion. Implementing partners in our sample have developed and implemented controls, but not all have done so. We are happy to share the results of our research with you. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. risks such as fraud, theft, diversion, and loss. USAID officials in the region explained to us that while partners provide data and information, their inability to consistently access project sites limited the extent to which partners could obtain and use the data. They said ongoing fighting, bombing raids, and border closures limited the amount of data that could be obtained and used by the partners. The U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID) is working with partners in the Middle East and North Africa to improve the quality of the data provided. mitigate fraud. In the absence of such activities, fraudulent practices may go unnoticed or take longer to detect. State and USAID may not have visibility into areas of risk needed to effectively oversee programs and provide reasonable assurance that humanitarian assistance funding is being used for its intended purpose. In addition, the U.S. State Department may not be able to provide adequate oversight to ensure that funds are being used as intended. The U.N. estimates that more than 1.2 billion people are at risk of fraud in the world's poorest countries. including cases of partners not fully implementing monitoring practices, resulting in limited project accountability. USAID Office of Inspector General (OIG) has reported that assistance projects implemented in developing countries are at significant risk of fraud, waste, and abuse. OIG noted that those risks are multiplied when projects unfold and are at risk of abuse or fraud when they are implemented in a developing country. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. GAO recommendation, FFP updated its program guidance in March 2015 to state that partners applying to conduct cash transfer and voucher-based food assistance programs should include in their applications an assessment of the risk of fraud or diversion. According to USAID, this represents a requirement that cash-transfer and vouchers-based programs must be fraud-free. The U.S. Department of Agriculture says it has no plans to change the way food assistance is administered. The agency says it will continue to work with states to improve the program's effectiveness. food assistance programs conduct a fraud risk assessment. The assessment does not apply to all types of food assistance or to assistance provided through OFDA. In the absence of a requirement for all implementing partners to conduct comprehensive risk assessments, USAID noted that it works closely with partners to ensure the assessment is carried out in a thorough manner. The agency said it works to ensure that food assistance programs are fraud-free in the U.S. and around the world. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. of Food for Peace (FFP) and Office of U.S. Foreign Disaster Assistance (OFDA) require some implementing partners to create a Safety and Security Plan. The plan addresses security threats and vulnerabilities related to program locations. It also provides information such as contingency planning and risk mitigation measures. Moreover, in response to a disaster, the plan can be updated to reflect the latest information available to the implementing partners. For more information, visit FFP's website or the OFDA's website. framework agreements with its implementing partners emphasizing the commitment of the partner to internal controls, including risk management. State officials noted that the framework agreement for one of its partners is updated every two years and tracks the progress of the organization’s efforts to develop enterprise risk. For more information, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/28/business/10/29/business-risk-guidance/story/story on-cnn-risk.html. State: Partner organizations should follow their own internal requirements for risk assessments. State: Voluntary contribution agreements between State and these implementing partners do not reference the framework agreements or management.management. State says its funding arrangements are based on the basis of State’s funding arrangements, not on partner organizations’ internal requirements. It adds that it has no plans to change its funding arrangement with partner organizations in the near future, and that it is committed to working with them to find a solution. extent to which State, USAID, and their partners have assessed risks to the programs. We selected a nongeneralizable sample of 12 fiscal year 2015 State and USAID funding instruments, out of a total of 52 funding instruments from 9 different implementing partners. We obtained a list of all funding instruments based on the following criteria: (1) The funding instrument was awarded by State’s Bureau of Population, Refugees and Migration; (2) the funding instruments were obligated in fiscal year2015; and (3) the instruments were awarded by USAID. that are reproduced in appendix II and appendix III. State and USAID also provided technical comments, which we incorporated as appropriate. In its written comments, State concurred with our recommendation. State noted risk assessment initiatives that it has in place with its implementing partners, and indicated that it is working with them to address the issue. The report was published by the Center for American Progress on October 31, 2013. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. Amman, Jordan; and conducted telephone interviews with officials in Antakya and Ankara, Turkey, to discuss their policies and practices regarding risk assessments. To evaluate implementation of controls to mitigate risks and ensure appropriate financial oversight of assistance, we used our nongeneralizable sample of 12 fiscal year 2015 State and USAID funds. We also conducted interviews with the heads of the U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID) in Washington, D.C. and New York. likelihood of occurrence, and impact; and determining actions or controls to mitigate the risk. GAO’s Standards for Internal Control in the Federal Government and COSO's internal control framework both state that entities should comprehensively identify risks at both the entity-wide and activity levels. While USAID requires implementing partners operating humanitarian of humanitarian assistance, USAID doesn’t require them to be involved in humanitarian assistance. We analyzed relevant documents from each of the organizations related to risk assessment, including policies, procedures, and procedures. humanitarian assistance programs includes managing program funds to ensure they are spent in accordance with funding instruments. To identify factors affecting delivery of humanitarian assistance, we conducted a content analysis of all monthly United Nations reports. We also looked at the extent to which State, USAID, and their partners have assessed risks to the programs; and (3) implementation of controls to mitigate identified risks and ensure appropriate financial oversight of humanitarian aid projects. The report was published by the U.N.’s Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. Government provides the overall framework for establishing and maintaining internal control in the federal programs. Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (COSO) has issued an internal control framework that has gained broad acceptance and is widely used around the world. Both frameworks are based on the principles of the International Organization for Standardization (ISOC) and the International Accounting Standards Board (IASB) The ISOC and ISOC provide the standards for internal control within the federal government and other government agencies. funding instruments, as well as the Standards for Internal Control in the Federal Government and the COSO internal control framework. To determine the extent to which U.S. agencies are overseeing the activities. To analyze relevant documents from each of the organizations related to control activities, including policies, procedures, and manuals. To find out how much control the agencies have over the activities they are involved in. to find out what the agencies are doing to ensure that the activities are overseen by the appropriate agencies. Internal control generally serves as a first line of defense in safeguarding assets, such as food and nonfood items. In implementing internal control standards, management is responsible for developing the detailed policies.include the five components of internal control: control environment, risk assessment, control activities, information and communication, and monitoring. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255 or visit www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org. as Turkey or Jordan and, therefore, procured goods in the host country or the region and warehoused them prior to transport into Syria. Officials from two implementing partners we interviewed in Amman stated that they conducted spot checks of assistance packages in warehouses to confirm the quantity of the contents. They said they were able to verify the contents of the assistance packages before they were sent to the war-torn country. We are happy to make clear that this was not the case in this case. as packing slips and waybills to verify the contents of shipments. Once parcels arrived at warehouses in Syria, partners we interviewed stated that staff used technology, such as geotagged photographs, to document the arrival and contents of the shipment. Nonetheless, these partners stated that the lack of visibility over the shipments over the past few years has been a problem for the Syrian government. We are happy to clarify that this is not the case with all shipments to and from Syria, and that we are working with the government to improve the situation. Jordan for verification. Officials added that this method for verifying beneficiaries was an ongoing process, as the lists sometimes changed due to the movement of people. Two implementing partners that we visited in Jordan, who delivered food and medical supplies, among other types of assistance in southern Syria, provide examples of how this can be carried out in the region. They said that the process was still in its early stages, but that it was going in the right direction. They added that the goal was to help the people of southern Syria get back on their feet. and ensure that the quality of the items complied with the terms of the contract. According to another implementing partner, officials from its organization visit the vendor warehouses before signing contracts to verify that U.S. government commodity safety and quality assurance guidelines are met. In addition, partners used documentation such as documents such as the U.N.’s “gold standard” for food safety and production standards, according to the report. The report was published by the World Resources Institute, which is part of the International Council on Food Security. to discuss their policies and practices regarding control activities. We also conducted site visits to warehouses in Jordan maintained by two of the implementing partners. We conducted this performance audit from July 2015 to July 2016 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan to conduct a performance audit for each of the three years in which we conducted the audit. The audit was carried out in compliance with the Generally Accepted Government Auditing Standards (GAGAS) for the period July 2015-July 2016. and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. 1. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable based for our conclusions. 2. We recommend that the board of directors conduct an internal audit of the company. 3. The board recommends that the Board of Directors conduct an independent internal audit. 4. The Board of directors recommends the board conduct an external audit. 5. The audit should be completed by the end of the year. to assess and mitigate the potential impact of fraud risks remain. Implementing partners in our sample have developed and implemented controls over their programs that deliver humanitarian assistance to people inside Syria. For those partners that had conducted risk assessments, these controls generally responded to risks they had identified. For example, some implementing partners identified aerial targeting of humanitarian aid workers and beneficiaries at distribution points as a major vulnerability. See table 2 for details of the controls implemented by implementing partners in the sample of aid agencies in Syria. fleeing to safety. Partners in our sample had also implemented controls to mitigate risks of fraud and loss within their operations. However, the majority of these efforts were not informed by a risk assessment. Four of the nine partners in our Sample conducted cross-border delivery operations from neighboring countries such as the UK and the U.S. The majority of partners had not carried out an assessment of the risk of fraud or loss in their operations before launching a new product or offering a new service. implemented controls to mitigate this risk, such as distributing goods to beneficiaries on overcast days and making door to door deliveries of aid packages. Another partner with field sites in Damascus identified the risk of ambush as a vulnerability and provided its drivers with instructions on taking evasive actions and avoiding ambush. The UN says it is working with the Syrian government to find a solution to the problem. The U.N. says the situation in Syria is under control, but that it needs to work with the government on a long-term solution. armed opposition groups at checkpoints. Partners also implemented. shifting liability to the transporter and only paying for parcels that were delivered to the intended destinations. According to one of the partners, the shift of liability to. the transporter has limited the instances of diversion, although we did not confirm this. We are happy to make clear that this is not the case, and that the responsibility for delivery of parcels to their intended destinations is with the transporter, not with the partner, as previously reported. We would also like to make it clear that we do not condone the diversion of parcels by armed groups. controls to mitigate fraud risks during the distribution process. For example, partners developed criteria for identifying and selecting eligible beneficiaries. Examples of people meeting selection criteria included internally displaced people, people with disabilities, and female heads of household. In addition, partners compiled this information into beneficiary lists to assist the process. In the past, the government has used a combination of public-private partnerships and private-public partnerships to help with the distribution of the funds. For more information, go to: www.justgiving.com/cnnfraud. addition, partners mentioned working with local councils to develop beneficiary lists. Officials at a partner organization we interviewed stated that during the distribution process, staff crosschecked the names of beneficiaries on the list with identification provided by the beneficiary, and then relayed that information to the partner’s field office in the U.S. The program is funded by a combination of donations and grants from the governments of the United States, Canada, Australia and New Zealand. For more information on the program, visit: http://www.justgiving.com/poverty-aids. project. The subawardee was reliant on one individual to facilitate the transfer of materials and salaries. This individual was involved in the alteration and falsification of records related to the distribution of the nonfood items. According to the USAID OIG, senior leadership at the subawardsee was aware of the falsifying of records and was aware that it was a violation of USAID policy. The U.S. Agency for International Development is investigating the incident. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. October 2015, USAID’s OFDA hired a third party monitoring organization to review its projects in Syria. By February 2016, field monitors had conducted site visits and submitted monitoring reports to USAID. USAID could work with the third party monitor to ensure that provide training to field monitors, the report says. The monitoring plan and site visit templates do not mitigation plans to USAid, it adds. The report concludes that USAID should consider providing field monitors with training in methods to identify potential fraud risks. programs related to the crises in Syria and Iraq. According to officials at the USAID OIG, they have four ongoing investigations of allegations of fraud and mismanagement related to programs for delivering humanitarian assistance to people inside Syria. Two of the investigations involve allegations of procurement fraud, bribery, and product these facts. In May 2016, USAID reported the identification of bid-rigging and multiple bribery and kickback schemes related to contracts to deliver humanitarian aid in Syria, investigations of which resulted in the suspension of 14 entities and individuals involved with aid programs from Turkey. our sample did not conduct assessments of the risk of fraud, there are elevated risks for fraud in U.S. funded humanitarian assistance projects for people inside Syria. For instance, in the second half of fiscal year 2015, the USAID OIG received 47 complaints reporting waste, fraud, and abuse in USAID told us that the field monitors supporting the third party monitoring contract had not received fraud awareness training. Further, while USAID’s third party. monitoring contract provides a mechanism to gather additional information about its programs in Syria, providing clearer instructions to collect data on. and training to recognize fraud risks may better assist USAID in its efforts to. require comprehensive risk assessments. All of the implementing partners in our sample have policies, procedures, or guidance related to conducting risk assessment for their programs to provide humanitarian assistance into Syria, including safety and security. State has agreements with its implementing partners, called enhanced monitoring plans, asking implementing partners to regularly provide information on current conditions, including assessments of the risks of diversion and harm to staff. While collecting additional information on certain risks, the enhanced monitoring plan does not require partners to conduct comprehensive risk assessment. critical aid to those in need. State and USAID do not require implementing partners to conduct comprehensive risk assessments for humanitarian assistance delivered to people inside Syria. While most partners assessed safety and security risks associated with such programs, most did not assess financial risks, such as the risk Syria is funded through voluntary contributions to public international organizations. Neither the funding instruments for these contributions nor State’s Federal Assistance Policy Directive require the implementing partner to conductrehensive risk assessments specifically related to the assistance. While there is not a requirement, according to State, it has established USAID does not have Syria-specific policies and guidance regarding risk assessments related to fraud. The ongoing conflict in Syria has created a conflict zone, as well as State and USAID’s inability to directly monitor programs inside Syria. Despite the fact that fraud has been detected in these assistance programs, most of the fraud has not been detected. USAID may be missing an opportunity to assist in its activities to mitigate fraud risks and design appropriate controls. The importance of financial oversight includes conducting risk assessments to identify, analyze, and respond to risks. areas of risk, such as fraud and loss due to theft and diversion. Neither USAID nor State requires implementing partners to conduct comprehensive risk assessments for humanitarian assistance to people inside Syria. To improve the financial oversight of U.S. programs to provide humanitarian assistance, we recommend that the USAID Administrator take the following four actions: Update guidance to require non-governmental organizations to conduct risk assessments addressing the risk of fraud. Ensure that field monitors in Syria are trained on assessing and identifying potential fraud risks. Instruct the third party. USAID OIG has noted that aid organizations providing life-saving assistance in Syria and the surrounding region face an extremely high-risk environment. The absence of adequate internal controls, among other challenges, can jeopardize the integrity of these relief efforts and deny during a disaster or military contingency, the OIG says. The U.S. State Department says it is committed to supporting the Syrian people in their fight against the Islamic State of Iraq and Levant (ISIL) ISIL has been fighting ISIL for more than a year. in 2012 due to security conditions and the safety of personnel, among other factors. According to State and USAID officials, the inability to access Syria limits the visibility that staff have over the provision of humanitarian assistance. Officials noted that unlike humanitarian responses conducted in other countries, USAID staff are unable to visit project sites in Syria and speak with program beneficiaries.USAID officials also acknowledged several gaps in their monitoring system due to remote management, such as verifying progress, obtaining comprehensive verification of progress, and disseminating information. The increasingly violent and widespread Syrian conflict has hindered effective delivery of humanitarian assistance. The inability of some partners to consistently access areas in Syria and directly monitor programs has created challenges for oversight. U.S. agency officials charged with overseeing these programs may not have visibility into over their programs delivering humanitarian assistance to people inside Syria. Despite these controls, some partners have experienced instances of fraud, and without such formal assessments, implementing partners may not be able to design appropriate controls to mitigate such risks. To help address these issues, U.N. agencies have taken some steps to oversee partner programs. monitoring organization monitoring OFDA programs in Syria to modify the site visit forms to include specific guidance for documenting incidents of potential fraud. To ensure that State has a comprehensive understanding of the risks facing its implementing partners providing humanitarian assistance to people inside Syria, we recommend that the Secretary of State modify the form to include this guidance. We also recommend that State change the way the OFDA site visit form is written to make it easier for monitoring organizations to identify potential fraud in the humanitarian aid programs. We recommend that this change be made to the form so that it is easier to understand. in fiscal year 2012 and totaled just over $5 billion, as of February 2016. USAID has obligated a majority of funding toward the response inside Syria. State has focused more on assistance to Syrian refugees in the region. The United States and the international community provide funding for a range of humanitarian assistance inside Syria, including food, shelter, nonfood items, and shelter for children and pregnant women. The U.S. State Department provides $1.6 billion for refugees in. the region and $547 million for assistance to people inside. Syria. According to the UN, the number of people in need of humanitarian assistance inside Syria has risen steadily since 2012. As the largest donor, the United States has taken a leading role in providing humanitarian assistance to alleviate the suffering of individuals inside Syria who are affected by the conflict. According to USAID, as of February 2016, U.S. government assistance was reaching 4 million people inside Syria per month. Figure 4 illustrates the relative amounts of assistance needed to address the humanitarian emergency in the country. is part of a broader international response. Since 2013, the United States has consistently led global funding efforts. For instance, the U.S. provided more than a quarter of the total international funding for the 2015 Syria humanitarian response. Figure 5 shows the top ten international donors to this effort. For more information, visit: http://www.cnn.com/2015/01/29/syria-humanitarian-recovery/index.html. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. substitution in USAID funded humanitarian cross-border programs related to procurements of non-food items. One of the investigations found that the subawardee of the implementing partner failed to distribute nonfood items in southern Syria. In Jordan, we visited the organization’s warehouse and observed officials randomly select parcels for inspection to verify the quantity and quality of the contents. In fiscal year 2015, USAID awarded about $16 million through a cooperative agreement to an international NGO to deliver medical supplies and equipment. reportedly seized the Syrian Arab Red Crescent warehouse, which contained food assistance for 35,000 people and hygiene kits for 15,000. According to USAID officials, this represented the largest loss USAID has experienced delivering aid inside Syria. In addition, the proliferation of armed actors has made the conflict extremely complex, USAID said in a statement on Monday. The U.S. State Department confirmed the seizure of the warehouse and said it is working with the Red Crescent to get the aid to those in need. interagency teams. The Southern Syria Assistance Platform, based in the U.S. embassy in Jordan, and the Syria Transition Assistance Response Team, are based in Turkey. State officials and USAID Disaster Assistance Response Teams manage humanitarian programs for Syria in partnership with UN agencies, international NGOs, and national organizations. They coordinate between themselves and with other State and USAid representatives, U.s. embassies, the Department of Defense, the governments of Jordan and Turkey, and other regional and international entities. State works through three main partners—two UN organizations and one public international organization. USAID provides funds to UN organizations inside Syria and also works through nongovernmental organizations. In general, implementing partners operating out of neighboring countries, mainly Jordan and Turkey, cross the border into Syria to deliver assistance into opposition controlled areas. Of the main types of assistance provided, the following are the most common: food, shelter, medicine, medical supplies, medical equipment, and shelter for children and pregnant women. other half was provided to support the more than 4.8 million people who have fled as refugees to neighboring countries. USAID’s Office of U.S. Foreign Disaster Assistance (OFDA) and Office of Food for Peace Syria are providing humanitarian assistance to people affected by the Syrian conflict. We also conducted interviews with officials from State (Population, Refugees, and Migration), and USAID (the State Department, the Department of Health and Human Services, and the State Department's Bureau of Population, Refugees and Migration) officials we spoke with in Washington explained that officials screen proposals from prospective partners to identify those that have appropriate measures to mitigate risks. They added that USAID officials in the region maintain regular contact with partners, attend monthly meetings with manuals. We also requested and reviewed risk assessments related to delivery of assistance to people inside Syria. We interviewed State and USAID. officials in Washington, DC; and officials from State and implementing partner organizations in Geneva, Switzerland. we also met with officials from. State, USAID, and implementing partners in Switzerland. warehouse where supplies were received, checked for quality, affixed with quick response (QR) codes, and packaged. State and USAID have taken steps to oversee partner programs delivering humanitarian assistance inside Syria. State officials noted that State conducts a variety of oversight activities. For instance, State checks for quality at the warehouse where supplies are received and packaged, as shown in figure 8. For more information, visit the State Department's Humanitarian Aid Operations Center at http://www.state.gov/humanitarian-aid. the implementing partner was based in Syria or a neighboring country from which cross-border operations into Syria were conducted. While the results of our review of funding instruments cannot be generalized to the entire list, they present a mix of instrument dollar values, implementing partners and their locations, and types of funding. We are happy to share these results with the world, and hope they will help raise awareness of the need for more funding for the fight against ISIS in Syria. We hope to see you in the coming days and weeks. analysis of monthly UN Secretary General (UNSG) reports on the situation inside Syria. interviews with officials providing assistance to Syria based both inside and outside of the country. Humanitarian assistance is routinely prevented or delayed from reaching its intended target due to shifting conflict lines, attacks on civilians. The reports, which are submitted to the Security Council pursuant to Resolution 2139 (2014), provide information on the humanitarian situation in Syria from March 2014, when the reports began, through December 2015, to categorize and summarize observations contained in the reports. staff, and restrictions on international and national NGOs’ ability to operate. One organization told us that the Syrian government has within the humanitarian principles of humanity, impartiality, neutrality, and operational independence. The UNSG reports contain multiple instances of ISIS blocking humanitarian and commercial access into and through areas under its control. For example, in November 2015, the UN reported that ISIS controlled and blocked humanitarian access to a stretch of land in the north of the country. The U.S. State Department says it has no plans to send troops to Syria. In February 2012, the U.S. embassy in Syria suspended operations because of concerns over staff safety due to escalating violence. As a result, the UN was unable to deliver assistance to over 220,000 people. Due to restrictions, USAID and State staff manage the delivery of humanitarian assistance in Syria remotely from neighboring countries. In 2015, the United States closed its embassy in Damascus and moved its operations to Jordan and Turkey through two highway leading to the western parts of Aleppo city.in 2015. Administrative procedures put in place by the Syrian government have delayed or limited the delivery of humanitarian assistance, according to UNSG reports. These factors of international NGOs.procedures, and practices to fit the entity’s operations and to ensure they are built into and are an integral part of operations. Effective delivery of U.S. humanitarian assistance to people inside Syria is complicated by three related factors—a dangerous operating environment, access issues, and remote management of programs. In early 2016 State reported that since the beginning of 2015, the Syriangovernment had received 113 requests from the UN to deliver humanitarian aid, of which 113 were approved. USAID: Humanitarian workers inside Syria must work within the insecure operating environment. Financial oversight in forces and indiscriminate shelling by armed opposition groups affect their ability to carry out their work. USAID: Implementing partner officials based in Damascus, Syria, told us that they are constantly reaching out to contacts to determine the safety of planned delivery routes. Figures 6 and 7 show the complex operating environment in which aid workers must work in Syrian government controlled areas and opposition-controlled areas. Figure 6: Figure 6 shows this complex Operating environment. assistance while in transit in Syria, and managing the projects remotely from Jordan, were risks to their operations and therefore required mitigating actions. Partners we interviewed that relied on transporters to deliver assistance within Syria mitigated the risk of loss, including loss due to theft by the Syrian Army or the Syrian government. We are happy to share our findings with the international community. We hope to hear from you in the coming days and weeks as we continue to assess the situation in Syria. We look forward to hearing from you. convoys were approved, the officials participating in delivering the assistance were sometimes subjected to hours-long delays, stretching into the middle of the night. State's and USAID’s implementing partners also told us that they rarely operate inside ISIS controlled areas because they cannot ensure that they will be able to operate. State’S and USAid’'s implementing partners said they rarely operated inside ISIScontrolled areas because. they couldn’t guarantee that they would be capable of operating. on the ground inside Syria are heavily influenced by the ongoing conflict. The conflict began in March 2011 when demonstrations turned into protests against the government of Bashar al-Assad. Over the past 5 years, the conflict has grown more complex as the number of participating armed actors has proliferated; they now number more than 100,000. The number of people killed in the conflict is estimated to be in the region of 200,000 to 300,000, according to the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights. include the Syrian government, non-state opposition groups, the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS), and the al-Nusrah Front. Russia, Saudi Arabia, and Iran, have strategic interests in Syria and have been directly or indirectly involved in the conflict. In February 2016, the U.N. Security Council passed a resolution condemning the use of chemical weapons in Syria. The resolution also called for an end to all chemical weapons use in all of Syria, including in the capital Damascus. The ongoing conflict in Syria has created a serious humanitarian challenge. Syrians, as well as Palestinian and Iraqi refugees residing in Syria, have become increasingly vulnerable due to high levels of violence and insecurity. As of May 2016, the UN reported that more than 2016. However, persistent armed conflict and aerial attacks, including attacks on medical facilities, continue to negatively affect millions of Syrians. The UN reports that the resumption of active conflict in several governorates has hindered the effective delivery of humanitarian assistance and people’s needs. Conflict lines in southern Syria began shifting rapidly in February 2016 due to Russian air strikes. All UNSG reports from 2014 and 2015 include descriptions of indiscriminate aerial bombardment by government forces. The Syrian government has been accused of indiscriminately bombing southern Syria in recent years. The government has denied the allegations and says it is only targeting terrorists. The Russian military says it has targeted terrorists in Syria and has killed thousands of people. The U.S. has said it has killed more than 1,000 people in Syria in the past year. the United States and Russia brokered a cessation of hostilities, excluding ISIS and the al-Nusrah Front. According to the UN, the reduction in violence allowed for increased humanitarian assistance deliveries to hard-to-reach and besieged locations in Syria during the months of March and April. The U.S. and Russia also brokered an agreement with the Syrian government to end airstrikes on rebel-held areas of the country. The cease-fire is expected to last until the end of April. aid facilities and workers, an inability to access besieged areas, and other factors related to active conflict. The years of conflict have led to shifting areas of control as armed groups claim and lose territory. In late May 2015, for example, after ISIS took over the city of Palmyra, it was reported that ISIS had taken control of the city's airport and airport facilities. It has since been reported that the airport has been taken over by the Islamic State of Iraq and Levant (ISIL) or deny humanitarian access to besieged areas, and people risk infectious disease, malnutrition, poor sanitation, and lack of medical care. For example, in early 2016, the UN estimated that the lives of roughly 42,000 people remained besieged by government forces in the towns of Madaya and Buqayn, where, according to the UN, about 40,000 are still trapped. The UN estimates that about 42,00 people remain trapped in the two towns, including about 20,000 children. The UN reported that in 2015, only 10 percent of all requests for UN inter-agency convoys to hard-to-reach and besieged areas were approved and delivered. In addition, according to implementing partner officials based in Damascus, even when these convoys were approved, deaths from diseases associated with malnutrition had been reported, the UN said. The UN said that the situation in Syria has deteriorated in recent months, with the death toll from malnutrition rising to more than 1,000 a month.  aid facilities are often indirectly impacted or directly targeted, leading to widespread damage. According to the UN reports, there are frequent instances of gunfire, car bombs, barrel bombs, rocket strikes, and mortar attacks near aid facilities. There are direct attacks on medical facilities, placing their lives at risk, the UN says. In addition, aid facilities in Syria are often directly or indirectly impacted by airstrikes and shelling. The UN reports that aid facilities have been directly targeted by airstrikes, shelling and gunfire, and that aid workers have been killed. 4.8 million Syrians had fled the country and registered as refugees, 6.5 million people were internally displaced, and 13. 5 million people inside Syria were in need of humanitarian assistance. As of May 2016, the UNSG reported that 4.6 million people in Syria are located in hard-to-reach areas. More than 500,000 of those remain besieged by ISIS, the government of Syria, or non-State armed opposition groups. Parties to the conflict heavily restrict access to those areas. facilities and personnel; missing or detained humanitarian workers; and injury or death of humanitarian workers. In one instance, an air strike hit the Syrian Arab Red Crescent offices in Idlib, destroying ambulances and vehicles. A total of 87 humanitarian workers have been killed in Syria in the conflict. This includes 17 staff members of the UN, 53 staff members and volunteers of the SyrianArab Red Crescent, 8 volunteers and staff of the Palestinian Red Crescent Society. The UN reported that, as a result of the conflict, the capacity of the Red Crescent to provide first UNSG Report has been reduced. aid services in the city was curtailed. Medical facilities have also been attacked. As of November 2015, there had been 336 attacks on 240 separate medical facilities and 697 medical personnel killed inside Syria. In addition, as of the April 2016, there have been more than 1,000 attacks on medical facilities in Syria since the start of the Syrian conflict in March 2011, according to Physicians for Human Rights (PHR) This figure includes attacks on hospitals, clinics, and other medical facilities that have been destroyed or damaged.