Since TAG was first established, the amount of deposits insured by TAG has increased. On December 31, 2008, shortly after TAG was implemented, the program guaranteed approximately $722. The Dodd-Frank Act's changes to the definition of insured deposits are temporary and due to expire on January 1, 2013. The unlimited deposit insurance for NIBTAs expires on that date and returns to the FDIC's $250,000 standard maximum deposit insurance amount. The FDIC program also had a more restrictive definition of NIBTA than theFDIC program. The TAG program currently provides unlimited deposit insurance for $1.4 trillion in noninterest-bearing transaction accounts. NIBTAs have grown by approximately $1 trillion. If TAG expires, depositors may choose to leave their deposits as uninsured deposits at their existing banks. They could move some or all of their money out of the traditional banking sector or (2) they could move it to a noninterest bearing account. The DGP is no longer guaranteeing new debt, but TAG continues to apply to new deposit balances. NIBTAs are frequently used by businesses and local governments as a cash management tool, often for payroll transactions. Any depositor whose account meets the eligibility criteria receives unlimited deposit insurance coverage. The expiration of unlimited insurance may increase the risk of NIBTas. But even without TAG, the high degree of liquidity offered by NIB tas may incentivize some borrowers to keep their money as uninsured deposits. Depositors who place a high value on safety may transfer their NIBtAs. write checks to pay their vendors and employees. If TAG expires, however, depositors may change their perception of the safety of NIBTAs. Depositors may reevaluate how they allocate their money across the various options in the financial system. As is discussed in the following sections, the use of NibTAs can be used to pay employees and vendors in a variety of ways, including through bank accounts and bank cards. The use of the bank account system can also be used as a way to pay vendors, employees and other creditors. quarter of 2008 (before TAG was implemented) to $2.3 trillion in the second quarter of 2012. NIBTAs were used at relatively high rates before TAG and their growth may not be due solely to the guarantee offered by TAG. Changes in economic and financial conditions since TAG was introduced may also have contributed to the growth of NIBtAs since the introduction of the guarantee in 2008. For more information on the guarantee and how to use it, visit www.nibtas.org. could return to pre- TAG levels if TAG expires. Changes in the financial and regulatory environment since 2008 could also result in a different allocation. It is unclear if the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), the primary regulator of money market funds, will impose additional regulation. The uncertainty about future regulation and the low yields makes it unclear how much would leave TAG accounts. Some have have suggested that deposits could flow to money market Funds if TAG expired, but this has not been confirmed by the SEC. be withdrawn. Depositors' preferences for safety, liquidity, and yield will determine how they allocate their money across the various options they face. If TAG expires, the options available to depositors can be simplified to two general choices: (1) depositors could leave some or all of their money in the traditional, and (2) they could leave it in a Roth IRA or other form of government-backed investment. The options are available in a variety of ways, depending on the state of the economy. with assets over $10 billion were still participating in TAG, whereas 75% of banks with less than $10billion in assets were in the program. The higher participation rate by smaller banks may signal that they believed they needed the program to attract funds, whereas the larger banks were less interested in TAG. The program is available to banks with $10bn or more in assets. For more information on TAG, go to www.targetrust.org or call 1-800-273-8255. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90. likely to view the program as necessary. Others may argue that decisions to participate in TAG may not have been driven by the actual usefulness of the program. Either way, the program was developed in response to the financial crisis. The program will be available through the end of the year to those who have signed up for it. It will also be available to anyone who wants to sign up for the program in the future. The cost of TAG has not yet been determined, but it is expected to be in the region of $1 million. aware of at different banks. Some depositors may attempt to recapture the safety they would lose if TAG expires by shifting their deposits to safer banks. Safer banks, such as those with higher capital levels or in place, may hold a disproportionately large share of TAG accounts. The expiration of TAG may increase the concentration of deposits in the largest banks. A potential indicator of the different views of large and small banks about the usefulness of TAG is the percentage of each group that holds a TAG account. table 1 shows statistics on TAG accounts by bank size. The largest banks have more accounts per institution and higher average account balances than smaller banks. Approximately 75% of TAG funds are in the 19 banks with more than $100 billion in assets, though those 19 banks account for 61% of total assets in the insured banking system. Even with TAG, if a bank is allowed to fail, then the depositor may view their uninsured deposits as safer than if the deposits were in a bank that would be allowed to failing. The insured banking sector saw few bank runs during the financial panic. The establishment of TAG, in addition to the existing deposit insurance and other measures taken by regulators, may have bolstered depositors' confidence in banks as reliable counterparties. Deposit insurance may have boosted confidence in other parts of the financial system, according to a report by the Center for International Policy Studies (CIP) The report was published by the CIP on November 14, 2013. It was based on a survey of more than 1,000 people who participated in the survey. (which is a function of the number of future bank failures, the size of banks that would fail, and the amount of TAG funds in failed banks) is beyond the scope of this report. Although extending TAG may impose additional costs on the DIF, the benefit of extending TAG, on. If the type of banks and banks that fail in the future is different, then estimates of future losses based on the past losses of TAG to the D IF would be inaccurate. If TAG is extended beyond 2011, then the benefits of TAG will be greater than the costs. the other hand, may be that it maintains confidence in the banking system and prevents future bank failures that would have required drawing on the DIF. The counterfactual cannot be known with certainty, making it difficult to estimate the costs and benefits of extending TAG. An additional potential cost of TAG could be an additional $1.5 billion a year, according to a report by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) The report was published by the IMF on November 14, 2013. It was based on an analysis of the IMF’s assessment of the impact of TAG on the global economy. The FDIC estimates that, for the 108 banks that failed in 2011 and the first quarter of 2012, TAG deposits amounted to 3 percent of deposits on average. Most of the bank failures since January 2011 have been smaller banks which, as mentioned previously, had relatively few TAG deposits. Allocating DIF losses between these deposits and other deposits would result in an FDIC's "problem list," which is one potential indicator of the number of banks that are at risk of failing in the future. estimated TAG cost over these five quarters of about $270 million, or about 3 percent of the total $9.3 billion estimated cost of failures during this period. Figure 6 shows that the number of bank failures has fallen from its peak in 2010. The number of institutions on the list of failed banks has also fallen from 2010's peak of more than 1,000. The total number of failures has now fallen to about 1,200. The TAG cost of bank failure has fallen to around $270million, from about $9billion in 2010, according to the report. NIBTAs constitute one of several cash management tools used by businesses, non-profits, governments, and other entities. They provide depositors with easy access to their money, allowing them to make transfers. S. 3637 would instruct the FDIC to estimate the expected losses due to NIBT as a result of the DIF program. On November 26, 2012, Senator Harry Reid introduced S.3637 , a bill to temporarily extend the TAG program until December 31, 2014. The TAG program created by the FDIC was a voluntary program in which eligible financial institutions were automatically registered to participate. The Dodd-Frank Act, however, made all FDIC-insured banks part of TAG by temporarily changing "the definition of insured deposits to include the entire balance of noninterest-bearing transaction accounts" The " TAG program," therefore, refers to two similar but distinct programs. Though both TAG programs provided unlimited deposit insurance to NIBTAs, they also differ in several ways. The TAG program established by the FDIC expired on December 31, 2010, and was replaced on the same day by the TAG program as established by Section 343 of the Dodd-Frank Act. The original TAG program was optional; at certain points banks were given the ability to opt out. An extension of TAG, therefore, may require congressional action. On November 26, 2012, that opted out of the FDic's TAG program when given the option. When the FD IC version of TAG expired on Dec. 31, 2009, 31% of banks were TAG insured. FDIC institutions pay an insurance premium into the DIF based on their risk. To function effectively, the entity setting the insurance premium must accurately forecast future risk or be able to recoup losses ex post. If the FDIC can successfully estimate the future cost that TAG funds would impose on the Dif, then the premiums could be set to cover the expected losses. However, if TAG funds are not forecasted accurately, then premiums could not be set for the expected loss to be covered. institutions that pose more risk to the DIF are assessed higher deposit insurance premiums relative to those that pose lower risk. If a member institution fails, the proceeds in the D IF are used to prevent insured depositors from losing any of their insured deposits. For a risk-based insurance system to work, it is necessary to have a system that protects depositors against loss of their deposits. To learn more, visit Deposit Insurance Fund (DIF) and Deposit Protection Fund (DPF) websites. problems may arise if the insurance is underpriced due to an underestimation of future losses. The DIF may have to borrow from the Treasury to protect depositors, putting taxpayers at risk. Although predicting the future cost of TAG to the DIF is difficult, it is possible to estimate the cost to depositors of TAG. If future losses cause the. DIF to become depleted, the Dif may need to borrow money from the. Treasury to. protect depositor’s money. to the program's extension for each calendar year and to collect an amount equal to the expected losses by September 30 of each calendaryear. The assessments would be in addition to the assessments that the FDIC would otherwise collect. The program is expected to be in place for at least the next five years, according to a report by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. The report was based on a survey of more than 1,000 people who participated in the program in the past two years. The FDIC says it will continue to monitor the program. WSLG37, Extending the FDIC's Transaction Account Guarantee Program Given the Uncertain Economic Outlook. Although section 1105 of Dodd-Frank provides FDIC with authority to institute a widely available program of emergency assistance, it is limited to situations involving a liquidity crisis. Invoking the authority to Institute a broad program would be a step in the right direction, says WSLG 37, which is not likely to happen soon. WSL G37, which has been around for more than 30 years, says it's time to extend the program. Dodd-Frank Act created a special resolution regime administered by the FDIC for failing firms that pose a threat to financial stability. Some market participants may view the steps taken by the Dodd- Frank Act to take money.away from those institutions due to regulatory changes made by the Act. For example, the Act created an FDIC-run resolution regime for failing banks. For more information, go to: www.dodd-frankact.org and www.fda.gov. requires a detailed determination by the FDIC and the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (Fed Board) that a liquidity event exists. Failure to take action would have serious adverse effects on U.S. financial stability or economic conditions. The authority appears to be limited to emergency situations, such as a financial crisis or a global financial crisis, according to a report by The Wall Street Journal. The report also said that the authority is limited to emergencies or global financial crises such as the Great Recession or the Great Depression. The Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC) is a council of financial regulators that is charged with monitoring systemic risk in the financial system. The council has identified structural vulnerabilities in money market funds which could affect financial stability. It is working with several federal financial regulators to identify these vulnerabilities. The FSC is also looking at the future regulation of the money market fund market, including how it will be regulated in the future. It has identified the following areas of concern for the future of money market funding: The FDIC established the Temporary Liquidity Guarantee Program (TLGP) on October 14, 2008, to strengthen confidence and to encourage liquidity in the banking system. TLGP had two parts: a Debt Guarantee program and a Lending guarantee program. The FDIC also established the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) to protect depositors' money in the event of a downturn in the financial markets. TheFDIC also created a Deposit Insurance Program (DIP) to help depositors pay their bills. In September 2008, ongoing financial turmoil escalated into a financial panic. Large financial institutions, such as Lehman Brothers and AIG, were failing, the stock market was falling, and credit markets seized up as lenders became unwilling to extend or roll over short-term loans. The federal government responded with a series of series of emergency measures. The U.S. government is still dealing with the aftermath of the financial crisis today, with the economy still in a state of crisis. The economy is recovering, but it is still in deep trouble. Financial stress in 2012 is elevated compared with the lows of 2006 and 2007, according to the St. Louis Federal Reserve Financial Stress Index. The index is composed of 18 data series that provides one measure of financial stress. It has fallen from the high points of the high point of the 2006-2007 period, the index says. It is based on data from the U.S. Federal Reserve Bank of New York and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. For more, go to: http://www.st Louisfed.org/financialstress. (NAV) on their shares, typically of $1.00. A stable NAV gives shareholders the impression of a high degree of safety similar to deposits but offering a higher return. If a money market fund falls below a $ 1.00 NAV, then the fund is said to "break the buck," and part of the fund's value is lost. The fund is then said to have lost part of its value, or "broken the buck" The fund's share price is then considered to have fallen below its NAV. the fund's shareholders' invested principal is in jeopardy. Investors could actually lose money. Breaking the buck is a rare occurrence, though it happened in September 2008. In response, many withdrew their money from money market funds and deposited it in banks, as seen in Figure 5 . Figure 5 shows how the money market fund market reacted to the financial crisis in the U.S. in 2008. It's also a good idea to keep your money in a safe place, such as a bank account. Money market securities are short-term financial instruments with relatively high liquidities and short maturities of between several days and about a year. Money market funds act as intermediaries between shareholders who demand liquid investments and borrowers who desireShort-term funding. MoneyMarket funds attempt to keep a stable net asset value. Moneymarket funds are mutual funds that invest in money market securities. Money markets are instruments of short- term borrowing and lending. Examples of money market Securities include negotiable certificates of deposit (CDs), bankers' acceptances, U.S. Treasury bills, commercial paper, debt issued by municipalities, and repurchase agreements (repos) Money market funds have traditionally earned a higher yield than bank deposits. But money market funds are currently earning historically low returns, lowering the opportunity cost of holding noninterest-bearing deposits. There is also uncertainty surrounding the future of the money market fund market, which could lead to a partial reversal of the current upturn in the market's fortunes in the near future. The market is currently trading at a record low of 1.36 per cent. The U.S. Federal Reserve is expected to raise its interest rate in the coming months. options, such as commercial paper, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac securities, repurchase agreements, enhanced cash funds, and municipal securities. Money market funds are the second-most popular individual form of short-term investment according to a survey of financial professionals. They will be the focus of the next section of this article. The next section will focus on money market funds in the U.S. and Europe. The final section of the article focuses on Europe and the Middle East and Africa. and liquidity. To have a higher return, an investor may have to sacrifice liquidity (the ease with which an asset can be converted into cash) Certificates of deposit, for example, may pay a higher interest rate than a typical savings account, but there are restrictions on when the money can be spent. For more information, go to: www.cnn.com/investor/how-to-get-a-better-return-and-how-much-it-will-cost-you. traditional banking sector. Depositors can effectively "deposit" their money in other nonbank options. These include buying shares in a money market fund (MMF), by buying U.S. Treasuries, or by choosing one of the many other available options. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the United States, call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. to have more of all three, but face trade-offs. For example, there is a trade-off between safety and yield on an investment. The more at risk an investor's money is, the higher the possible return if the risk does not eventuate. There is also a trade off between yield and safety, and the more of both you have, the more likely it is that you will have a good return on your money in the long run. For more information, go to www.cnn.com/investor. banks are in practice "too big to fail" (TBTF) A bank is said to be TBTF if policymakers are likely to judge that its failure would cause unacceptable disruptions to the overall financial system and would act to prevent failure. If a depositor thinks policymakers would not allow a particular bank to fail, the bank may be considered TBTF. A bank may also be considered too large to fail if it has a large enough balance sheet to cover the risks of its own failure, but too small to be considered a threat to the entire financial system. remove TBTF status as credible and think they would recover even less of their uninsured deposits at a large firm than at a smaller or less interconnected institution. In that case, uninsured depositors may move their TAG deposits away from large institutions and use smaller banks. FDIC-insured institutions comprise the majority of TBTF-insured banks in the U.S., according to a report by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. The report was based on a survey of more than 1,000 depositors. it is possible that since the end of 2010, both large and small banks may have changed their views on the value of the program. Although some deposits may migrate to the largest institutions due to a perception of their implicit guarantee, it is also possible that deposits might migrate to smaller banks. Some deposits may also migrate to small banks due to their perceived lack of a deposit guarantee. The program is expected to be extended for a further five years if it continues to be successful. It is not known if the program will be extended beyond that time. extending deposit insurance to some uninsured accounts through TAG may have strengthened the banking system by discouraging some borrowers from withdrawing their deposits. Figure 1 extending TAG would be the moral hazard associated with deposit insurance. In the context of deposit insurance, moral hazard can manifest itself in two ways: "first, explicit deposit insurance gives insured banks incentives to pursue added risks because they can capture any profits but shift any losses to the government" and "second, deposit insurance makes it easier for the government to pass on losses to insured banks" uninsured deposits to various accounts in different insured banks so that each account is under the maximum insured level. Depositors may move their accounts to one of the largest or most interconnected banks if they believe those banks are less likely to fail. Although this option may minimize risk, it would increase the transaction costs for the depositor. There would be more accounts to keep track of and possibly more types of fees to be with less concentration in a risky asset class, may be perceived as less Likely to Fail.  deposit insurance has historically had an upper limit on the amount insured to minimize this loss of market discipline. Second, explicit deposit insurance reduces incentives by depositors and shareholders to monitor their banks. Banks' additional incentive to take further risks and the depositors' reduced incentive to monitor could increase the likelihood that some banks may fail. The reduced market discipline caused by deposit insurance could incentivize banks to issue loans that do not accurately price the underlying risk.moral hazard could impair the quality of credit intermediation decisions in the economy.  deposit insurance gives depositors confidence that if their bank fails, they will not lose the money in their insured accounts. Deposit insurance also reduces the incentive of depositors to monitor their banks and ensure that their banks are not assuming unnecessary risks. Bank regulators examine banks and attempt to prevent them from acting in a way that could put insured deposits at risk. Regulators are supposed to monitor banks for excessive risk-taking, but having fewer uninsured depositors may potentially reduce the effectiveness of the monitoring. The U.S. Federal Reserve is expected to announce a plan to introduce deposit insurance in the next few months.