deferred to FOT&E. This deferral was due to the DHS Director of Operational Test and Evaluation postponing the testing of the NSC’s cybersecurity capabilities until a more robust test plan could be developed to reflect emerging threats. At the conclusion of IOT&e, COTF found the N SC to be operationally ready to be tested for cybersecurity threats. The NSC has been given the go-ahead to test its cybersecurity capabilities for the first time. FOT&E will begin in the fall of 2016 and is scheduled to continue through at least 2017. DHS held an acquisition review board (ARB) to discuss the outcome of IOT &E. The ARB resulted in DHS approving the NSC for the FOT & E program. The NSC was approved by the DHS Board of Review (BBR) on December 6, 2015. The BBR is a joint board of the Defense Department and the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) The BCR is responsible for the acquisition review of FOT&e. specify the timing of FOT&E or the actions that should be taken following the completion of testing. Further, DHS’s directive on test and evaluation does not include any direction or guidance on Fot&E. We concluded in our January 2016 report that this gap in DHS guidance also has implications for FOT &E testing in the U.S. and around the world. For confidential support call the Samaritans in the UK on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or click here for details. asset’s COIs. As we reported in January 2016, IOT&E took place about 2 years later than planned and after 7 of the 8 planned NSCs were under contract, with 3 operational. We have previously found that delaying critical test events can lead to late discoveries and could result in additional the final asset is delivered, currently scheduled for fiscal year 2035. For the FRC, Iot&E occurred after 4 of the planned 58 cutters were operational. COTF writes a test report that focuses on the resolution of the asset’s COIs and any deficiencies that were identified during testing. Post-operational reports indicate that problems persist with these systems as they were often unavailable during operations. Despite these findings, as noted above, COTF found the NSC to be operationally effective and suitable. KPPs typically include a summary of theresolution of the all repaired following IOT&E. While COIs factor into a system's operational effectiveness and suitability rating, K PPs are more focused on deficiencies.  reliability and operational availability issues of the weapon systems affect the overall ability of the NSC to conduct certain missions. The CIWS, NULKA launcher, and TRS-3D air search radar, and the 57-mm gun are among the weapons in question. The NSC’s IOT&E event was held in Washington, D.C. on September 14. The event was hosted by the National Security Council, which is responsible for the U.S. defense budget. production decision and focuses on refining the conclusions that were made during previous operational test events. It also validates any incomplete or deferred requirements and verifies the correction of deficiencies identified. FOT&E focuses on evaluating production changes, and reevaluating the system to ensure that it continues to meet operational needs. In the U.S., FOT &E is conducted by the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) in Washington, D.C. and the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) in Atlanta. are the capabilities considered essential for mission accomplishment. KPPs are listed by threshold values, which are the minimum acceptable level of performance. For example, a KPP for the NSC is being able to reach a maximum speed of 28 knots for a threshold value and 31 knots for an objective value. K PPs differ from COIs in that KPP's focus on specific performance metrics, while COIs focus on certain types of missions that an asset should be able to conduct or an asset’s ability to be ready to perform those missions. COTF assessed the NSC’s COIs, for example, by comparing the outcome of the test event against the full scope of the COI. COIs are examined during testing to evaluate a system's ability to provide the desired capability and perform its mission. Table 1 provides examples of COIs and KPPs for the N SC. COTF assesses NSC COIs by comparing outcome of test event with the full Scope of COI to determine the full capability of the system. complete three action items: (1) complete testing of the cybersecurity COI; (2) verify the correction of all major deficiencies, including the unmet KPPs; and (3) assess the NSC’s cyber-security capabilities. The cybersecurity COi is planned to be tested in 2016, which, if successful, will address the first and third requirements. If successful, it will address first and second requirements, as well as address the third and fourth requirements if successful. operational suitability, testers determine whether or not the agency can logistically support the asset to an acceptable standard. Critical operational issues (COI) are one metric used to determine an asset’s operational effectiveness and suitability and problem. COIs and deficiencies identified during testing both factor into an asset's overall operational effectiveness, suitability rating. In addition to verifying that an asset is operationally effective and suitable, operational testing also tests key performance parameters (KPP), which are key performance indicators. determine whether the COI was met or not. Unmet COIs are often the result of related deficiencies, which are identified during testing and include any system that is lacking in its ability to meet normal standards or to function as intended. Deficiencies are scored based on the severity of the the deficiencies, and are scored on a scale of 1 to 5. The score is then used to determine whether or not a COI has been met, and if so, by how much. Contact points for our Offices of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of this statement. Individuals who made key contributions to this testimony include Katherine Trimble, Assistant Director; John Crawford; and others. For more information about this statement, please contact Michele Mackin at (202) 512-4841 or mackinm@gao.gov. for more information on the GSA’s public information office, please visit www.gsa.gov/public-information. This work is a work of the U.S. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States. The published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from GAO. However, because this work may contain copyrighted images or images, we ask that you credit us for our work. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from. The Daily Discussion: What do you think? Share your thoughts, stories, and videos with CNN iReport. other material, permission from the copyright holder may be necessary. If you wish to reproduce this material separately, please contact us for permission. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-TALK (8255). In the UK call the helpline on 0800-8255. 2009, we reported on best practices that commercial shipbuilders use to ensure that ships are delivered on time and within budget. We found that before a contract is signed, a full understanding of the effort needed to design and construct the ship is reached. To minimize risk, buyers and shipbuilders reuse previous designs to the extent possible and attain an in-depth understanding of new technologies included in the ship design. Before construction begins, commercial ship builders complete key design phases that correspond to ship performance parameters. with the completion of a three-dimensional product model. Final information on the systems that will be installed on the ship is needed to allow design work to proceed. During construction, buyers maintain a presence in the shipyard and with key suppliers to ensure the ship meets quality expectations and is well-prepared for the voyage. The ship is expected to be completed by the end of 2015. The vessel will be christened in the summer of 2015 in a ceremony to mark the start of the ship's construction. the second phase of the acquisition was intended to promote competition and allowed bidders on the contract to make certain design changes to the ship. The key performance parameters remain the same and the design for several critical systems—such as the propulsion system, generators, hull structure, and bridge layout—remain the same. The contract was awarded to BAE Systems, a subsidiary of British defense contractor BAE, in 2010. The deal is expected to be completed by the end of the year. although there are several factors known to influence these problems, the root causes and the method and cost of potential solutions are not yet known. The problems include: (1) high engine temperatures, which limit the top speed of the cutter in certain conditions, and (2) cracked cylinder heads, which are occurring in some cars. The root causes of these problems are not known yet, but are believed to be related to high engine temperature and cracked heads. The problem is thought to be the result of a combination of these factors, as well as other factors. Five of the 10 major deficiencies pertained to the NSC’s weapon systems and cutter boats. Table 2 shows the 10 deficiencies. None of the major deficiencies were rated as severe, which would preclude the N SC from accomplishing its mission. In its assessment, the U.S. Navy found that the ship was.effective and suitable, but with 10 major. deficiencies. The Navy found the ship to be. effective and suitable. But it had 10 major deficiencies, which were not severe. Of the 7 KPPs not met, 3 pertain to the NSC’s cutter boat operations. The cutter boats are designed to be integral to theNSC”s overall capability, operate both on the high seas and on land. The NSC has not met any of the 7 of the KPPS. The test results are published in a report published by the U.S. Navy on July 31, 2013. The report also includes the test results, and a discussion of these results. and determined that the three KPPs involving cutter boats were not fully met since the boats are unable to operate through all sea state 5 conditions. According to Coast Guard officials, the September 2012 requirements document for the NSC should have been written more clearly to convey the sea state expectation for cutter boat launch and recovery operations. The NSC’s sea state KPP was never intended to be applicable to the operation of the cutter boats. In January 2016 we recommended, and the Coast Guard concurred, that the N SC’S K PPs for the operation  should be. are measures of the capabilities considered essential to mission accomplishment. In our January 2016 report, we found that during IOT&E and other test events, the NSC fully met 12 of its 19 KPPs. We found that the Coast Guard and COTF have different interpretations of the cutter boat K PPs. By not meeting all KPP’s, the Coast Coast Guard is not able to demonstrate that theNSC within and beyond the visual range of the N SC. The Coast Guard plans to maintain the original equipment design for the production of the remaining NSCs and plans to conduct retrofits after accepting delivery of the cutters. Without updated guidance that establishes timeframes and responsibilities for completing all testing, the Coast Guard risks encountering the same scenario with the OPC. The Coast Guard recapitalization program is estimated to cost $12.1 billion, making it the most expensive Coast Guard program to date. In some instances, replacement equipment is still in. The Coast Guard is in the process of designing the OPC, which is the last of the major cutter classes to be built as part of the recapitalization program. This cutter class is intended to bridge the mission gap between the FRC and NSC. As the Coast Guard has progressed in its acquisition of cutters, it has matured its acquisition processes, which has been demonstrated in its approach with the F RC and OPC programs. The process is expected to be completed by the end of 2015. The 8 NSCs are planned to be fully operational by 2020. The Coast Guard is phasing out the legacy 378-foot High Endurance Cutters. During testing, the NSC successfully demonstrated 18 of its 19 COIs, with one COI — cybersecurity—being the only one that was not demonstrated. The 8 N SCs are expected to be operational by2020. The U.S. Coast Guard will use them to patrol the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans and the Caribbean Sea. is providing the capabilities that it intended to field. For instance, the Coast Guard has not yet demonstrated that the NSC can achieve a hard and soft kill against a subsonic cruise missile as required. The NSC has not fully meet interoperability requirements with the Department of Defense, DHS, and other government agencies. The Coast Guard is not yet able to achieve aHard and Soft Kill against a Subsonic Cruise missile. The U.S. Navy has not been able to fully meet its interoperability demands with other agencies, such as the Defense Department. at a rate higher than expected and are the NSCs number one operational degrader and cost driver for maintenance, and (3) overheating generator bearings, which have caused at least one patrol to be cut short due to the lack of an effective backup generator. Although the Coast Guard has two backup generators, they are not effective enough to meet the needs of a patrol. The Coast Guard also has two spare generators, which are used to power the ship's communications system and other equipment. The U.S. Navy has a fleet of more than 1,000 ships. the prototype phase. The problems identified with these systems during operations will continue to impact the NSC until the design changes are implemented across the fleet. Figure 1 shows selected systems that will require retrofits after all eight cutters are built. Early testing can allow performance issues to be discovered. The NSC plans to replace its fleet of cutters with a new fleet of high-tech, high-performance cutters by 2015. The new cutters will be powered by a new propulsion system that will have a range of speeds of more than 100 knots. The Coast Guard plans to begin IOT&E by December 2023, by which time it expects to have 1 operational OPC of a planned buy of 25. The Coast Guard may have opportunities to incorporate additional shipbuilding best practices with the OPC program. In May, the Coast Guard announced plans to buy 25 OPCs from a consortium of private companies. The U.S. Coast Guard has developed a warranty provision under its contract with the consortium that it is confident will provide value from this warranty. and deliver this ship in 2021. OPC’s initial and full operational capability dates both slipped 15 months. Coast Guard attributes to procurement delays, including a bid protest that GAO ultimately denied in June 2014. The Coast Guard’S fiscal year 2016 Capital Capital Project is scheduled to be completed by the end of the first quarter of next year. It will be the first ship to be fully operational for the U.S. Navy in more than a quarter of a century. For more, go to CNN.com/OPC. The Coast Guard plans to allow for the best return on investment for taxpayers by saving taxpayer money, conserving scarce resources, improving contractor performance, curbing fraud, and promoting accountability for results. The Coast Guard currently plans to award the construction contract for the lead OPC ship in fiscal year 2018 Investment Plan reflects $1.5 billion in funding for the OPC, which funds the detailed design work and construction of the first three vessels. After the first 3 of the planned fleet of 25 OPCs are built, the Coast Guard plan to increase its purchase to 2 OPC's per year until the fleet is complete. we also reported in April 2015, the Coast Guard is using a two- phased, competitive strategy to select a contactor to construct the OPC. In general, as we have previously found, competition is likely to save taxpayer dollars as opposed to a sole source acquisition approach, such as was used in this case. We also reported that the U.S. Coast Guard will use a competitive approach to select the contactor for its new OPC, which is expected to be completed in 2017. to date reflects some lessons learned from the NSC acquisition, for example in the areas of competition and the schedule for IOT&E. Furthermore, as the $12 billion OPC program moves forward, it may have opportunities to further incorporate some best practices that we have highlighted in our past work on OPC, according to the company. The company says it will continue to look for opportunities to incorporate best practices into its OPC programs as they move forward. The program is expected to be completed by the end of 2015. delivered on schedule. We will continue to assess the progress of the FRC and OPC acquisitions going forward. Chairman Hunter, Ranking Member Garamendi, and Members of the Subcommittee, this concludes my prepared statement. I would be pleased to respond to any questions. If you or your staff have any questions, please call the White House at 202-224-3121 or email White House@dailymail.co.uk. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org. DHS and Coast Guard acquisition guidelines require operational test and evaluation by an independent test agency. The Coast Guard uses the U.S. Navy’s COTF to conduct operational tests and other evaluations for its major acquisition programs. For operational effectiveness, testers determine whether or not an asset can meet its missions. For for operational suitability, testers assess an asset's operational effectiveness and suitability to perform its duties as a Coast Guard vessel or aircraft carrier. For full-rate production, testers must confirm that the production configured system meet all requirements before approval. Coast Guard has developed an interim solution. DHS agreed with these recommendations and estimated they would be implemented by November 2016. DHS’s guidance for its major acquisitions does not require programs to conduct FOT&E, nor does it held, if necessary, to provide oversight and specify any further actions programs should take. By the time of the spring 2014 Iot&E event, the Coast Guard had nearly 6 NSCs in service. It will have accepted the delivery of at least the 6th NSC before the testing is complete. The Coast Guard will be operating 6 N SCs before it has resolved issues from IOT &E. suitability, and, according to Coast Guard acquisition guidance, occur prior to a full-rate production decision. The test event concludes with a rating of operationally effective or not effective, operationally suitable or not suitable. This event is conducted after IOT&E and an asset’s full rate. That is, the Coast Guard could continue to buy assets without having demonstrated their full capabilities in testing. In January 2016 we recommended that updated guidance should establish factors that should be considered with planning Fot&E. program for full rate production in October 2014. ARBs review major acquisition programs for proper management, oversight, accountability, and alignment with DHS’s strategic functions at acquisition decision events and other meetings as needed. The resulting acquisition decision memorandum (ADM) from October 2014 directed the Coast Guard to conduct FOT&E and FOT &E for the first time in the agency's history. The Coast Guard will be responsible for the FOT and E for the next two years. The program will be funded by the Department of Homeland Security. four years of experience operating the NSCs. The Coast Guard has encountered several issues that require major retrofits and design changes. The total cost of changes we identified as of June 2015 totals problems are corrected. As a result, the Coast Guard plans to purchase and install equipment with known design flaws on the N SCs that are known to be defective. It also plans to replace equipment that has been in service for more than a decade. It plans to install equipment that is known to have been in use for less than five years. IOT&E that involved equipment failures by restoring the operational status of the related systems on the Stratton. The Coast Guard has plans to correct four more deficiencies, but may not correct 2 due to the cost of making fleet-wide changes. The Stratton is the Coast Guard's oldest ship, having been in service since the 1950s. It was decommissioned in 1998. It is the only ship in the U.S. Coast Guard fleet that is still in service. It has been in the fleet for more than 30 years. of the ADM, but other testing events are expected to occur through 2017 and possibly beyond. The ADM also directed the Coast Guard to verify the correction of all deficiencies, including the 7 unmet KPPs. According to Coast Guard officials, they have corrected 4 of the 10 major deficiencies from ADM's list of 10 major problems with the ship. The Coast Guard says it has also corrected 4 out of the 7 major deficiencies with the KPP. The U.S. Navy has a fleet of more than 1,000 ships and submarines. The Coast Guard purchased the technical specifications and licenses necessary to build the FRC in order to use the information to conduct a full and open competition for the remaining 26 of 58 planned vessels. According to Coast Guard officials, the competition will be open to the public. The FRC is scheduled to go into service in 2015. The Coast Guard says it will be the largest ship in the world at the time of its launch. The U.S. Coast Guard has a fleet of more than 1,000 ships. Bollinger Shipyards for the FRC program that has held the contractor responsible for production deficiencies. As we reported in June 2014, the Coast Guard does not always have insight into how much it costs the contractors to fix these issues. However, after multiple deficiencies interrupted production, officials noted they are now working with the contractor to fix the problems. The Coast Guard has not said how much the problems will cost to fix. The ship is scheduled to arrive in the U.S. in the fall. currently in production. The Coast Guard will be faced with paying for the replacement of these systems with new equipment that it must also purchase. Furthermore, we found in January 2016 that the Coast Guard has encountered a variety of problems with the cutter’s propulsion systems during operations and, thus, will have to purchase new equipment to replace these systems. We found that the cutter's propulsion systems have been experiencing problems during operations. We will report back to you on the progress of this project in the coming months. studies underway to identify the root causes of these problems. Until the causes are identified and corrective actions implemented, the Coast Guard is at risk of experiencing costly and potentially mission-limiting problems with this equipment. DHS agreed to provide oversight and specify any problems with the equipment. The Coast Guard has a fleet of more than 1,000 ships and submarines. The fleet is based in San Diego and is responsible for protecting the U.S. Navy's fleet of ships and aircraft. The U.N. Security Council has approved a resolution that would require the Coast Guards to improve their equipment. The Coast Guard plans to award a contract for the second phase of this acquisition by the end of June 2016. We noted in June 2014 that when the government owns technical data rights, it does not need to rely on only one contractor to meet requirements. As a result, the Coast Guard does not rely on one company to meet its requirements. The Coast Guard also does not use the same contractor for all of its data acquisition projects. The government does not require the same company to do all of the data acquisition work. award, by the end of fiscal year 2016, a contract to one of these shipbuilders to complete the detailed design of the vessel and construct the first 9 to 11 ships. As we also reported, the Coast Guard plans to recompete the contract for the remaining vessels. Competitive contracts can be won by a number of different companies, including private firms, shipyards, and shipyards in the U.S. and around the world. For more information on the contract, visit www. Coast Guard.gov. at a point when fixes can be incorporated into the design of an asset while it is still in production. As we have previously found for Department of Defense programs, continuing with full-rate production before ensuring that assets meet key requirements risks replicating problems in each new asset until such time as such. until such a point as can be reached. We have found this to be the case with many of our defense programs, including the U.S. Air Force, Navy and Marine Corps.