Professor: We're talking about evolutionary game theory in the case of, well, biological evolution. He says it's not that we think that the cells are engaging in any sort of weird puzzle solving. Instead, he says, they're just mutations. And the more fit individuals spread in the population, and somehow, you evolve to the same or similar solutions in the context of game theory, he adds. "From my standpoint as an experimentalist, I don't forget about the basic insights about the experimentalist," he says. In a population that is experiencing this Moran process or Moran model, constant population size N equal to 1,000. Each time that an individual divides, it has a 1 in a million probability of mutating. The probability of getting both mutations in one generation is going to be 10 to the minus 12. And then there is the question, will 0, 1 actually fix in the population before later later? And actually, there's a question of do we have to worry about clonal interference or not? a minute. But if you don't understand what's going on, it'll take you an hour. Ready? Three, two, one. OK, all right, so we do have a fair range of answers. I'd say it might be kind of something like 50-50. And that's great. It means that there should be something to talk about. So turn to a neighbor. You should be able to find somebody that disagrees with you. And if everyone around you agrees, you can maybe-- all right. So there's a group of D's and aGroup of B's here, which means that everybody-- AUDIENCE: Let's fight. Professor: If you have 998 individuals that are 0, 0 individuals, and one that's 0, 1, and you have one individual that is 1, 0. The probability for that first path would be the S for 0,1, so it's 0.02, multiplied by the probability that the other [INAUDIBLE] 1,0 would die out. So the probability of fixing it in the back direction is not 0, but it's exponentially suppressed. So this is actually, in principle, not quite answering the question that I asked, because this is a non-neutral deleterious mutation. that are present maybe in one copy. In order for this individual to fix, he has to survive stochastic extinction, which happens with the probability of 2%. And the 1, 0 individual has to go extinct, which happening 90% of the time. And so this is, indeed, answering the question that if you had one copy of each of these two mutant individuals in the population, that's the answer to what is the probability that this 0, 1 mutant would fix. But that's a slightly different question than talking about the relative probability of the first state. One is the time between the time to fix, which went as 1 over S log of NS, right? So we can ignore clonal interference if this is much larger than that. No clonal interfered corresponds to mu N log NS much less than 1. Is that right? Did I do it right? OK. So and once again, there are multiple S's, and it's easy to get kind of upset about this. But you can just use whichever S would be-- which S would you want to use to be kind of-- rate, you don't even do successive fixations. So it may be that neither state ever actually fixes, because it could be that the 1, 0 state is growing exponentially, but is a minority of the population. And it gets another mutation that allows it to go to 1, 1. So as you increase the mutation rate, you can kind of move through states. And there's a whole literature of the rate at which you cross fitness valleys. It's just important. If the fitnesses depend on composition-- this is the population composition-- then you cannot even define a fitness landscape. In game theory, the payouts that you read about in Chapter Four are kind of what would happen in that sort of situation. And from this framework, you can see that there are going to be a bunch of kind of non-trivial things that can happen, even in this regime where everything's linear. And surprisingly, surprisingly, that does not mean that it's not possible to have bi-stability, or you can have another coexistence or you have another type of coexistence. be in trouble, et cetera. So the idea of the prisoner's dilemma is that if you set up these jail sentences in the right way, then it could be the case that each individual has the incentive to confess. And you can come up with some reasonable payout structure that has that property. And we'll call this-- so this is for individual one, say and individual two. So there are different strategies you can follow. And do you guys remember from the reading slash my explanation how to read these charts? In a population, if you have genetic A's and genetic B's that are each giving birth to their own type, then you evolve to some coexistence of genotypes. Whereas in this situation over here, we have coexistence. Does not matter where you start. So long as you have some members of both A and B in the population, you'll always evolve to the same equilibrium. Whereas the mixed Nash equilibrium is a situation where you have, in principle, genetic homogeneity. So this is a single genotype that is implementing phenotypic heterogeneity. In many cases, isogenic populations of microbes can exhibit a diversity of phenotypes as a result of stochastic gene expression and bi-stability. Another question is, what is the evolution explanation for why that behavior might have evolved? Now in general, we cannot prove why something evolved, but we can make educated guesses that make experimentally testable hypotheses. And for example, in the experiment that we've been doing, we're looking at bi-modality in expression of the galactose genes in yeast.