This week we'll look at the super magic formula. The formula is a compaction of a lot of math. We'll use it to derive a general formula for something moving on something that's moving. The class will also work on the spider problem and the Frisbee problem. The course is free and open to the public. Use the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on MIT Open Courseware. For more information about MIT open courseware, visit MIT opencourseware at ocw.mit.edu.  angular velocity is a kind of a madeup concept that just simplifies the math and it's kind of intuitive stuff is rotating Theta Dot multiplied by you know the Le lever arm right gives you a velocity but you can see how it kind of slaughtered into place. angles don't add up right if I change the order in which I add angles they don'tAdd up right so if I said 45° up and I'm going to trade 45° my arms up here right why is the why is this angle adding up here a has something changed over the weekend if I turn 45° anyway you know. Andrew Keen explains how angles don't add up but infinite decimal angles do add up. He says that if I just took Theta as a Theta with this vector and I said apply these two rotations well depending on the sequence in which you added the rotation vectors up you end up with a different position right but vectors don't have the problem when you add two vectors it doesn't matter what sequence you add them in right if I have two vectors whether I do this or whether I write this first and do this the net Vector is the same you get it. The final you know in terms of that initial frame get it and W so we introduced the the velocity and then the next thing we did last last in the last class was I revealed to you this magic formula I said if you have a vector let's call it n and you want to take its derivative with respect to the frame a now if you the way we did it was we would rewrite in in terms. of the basis vectors of frame a right interms of A1 A2 a lot of math lot of derivatives. but you need this correction term which is very beautiful done done okay so this was the magic formula that I introduced in the last class how would we go about proving this anybody yeah do the math how wouldWe do theMath how would We prove this here's what we'll do let's prove it let's consider a frame a by the way you notice I will always show frames with this little circle a saying that it's a frame and with a little wiggly line pointing to it I willAlways do that if I don't stop me and make sure I do it okay. here so will you please expand it for me what does that come out to be this is the left hand side of that formula right and we'll do the right hand side separately and show that the two are the same I'm trying to prove it to you right so I'm not you know I'm doing just very boring stuff but we need to do it just establish it what is d by a d by DT of U1 cosine Theta it is U1 do cosine theta right minus U Theta do sin Theta okay. let's do that so let's imagine I'm spinning a basketball on my finger I could never do that but I'm doing it right. The room the world the Earth is a frame the basketball is another frame the kind of the U you know you guys need to be like uh Neo in Matrix have you seen that movie right it's very very important if you understand Matrix algebra you need to see Matrix all right so go see Matrix and you know how Neil kind of you know he when he's totally you know after Lawrence fishburns you know kind of trained him Etc he goes down and he can see. yeah okay using um frames uh using angle of velocity so the problem was we have the ground, the spider and the Frisbee. We characterize this situation with three parameters okay and the parameters are the positions of the center of the frisbe right and the distance of the spider. How many degrees of freedom does an insect have on a plane treat is a point okay it's a treat like a DOT it's only two right but yet we characterize this situations with three. parameters. can kind of do it that way but the simple way to do it is to simp well you know it doesn't matter we can just write this as B take the whole term d by DT of lb1 plus what quick hm I'm hearing a hesitant murmur not the yeah I was mumbling something a moment ago I'll tell you what I was trying to say uh cross lb1 what is a Omega B so we can rewrite a Omega b as Theta dot B3 and so this whole thing comes down to I'm going to write the answer here to save a Blackboard. you'll notice with coris these two terms always show up in different places and they add up just and it becomes two right. If you as I said if one of you invents a new term we'll name it after you okay and and so far I've used these words coris and all that I kind of called them out without telling you a lot more about them right so what we're going to do now is take a break in the following way I'm going to show you some videos showing you the coris force when I'm when you're done with these videos um you will a totally understand what the cholis not effect sorry not force cholis acceleration is. The Coriolis effect is what happens when things want to go straight but the kid in the m go around sees something different G volume turned up to an observer above the merry go around. The path of the ball appears kind of Swing Away get it and what happens with things like hurricanes and we'll show you I'll show some videos later if we have time is so now you're you're on the North Pole right you're sitting in the North pole and this is the Earth this is North Pole okay you're looking down a particle when it's let's say there's a low pressure. direction in which the vortex takes place okay the vortex is created far more by asymmetries in the sink or by rotation that was created earlier that can of remained right okay the angle of momentum which we'll cover later on the class it stays for a long time and it influences things to go in one way or the other. So it sinks you in fact you can construct a really large sink and you know apparently you can show it but it's very hard to do it it's hard to kind of isolate environmental factors so sinks not a valid example hurricanes avalid example. that wasn't the reason the corus effect was discovered so I take it back right but there it is also true that in the in World War I when the British when a British Fleet near Faulkland ran into a German Fleet they spend they shot 1,000 shells uh taking the Coriolis effect of the northern hemisphere well they were in the Southern Hemisphere and missed and then 60 shells um they actually use the right correction and they nailed the German Fleet and they won that battle so it's certainly true that by this you know by by the time World War II came along the range of these guns was high enough that the coriolus effect is relevant.