GILBERT STRANG: Differential equations is the big application of calculus. He says it's interesting to see what information and ideas from calculus actually get used in differential equations. Strang: You really do need to know basic derivatives. The derivative of e to the x of functions that really blow open the functions or we can deal with, he says. "I just like that the use of the fundamental theorem of calculus we need," Strang says. 'It's not everything by any means, but not all the details you learned' is e to the x. Dy dt equals y. And then the inverse function related to the exponential is the logarithm. With that special derivative of 1/x. But you know those. Secondly, out of those few specific facts, you can create the derivatives of an enormous array of functions using the key rules. Derivative is a linear operation. The product rule fg prime plus gf prime. The quotient rule. Who can remember that? And above all, the chain rule. The derivative of this-- of that chain of functions, that composite function is the derivative of f with respect to g. be nice, I just think if you plug that in, to that differential equation it's solved. OK so I want to take the derivative of that. That's my job. And that's why I do it here because it uses all the rules. OK to take that derivative, I notice the t is appearing there in the usual place, and it's also inside the integral. But this is a simple function. I can take e to the t-- I'm going to take eto the t. tells us about bending? That is delta t squared times the second derivative. One half shows in there. So this is the term that changes the tangent line, to a tangent parabola. It notices the bending at that point. So it curves up. It doesn't follow it perfectly, but as well-- much better than the other. OK. Now finally, what if we want to do even better? Well we need to take into account the third derivative and then the fourth derivative and so on. If we get all those derivatives then, all of them that means, we will be at the real one.