Jonathan Gruber: What stops people from bingeing on everything? It's their limited resources. He says budget constraints, by setting relative prices across goods, can help with a lot of kind of decisions in life. Grubert: What about shocking the budget constraint? We're going to do a lot in this class of what we call comparative statics, Gruber says. "We're not going to tell you what to eat. That's why it's better than dieting because, once again, Adam Smith was right" earn, OK? That is there won't be any savings or borrowing,. OK? Now that is a simplifying assumption. The median American household has $400 in the bank. So this is not kind of a terrible description of the way most people live their lives in America, which is what they earn each week and what they spend each week. But that's a good question. Now let's ask about a second thing. What if your income goes up? What if prices are back to 12 and 6, but your parents decide to send you more money? the price per cookie. P is the number of pizzas, and C is theNumber of cookies. That's your budget constraint. You can essentially devote your income to some combination of pizza and cookies, but you have to consider how much they actually cost in doing that. The more you spend on one, the less you get of another. The rate at which you can trade off pizza for cookies is minus 1/2, OK? That is every additional cookie would require giving up half a slice of pizza. Weight Watchers has developed the best method of weight loss in America. They set up a budget constraint and ask you to follow it. They essentially assign point values to every good you might consume. They say, if you want to achieve a weight loss of x over y days, then you've got to limit yourself to z points. So, essentially, on lunch. you can get a 10-piece nugget, which is 12 points, apple slices, and a Diet Coke. for a total of only 13 points. Audience: How do you determine your marginal rate of transformation? How do determine your-- like say it wasn't just pizza and cookies. How would you determine that value? JONATHAN GRUBER: That's a great question, and we're going to actually answer that question next lecture very explicitly. We'll talk about why income changes differ from price changes and what are the underlying mechanisms. Yeah? You can solve virtually every consumer choice problem I'll give you, OK? That basically, the ratio of marginal utilities equals the ratio prices. point A better? Why isn't it better to have two? Maybe you just-- maybe you like cookies a lot and don't like-- or like pizza a lot. How can we say that point D is better than point A? Yeah? AUDIENCE: Why not choose point E? It's above the budget. JONATHAN GRUBER: Yeah, you can't afford it. OK, likewise, point C you wouldn't choose. Point C has the same slope as point D. In other words, the slope is minus 1/2 at point C. Jonathon Gruber asks audience to trade two pizzas for one cookie. "That's what that number means. And that is a meaningful number," he says. "You are willing to give up 2.5 slices of pizza to get one cookie" "So what should you do? Eat less pizza. Eat more cookies," he asks. "We can use that. That's not an ordinal. that's cardinal" "You're willing to trade. Yeah, say it loudly so we can hear," he adds. Jonathon Gruber: Food stamps are not actually called food stamps anymore. He says the point of SNAP isn't really with contentedness or happiness, but rather like what would be to a more sustainable life. GRUBER: If you really just care what makes people happiest, you should give them cash, OK? He says there's another reason why it might not matter? What's a way people could get around food stamps? Yeah? AUDIENCE: Buy food with food stamps and sell it. Jonathon Gruber: If we think that people won't necessarily make the right decisions for themselves, then it may be worth actually making them worse off. Gruber says the empirical evidence is that, basically, the price of our paternalism is 15%. He says in developing countries, the answer seems to be just giving people cash makes them better off, but that runs into a lot of difficulties in terms of our concerns about how people will spend it. Grubert: At this point, the evidence is sort of probably in favor of being less paternalistic and justGiving people cash. example, they have a series of evaluation programs where they've given people cash. And they find that people spend relatively little of that on drugs and alcohol, but they actually tend to spend it productively. And, in fact, they found, in developing countries, this often provides valuable resources for individuals to start businesses. So they ran experiment Uganda where a nonprofit company randomly offered a group of women $150, which is huge relative to their income. That actually effectively doubled their earnings. From that one injection of cash, it led them to actually double their annual earnings, OK? stop there. We will come back on Monday, and we'll talk about how we actually go from this stuff to the demand curves we started the class with. Back to the page you came from. back to CNN.com home. Follow us on Twitter @cnnireport and @CNNOpinion. Follow CNN Living on Facebook and Twitter. For more, go to www.cnn.com/lifestyle and www.dailymail.co.uk/lpin.