We have in essence three different views of fiscal policy and how well it works. Keynes says we can change aggregate demand in such a way that we can make. The crowding out problem and the crowded out problem says well when you go out and you borrow all of this money you're gonna change the demand for loanable funds. We have a political problem here which is that once you actually start spending money it becomes difficult to take money away once you start giving people something taking out money away now becomes very very difficult. irate demand it's what's changing the short-run aggregate supply right eventually this recession we've got a lot of unemployed people remember here you see unemployment is greater than the natural rate of unemployment right so in essence you have cyclical unemployment we don't want that. Eventually we'll return to this full employment level of output and we'll do so at this lower price level say pl0 or I'll just call it pl - so we know that eventually SRA s increases to S aureus - output equals YF price level equals po2. money aside for college that was the loanable funds market they're putting money in there for savings they're saving it they're the suppliers you guys are borrowing money to go to school and you're now demanders you're the ones taking money out. When the interest rate goes - I - what happens to private borrowing what is it at now do it q2 is the total that's private and public how much is private borrowing. If I borrowed 300 from you you have 300 less to spend and so this guy goes up by 300 this guy go down by 300 what happens with this guy he stays the same. Paige: There's some tax rate here between zero and 100 that makes tax revenue as large as it can possibly be. Paige: Every single Monday that I come to work I'm essentially not doing anything I do all the day's work I deal with all of the kids. If you go labor every Monday right Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday 20 40 60 80 100 % I don't teach on Saturdays all right and so if they're taking 20% it's like they're like forget it it's not worth it.