The goal of this course is to give you the tools to interpret complicated phenomena. You don't know anything unless you have a reductionist picture of what's going on. The relationship between the effective quantum number and the ionization energy of a state then provides a hydrogen-atom-based structural model for everything you can observe. Your support will help MIT OpenCourseWare continue to offer high-quality educational resources for free. To make a donation or view additional materials from hundreds of MIT courses, visit MIT Open courseWare at ocw.mit.edu. happen. But this was something that nobody in the world was interested in because it was the breaking of the usual patterns. And so I'm going to try to give you at when you go from hydrogen to helium, you can't solve the Schrodinger equation exactly. But you can do it really well, and it just costs computer time. And if the computer is doing the work, you don't really care. Because once you've told the computer the rules, then it's off to the races. So what we know is this permutation operator, operating on any two-electron function, has to make-- OK, I'm skipping steps, and my notes are really kind of stupid sometimes. So there's only two possible eigenvalues. You can have minus 1 or plus 1. And the minus 1 corresponds to fermions, things that have half-integer spin, like electrons. The plus 1 corresponds, like photons, and vibrons, and other things. And actually, it's harder to construct a symmetric function than an anti-symmetric function. So we just have to kill this one. Stick diagrams are great, because it's easier to see on a picture, who are the actors, and have I included all of them, or have I left something out? And so now we're interested in the stick diagram for the 1s 2s configuration. And there are several kinds of 1s/2s configurations, depending on what the alpha and beta are. So there's four guys, and we can put our arrows on these things. It tells us what to do. want details. Hund: We want to know the trends of things, and we want to be able to do something like what you did in freshman chemistry on shielding. Hund: People get really excited when they discover a violation of Hund's rules. And it's just trivial. So there is this. What time is it? I have a few minutes to talk about shielding, and I will. OK, so we have a nucleus. and it has a charge of z. And so outside the nucleus, the charge is plus one, because you have a neutral atom. And then when you penetrate inside this region of dense charge, and all of the spins are generally paired, this is spherical. Hund's rules is all about, of all of the states that belong to a particular configuration, which one is the lowest? One-- which one, not the second lowest. And why do we care? Because in statistical mechanics everything is dominated by the lowest energy state. So if you can figure out what is the low energy state, you've basically got as much as most people are going to want. The highest possible value of J is equal to L plus S-- so for L, N greater than 3.