Professor Shelly Kagan: Life on the experience machine is perfect as long as you've got the right tape playing. But if something's missing from that life, there's more to the best kind of life than just having the right mental states, she says. Different theories of well-being might answer that in different ways, Professor Kagan says. But the crucial point is that it takes more to have the best life than getting the right insides, says Kagan, and that gives a whole lot of value to your life. All think accomplishment's important, but it's not as though any old accomplishment is important. We can say that there are certain things that are good above and beyond experiences. It's one thing to know your place in the universe, or to know the fundamental laws of physics. But it's another care about the overall shape of our lives, we might worry about wanting it to have the right shape overall. The unpredictability of our death adds an extra negative element. It makes it harder to plan the best way to live my life. are people who think that for everybody in every case, in every circumstance, the total is always positive. Modest container theories, that is, say there's a value to being alive, but it can in principle be outweighed. And among the bads of a valuable container theory, you have to add something more. So even if, you might say, the way my life is going in terms of its contents is bad, being alive per se might still be a good thing. But if the contents get bad enough, then you'd be better off dead. Hedonism is a version of the "neutral container theory" of the value of life. Hedonism: How well off you are, how valuable your life is is a function of the contents, the pleasure and the pain. If you're a fan of the neutral container theory, you won't have anything extra to add, because life per se is just a zero. But if you accept contents have to be horrible to outweigh it, depends on how much value you think being alive per se has. theory myself--I'm inclined to think not only that the contents of life would be bad, eventually, for all of us if we were immortal. But let me remind you that saying that does not rule out the possibility of consistently going on to say that even though it's a good thing that we die, because eventually immortality would be horrible. For all that, death could still come too soon. There could still be variability. Some people live 80 years, some people live 20 years. Because of the birthmark, everybody knows exactly how much longer they've got. It's not merely the fact that you're going to die; it's a necessary truth that we're all going to death. So we might ask, what about this inevitability of death? Does that make things worse? And here I want to distinguish between the individual question and the universal question. I myself, in different moods, get pulled in both ways. I think you can see--you can get a feel for both possible answers here. And so it is indeed a fact of our powerlessness that we are stuck with the necessities. in life is necessary, then we'd get a kind of emotional distance from it; it would no longer upset us. The story "bad to good" is the kind of story we want for ourselves, while the story "good to bad" is what we don't want. We want the bad behind us, not the bad in front of us. So, whatever the explanation is, we care about the overall shape and trajectory of our life. We have to worry then that because of the unpredictability of death that our lives may not have the ideal shape. 20s--you know 20--roughly another 60 years are going. And as you're busy calculating all this, you're walking across Chapel Street and you get hit by a truck and you die. Right? Because of unpredictability, you can't really know. And in particular, it's hard to know how to pace yourself. It's a long-term plan, which can go wrong if you get sick and die in your early 20s. Well, that's a rather dramatic example, but the same sort of thing in principle can happen to you. ask--so I'll throw the question out and we'll call it a day, start with this next time--then we have to ask, would it really be better to know? would you want the birthmark? Would you want to know exactly how much time you've got left? All Right. See you next time. Back to the page you came from. Click here for more from CNN iReport. Back To the pageyou came from, back to thepage you were from.