Jeffrey Grossman: We're going to talk about energy storage. He says the planet is kind of a storage device for that thing over there. Most energy storage needs are going to be around a year or less, he says. Grossman says electricity is more and more important in our lives. We'll go into batteries and then talk about the chemistry of batteries and throw in a couple of, why this matters, he writes..com/jeffrey-grossman/energy-storage-technique. The second law of thermodynamics makes you pay a penalty of energy if you convert it into heat and then back into electricity. Most power plants at best are around 50% efficient in terms of converting the thermal energy into electrical energy. So you could do chemical reaction to heat. That's how we power most of our world today. And it's one of the reasons why electrochemical change not going from your computer to your phone but going fromyour car to your cell to a house to a grid. Entropy is not about smoothness and it's not about disorder. Entropy is about accessibility to states. A messier room does not have higher entropy, and in this case, it's just simply the rules of the algorithm. It's about how many states you have to be in. Now, that can appear to be like disorder, right, but a messier Room does not has higher entropy. I love that you guys are blown away. I have rules here about entropy. In the early 1900s, a physicist named Galvani tried to make a connection between motion and electricity. He hooked up a lightning rod to a frog, and the frog went crazy. He deduced that the motion itself is something that generates electricity. The story of Frankenstein was written because they went around and electrocuted things and showed that they moved, and often they weren't alive, and so Mary Shelley, I think, saw that. The volt is named after Volta, who created the first stable battery, the voltaic pile. How do you make a battery that doesn't heat up when it's turned on? How do you stop the heating from happening and instead take advantage of this trading of electron work? That's what a battery is. It's just a different construction of the device, but it's just as important as the design of the battery, right? We'll get to that in a few minutes, but first, let's look at a reaction that happens when you put copper sulfate and zinc in a beaker. is yes, but I'm taking 2. I'm not taking 1, I'm talking about the oxidation state of 2 plus. That's going to be harder here. It's harder to take a 4s1 in a 3d from that beautifully filled 3d shell than it is to take these 2s electrons. So what you can see is that the potential difference is all about chemistry, right. And then finally, the last kind of piece of this is that we need a reference because you can only get changes in potentials. renewables at large scales unless you store it. In fact, we're really at essentially the tipping point. If you look at-- this is Germany, now. Huge penetration-- these are these six years, seven years of adding PV. They're now at 7%. 2016 is 7%. This is how much the price of electricity was in Germany when they added. They can sell it for a lot of money. But as they add more of this renewable to the grid, its price goes down when it's available.