Michael Short: Today, we're going to measure the efficiency of a Geiger counter. We're also going to take some sort of gross count of our source plus the net count rate of our actual source. And because I don't want to count for the next seven years, we've concentrated the ashes of 50 pounds of bananas in here to boost your signal strength. Short: The idea here is that this measure is actually a measure of confidence. So the two things that you do to decrease this standard deviation are to decrease the count rate and to increase your counting time. dose and distance or measured activity and distance? Yeah, Luke. AUDIENCE: [INAUDIBLE] r cubed. MICHAEL SHORT: Close. It's, let's say, the measured activity would be proportional to 1 over r squared. Does anyone know why this formula would break down? What happens to our solid angle or our approximation for ourSolid angle is kind of the analog to regular old angle, except in 3D. So instead of looking at things in radians, this has the unit of what's called steradians. a lot. So everybody peeled the bananas, put them in the oven, baked them, separated off the tin foil, baked off as much water and sugar as possible to concentrate the potassium 40 in the banana. So when you do the banana count, we frequently take a spectrum on this with the lid closed, and we always see potassium 40. There's potassium 40 everywhere. So after we get the count of bananas, we'll take a background count. You'll want to subtract the two signals. And it's just a little tiny piece in a little piece of quartz. know. Most of the Boston area is 21. But once you leave Boston-- MICHAEL SHORT: It varies. I don't think it is where I'm-- from Swampscott. But that's kind of up on the commuter rails. You don't want to go to Swampsc Scott. At any rate, I would think that, OK, it's 21. You can buy them. It's still late-stage. it's like town-to-town. But you have to be 18 to smoke. Geiger: How long do you have to count in the smoke shop to be 95% percent sure? So let's say your count rate's 5% uncertain. How do you know that we're 95% confident of our count rate plus or minus 5% error? That's the main question for today. Does anyone know how we'd start? Anyone get to the reading today? I see some smiles. OK. We'll start from scratch, then. All right, so who here has heard of a normal distribution before? A lot of you guys. Great. Michael Short: Counting is a truly random process, and errors in the background rate and the gross rate could add together or could subtract from each other. What you actually want is to do what's called uncertainty in quadrature, where you add up the sum of the square roots of those errors. Short: Even if you count for 67 minutes at 25 counts per minute, that might not be enough to discern the activity of the smoke shop, or the source, or whatever you happen to be looking at. If you go plus or minus 1 sigma away from your true average right here, you've filled in 68% of the area under this normal distribution. Similarly, if you went plus 2 sigma or minus 2 s Sigma, it's around 95% confident. 3 sigma is getting towards 99 point-- what was the number, again-- I think it's 6.5%. And then so on, and so on. There's actually societies called 6 sigma societies. And the way that they get their name is we're so confident of things we can predict them to 6 s Sigma. let's start substituting this out. That's not mine, so we can get rid of that. So we have see C b over t b squared plus C g over t g squared. What's next? How do we relate t g and C g? Well, let's start with the easy stuff, right? What can we cancel, or square, or whatever? Just somebody yell it out. And do I have to go through the rest the math with you guys? I think, at this point, we've got it pretty much solved. activity in the smoke shop to within some confidence and some error. In New Hampshire, the background count's quite a bit higher, because there's a lot of granite deposits, and granite can be upwards of 52 parts per million radium. The reason there's copper is if you get a high energy gamma ray into some lead, that's how I measure nickel, using n p reaction. The thing I really like-- excuse me, where's my vials? I used to have some smaller ones up here. NAA is a process of measuring the neutron flux in a nuclear reactor. The neutron flux is used to calculate how much activation you'd get based on neutron flux. NAA is done in liquid nitrogen, which is a very low, fast spectrum. There's usually an energy threshold for fast reactions, like 1V or 1.5V, which we do in NAA. The place where the thermal irradiations take place is where the NAA takes place, so we don't usually have to worry about that. Michael AMES: I've got a whole bunch of little spacers if I'm counting something that's hot. For longer radiations there's a spot in the basement in the reactor where they can get these, and they send them into the irradiation location. The dangerous thing is dropping lead bricks on your feet. MICHAEL SHORT: We did just go for a solid angle too, today, today. So, cool guys, you are here to do an experiment on MIT 1. samples. But we'll figure out how many samples we'll run. MICHAEL SHORT: It's one per person. [INAUDIBLE] MICHAEL AMES: That's a lot of shorts. In pairs, right? MICHAEL ShORT: Yeah. So I'll show you how the shorts get run. So when we run your shorts, we'll running your samples and we'llrun standards, and then you can do the comparative method. Or, if you feel like it, you can doing the other method. lake sediments. Other analytical methods have gotten a lot better, and so they've kind of caught up to NAA, and you don't need a reactor to run those. The environmental side of this has kind of quieted down a lot. But it's still useful for a bunch of things. I also work in the NCORE group. So that's a lot of my time, rather than just this lab. Practical things-- let's go take a look at a couple other labs. that looks at zinc deficiencies, and fingernails and toenails will give you a good record of how much zinc you've had over the last week, or month, or whatever-- depend where you cut the nails. And so I was going to get a couple of hundred African children's toenail. That didn't happen. But I did analyze my own toen nails. Well, if you went to somebody who was a little suspicious of you, asking for toenailed is a lot easier than asking for a blood sample. Because people would give up toenailing-- it's not a big deal. This is some soil from Montana next to a mine, so it's nicely contaminated with some metals. This is my IAEA mercury and hair standard. And this is kind of what everybody uses for standards. And you just kind of have a whole collection of them. And depending on what elements you're looking for, you try to mix and match them so you cover what you want without having to run five or six of them, says Michael Ames. And so that's how I do the comparative method. The experiment we're doing is basically change reactor power by half a megawatt. With me today is Tim. To actually do this experiment, we need two licensed people in here, one at least has a senior reactor operator. Both Tim and I are both senior licenses, so we have that covered. The only way you can actually do these manipulations are if you're in my training program-- I'm the training supervisor for the facility. And the program you guys are in fits that definition. Once it reaches the power level you want to stop at, the 1 megawatt, keep driving the regulating rod in to hold it at that power level. You haven't stopped the power at this time, you've just decreased how fast it's going up. The power level will sill go up, but a much slower rate than it was before. So once again, you make an entry in a log book that says I'm going to lower ranked power to 500 kilowatts, and then this time we'll use a shim blade. The reactor is on autocontrol. When we do these manipulations, the reactor operator is going to take manual control. That'll cause an alarm to come in. And this will only happen for the first time. And that should be the only time you hear this alarm, because we'll leave it on. The last person will make an announcement that we're done with power manipulations. We'll do that at the end-- is she'll take Manual control of the reactor, and she'll answer it. where it started, the 13.42 inches out of the bottom of the core. It might not make it all the way back up to [INAUDIBLE]. FRANK WARMSLEY: It'll be close. Compensate with the reg rod if you need to. 30.8. OK. And that's the end of the exercise. We'll be back in a few minutes with the results of the test. We hope to see you on "Larry King Live" next week.