Professor: The games that we'll end up playing today are games from last year. A lot of them are actually the final semester-- the final project. Professor: I want you to keep in mind that you're not constrained to building games that look exactly like those. "You when you actually play someone else's game, then you're the most important person," he says. "If that person's experience is problematic or exciting or engaged or outright hostile to other players, that's making it the way that they want to take it" I want to-- I try to cover quite a bit of it from the first reading during class itself. Was anyone here not here on Wednesday? OK, all right. So we need to make sure that your name's on the attendance sheet. And you should come and talk to me after class. And we'll make sure you get a copy of the syllabus and everything like that. Make sure that you get expectations for this class. So I hope you got-- I got it allright. If you don't let the player know what changed the game state, is it that meaningful a decision anymore? If you expect players to get very into your game, this is the stuff that you can leave with because they will understand it and figure it out on their own. There's a long term consequences, so a lot of immediate feedback, which is a term that you brought up. In Dominion, oftentimes you can draw cards that don't help you just pointlessly causing a reshuffle. Candy Land was invented to keep kids from getting polio from each other, professor says. In Mafia, all the information you're getting in the game is through other people in Mafia. In Battleship, there's again the hidden-- information that's hidden from you, but it's completely available to your opponent and vice versa. Charades and Pictionary-- usually your teammates are the ones who are guessing in Charades. In Village, we sort of did stuff, but we had-- and then afterwards, we didn't really understand. say, well, what if I tried this decision? And then there's an interesting phenomenon that goes with that in a lot of strategy games called save scrubbing. And that is where you know that the outcome of something is based on a probability. And so if you save and reload often enough, you will always be successful. But for a game whose random number seed has been saved and you fail and then you reload from the start, it means you'll always fail because that's a different concept of how the random number generator works. Don Norman's first chapter in the design of everyday things. He talks about materials like wood and glass, right? Glass is for looking through. Wood is for holding things together. And in games-- let me just bring in an example. Let's try to identify the components of-- how many of you have played put before? Really, really-- this is the box. And we're going to do a little bit more detail in about two weeks when we revisit the idea of user design. in a visual game, that's telling me visibly, right now, that this might be the way I get to do that. In a lot of strategy games, some of these things are very literal, right? So and so technology gives you this bonus. But visibility has something to do with the intent of the player of the user in Norman's case. But he's not talking about games. He's talking about the design of everything. And what the system can actually do, the actual operations of the system. what you can see of the system. So there are affordances and there are constraints. These are both words that are introduced in that reading. I think affordances is introduced in this reading. What's an example of an affordance? AUDIENCE: If you can sit on a chair? PROFESSOR: What about this thing tells you that you could sit on it? AUDience: It seems sturdy, and it's got a place for your butt. PROFessor: Yeah, it's not made of spikes. It's got at least three legs, which may help, and evenly distributed, which means that it'sNot going to tip over. face on it, which I always thought was a little bit strange about-- that might have been designed, too, actually. That might have something because if you-- this won't kill you, really. So you should put it in your home. I want to find out more about the history of the Edison plug. AUDIENCE: It's actually-- the design with the ground on the bottom is a bad idea because if something starts falling out that are too exposed to it, it will not be the ground one. Carcassonne is a game about making large patches of land. You don't know what tile you're going to draw when you start playing the game. The tiles are identical with a back, and that tells us about these tiles, something that we already know about cards. The fact that you've got a hidden back gives you quite a lot of different possibilities in the game, says Professor Peter Schmitz. The game is about mapping, so back to the idea of mapping, he says. a whole bunch of ways that you can help people with these sorts of mappings. I guess Donald Norman would describe a lot of these as spatial, metaphors to use. Spatial mostly to describe things like driving in a car and you turn the wheel to the left specifically toward the top of the wheel. And you car it's directed to turn left, that sort of thing. There are sort of bodily metaphors as well. Things that are high are either supposed to be good and happy, things that are low when you're feeling depressed. deal and trade your cards to corner the market, et cetera. When it comes to Carcassonne, there is actually a deep, deep problem with this game despite how popular it is. And that scoring is actually pretty difficult to do. It's a math intensive problem. It does largely map on to how many of the meeples that to get all the CarcASSonne bits back. So and then we'll pick this up in about five minutes. We'll be back with the next episode in about 30 minutes. be good feedback on whether your clues are getting across to your teammate. But your opponents are also usually some sort of feedback mechanism that's keeping time. If they hear you say something, they go ah, ah,. ah. And are there a few more hands or something like that? So just always remember that you can employ other players into your feedback mechanism. It doesn't always have to be your game alone. It's a game I played a long time ago called Scotland Yard. The player positions is almost never known. The detectives are working on partial information to try to corner and close this dragnet. what he's talking about only, I doubt that actually imagined that this was something to be possible at the time when he wrote it. That was 1980. And cell phones obviously have gone through a lot of criticism. But it is it has been successful through a number of different reasons. Don't discount marketing as being a big part of it. It's expensive for what it does. But then, arguably, by locking out a many things that you might want to do but maybe don't have to do, they are trying to make it easier for you not to do the wrong thing.