Learn about radiation damage and nuclear materials in 22.01. Learn about the different material properties and what they actually mean. Use the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on MIT OpenCourseWare. You can also send in your own photos to share with the rest of the world. The Daily Discussion is a written version of each of the MIT Open CourseWare lectures. Use this week's Daily Discussion to help students with reading comprehension and vocabulary and to help them understand today's featured news stories. can put in until it starts to either plastically deform or it hits its UTS, ultimate tensile strength, where it will just fail. Stiffness is more of a response function, so it's how much does it deform in relation to how much stress you put into it. The effects of this are things like stiffening. An increase in the Young's Modulus. Radiation creates pretty much any and all defects, it's a great way to stiffen and strengthen the material. Michael Short: DPA measures the number of times that each atom has moved out of its original site, but it has nothing to do with how many times it stays. DPA is all over in less than a picosecond. But it can take years for all these different defects to diffuse, to cluster up, and to form these super structures. Short: Temperature determines diffusivities. It also can change phases or crystal arrangements, like for the case of anything iron-based, but that is indeed what happens in the end. energy E and imparting kinetic energy T to another struck atom? That comes right from-- remember our treatment-- I think I've drawn this probably 50 times now. Our hollow cylinder treatment of a charged particle with charge little ze interacting with a particle a big ZE at some impact parameter B. We wanted to know well, for all possible approach paths, the area of this hollow circle, or the probability that this particular approach path is taken, is just the area here 2pi b db. Nuclear materials data looks something like this. Would you be bold enough to draw a trend line through a single data point? No. What about three where it doesn't actually match up with one of them? Or is there any reason why you think they made this parabolic instead of a linear line? I can draw a line that would fit between the error bars of these two right. They're not readable because they're not important. What I do want you to know is what's the quality of this data set you see? Russia has a fleet of sodium cooled fast reactors that can get you 25 DPA per year. If your reactor is going to go to 500 DPA, you have to know whether or not your materials will survive. In order to prove that it's actually safe to continue operation, you must have some amount of material to test and say, OK, this vessel is still ductile, it's still going to work. We only plan to put these vessels in service for 40 years, and folks put 40 years worth of these coupons. pocket of vacuum, then that pressure differential goes down and that void becomes a bubble, and that bubble is more stable. At higher energy starting around 2 MeV, there is a small, but non-negligible chance that a neutron will go in, and a helium atom comes out. As the voids fill with gas, they become more and more stable and a lot of materials generate their own gas. You can also get dislocation buildup. Normally, you would have to deform a material to create and move dislocations, but when you apply radiation, you can just create dislocation. small clusters can collapse into dislocations or the stress induced from irradiating things can cause more stress. You create what's called this network forest of dislocation that makes things a lot harder to deform. So when you actually pull on something, to show you diagrammatically, it deforms something like that. You get a mixture of bending and rotation to make it look like the bar is bending uniformly straight, but on the microscale, it's not. To show you some extreme examples of slip, that's when you have to go nano. the metal that all those guys thought was going to be ductile like metal was more brittle than glass. And any sort of bump would cause just complete shattering of this metal and catastrophic release of radioactive material. So this took them-- let's see-- I think Kazakhstan is smaller than the US. So who here has done a cross-country trip? How long it take you? AUDIENCE: Six days from Seattle to here. MICHAEL SHORT: OK, so this trip took them 13 days because they went slow. These out and you hit them with a very well calibrated hammer. And you can measure by actually turning this dial and letting the hammer turn it. So it breaks right through the material, in this case, it's in a quenched or brittle condition. And by doing this test at a number of different temperatures, you can recreate this ductile-brittle transition temperature curve. So they'll take a few Charpy coupons, they will test them at, let's say, every 25 Celsius, get a bunch of points, and decide where is the material brittle. that gets the most damage, you'd be taking out some of the stainless steel, which is a problem. You could take a piece out from here, maybe the outside, but then you've got a stress concentrator. Any sort of chunk that is missing is where a crack is going to preferentially form. The only way to do that is to go nano. We can go much, much smaller and just take out tiny pieces of the vessel and get the same information from a Charpy test but on the nanoscale. Michael Short: We predict that something stores about 2% of its energy in radiation defense. Short: What if there was a way to know how many of each of those defects there actually were in a material? Short: He used a nano a DSC, or nano differential scanning calorimeter, that can heat about 10,000 a millisecond. He says the data was taken like two months ago, it's pretty fresh, and it's not published yet, so hopefully by the time this video comes out, it will be. Snipes are real. You pretty much have to be British to know it, because they hunt them there for sport, and apparently, they're delicious. That's actually where we get the term snipe because the actual size of the sniper compared to the sniper is about that. If you can shoot that bird, if you can get that shot, you're a snipe hunter. You're not looking for a bird that doesn't exist. It's what we call the ultimate snipe hunt. It actually fits on a chip. There's one that we put our material on, and one as a reference that we both put in the accelerator being irradiated at the same time. This is what they actually look like. The scale bar here is 100 microns, and that transparent spot is a little bit of aluminum that we vapor deposited onto the calorimeter. Right there. That whole thing just went from zero to 450c. That pulse right there. It slowed down by a factor of 1,000. And so the way this process works, is we take our DSC chip, we put a mask over it.