Professor: In almost all cases when you address atoms, you do two photon courses because a photon is scattered. In reality, it is a two photon process and not two single photon processes, he says. Professor: If you have any doubts about some subtleties about how is light absorbed and emitted, the correct answer is always obtained from the two-photon picture. He concludes with a discussion on Raman processes, which involve two different vibrational states of a molecule and two different momenta. many terms do you get if you write down the Hamiltonian? No approximation without. How many do we get? Four. But then I think in the second step you get eight more. So just tell you what is special about two photons. I focus now on a situation, and that's the most common situation in the laboratory. If this intermediate state is resonant with omega 1, then we only want to consider now the process where the first step to the intermediate step is driven by the field e1. So therefore, we have only one term, which dominates out of those four. lowest order perturbation, second order perturbedation theory, in two steps. But if you're asking, what is the transition probability? The transition probability, we have to get the probability to be in the excited state. And when we divide the probability, the amplitude squared by t, we get a rate. And this is Fermi's Golden Rule. It is exactly the same you have seen probably more than 100 times. So this is the correct description of resonant fluorescence and Rayleigh scattering. e to the minus i omega t, I mentioned once to you is the sign plus or minus means whether we absorb a photon or whether we emit a photon. If you're unlucky and don't choose your lasers wisely, the two laser photons could get you high up into an electronically excited state. But in general, I would say if you have more than one process, there is no interesting interference term. You just get two different rates. And you just have both simultaneously. They're not leading to the same final state. Say if omega 1 is very, very strong, you can exactly diagonalize the Hilbert space of states k and a. But again, what happens is you mix those two states. And it is the admixture now in a non-perturbative way of state k. And from this admixture, we can absorb omega 2. And so it looks like, actually, now a two-level system, where we go from the dashed line-- called which is scattered coherent with the incoming photon? Raman: We can determine the phase of the laser in a homodyne or heterodyne experiment. And if the laser is in a coherent state, we can measure phi to any level of accuracy. Perfect phi has now been imprinted into a two-level system for the first time, and it appears to be working, says Raman. Raman: The discovery by Raman, which was rewarded with the Nobel Prize, for suddenly observing when you excited molecules with a very strong light bulb, you suddenly saw very different frequencies. Two photons are absorbed from the left and from the right, and therefore you get a very, very sharp line. Since hydrogen is of methological importance, measurements of-- fundamental measurements of the Lamb shift, comparisons with QED calculations, measurement of the Rydberg constant-- these are all done by hydrogen spectroscopy. So therefore, it is very important to have precision method which suppresses the Doppler effect. If you now estimate what is the relative line width, the delta, the line broadening, in relation to the transition frequency? So just give me a second. line, which is sufficiently sharp, sufficiently narrow, and also insensitive to magnetic fields and electric fields. People who want to measure fundamental constants-- the Rydberg constant-- want to compare lame shift with first principle QED calculations. This is the case for hydrogen. And, actually, with some advance in the numeric calculation of wave functions and all that, it may also be possible to do it with helium. But so far it hasn't kind of-- helium has not replaced hydrogen. It's still is an important technique and important tool for measurements. Coherence exists if there is a well-defined phase between two or more amplitudes, but we can only observe it if those amplitudes interfere. Coherence can be two amplitudes describing two different atoms, or it can betwo amplitudes of two states within the same atom. The first form of coherence I want to discuss is the coherence involved in exciting atoms and the atom emitting light. It's related to the spontaneous emission and scattering problem. To be continued on Monday. of spontaneous emission. The 100% unique and correct answer is the system involves with the following operator. This is the operator which completely describes the interaction of an atom with the electromagnetic field. The fact that we have a unitary evolution with this operator is 100% or 110% true. But this operator will actually lead to final states of the photon field, which may not have a specific phase. And this is actually what I want to work out with you in-- maybe even today, I think ten minutes may be enough-- what is really the information-- the phase information-- which we have in a photon.