Fluorescence is the emission of light in the absence of heat. Luminescence is the general term. Fluorescence is a little bit more specific. There are different types of luminescence. And you'll get to see some of those varieties of luminecence. The first thing to learn about fluorescence is how to spell fluorescence. It actually is fluor, F-L-U-O-R-E-S. What are you guys whispering about? Did I get something else wrong? Luminescence is the interaction of a chemical with another chemical to give luminescence. Another pretty useful type of luminescent is bioluminescent. I've done a lot of scuba diving in my life. And there's nothing more exciting than a scuba dive where you're trying to find out what's going on under the water. It's a great way to get a sense of the depth of the water, and how the water is moving. I think that's the most famous luminol sort of example. a particular wavelength so it's called its Lambda of excitation. Once it's excited, it just drops its energy back out and goes back to the ground state. This wavelength is higher energy. Obviously you don't create energy when you shine light on something. You'd be breaking a few fundamental rules if you did. The other way is simply to soak a dye into the gel. And the dye, because of the positive charge here, the counter ion gets displaced to the DNA and associates with it quite tightly. Professor Martin: We can't use DNA ethidium bromide, which is toxic. Instead, we can use a series of dyes known as DAPI and HOECHST, H-O-E-C-H-S-T. These dyes bind to DNA pretty differently, Professor Martin says. Professor Martin: It's a combinatorial system to take little pieces of DNA to give you a molecular structure to recognize virtually any target. The BDJ will hear more about what you want to think about in the next segment. was in the major groove, it would be swimming around in that groove. It's almost too big. So what's really cool about these dyes is they slide in between into the minor groove. And they also make some contacts with the phosphodiester backbone. They're literally in the groove. But there's some opportunity for electrostatic interactions. And in fact, they bind in particular regions of DNA where there's AT, not GC. Those are the places where there're just the pair of hydrogen bonds instead of the trio. Professor Martin: antibodies are agents of the human adaptive immune system. He says they have been exploited intensively to study biology. Professor Martin: What you will learn from Professor Martin in two or three lectures time is much more about the nuts and bolts of the immune cells. He'll talk about the technological side of antibodies and how they are useful reagents to study Biology. He will also talk to you about how they recognize their targets and how it mounts a response to disease and other features.