in this module of tools and equipment we're going to explore cookware and storage wear. There are five basic metals that are used in cookware aluminum copper stainless steel cast iron and carbon steel aluminum pots and pans are the ubiquitous pans that you'll find in most every kitchen. A rondo is an amalgam of several different metals cladware sometimes referred to as allcloud because of its brand name is using different layers in of metal including stainless steel copper and aluminum to provide the benefits of each one of those metals. Interchangeably in many ways but believe it or not though there is a difference between these two does it make a difference in your cooking if you use one instead of the other. A saute pan or satwa is one with the straight sides and has a larger surface area which makes it ideal for tasks like searing meat or reducing a pan sauce. A sawtooth or skillet has a slope side and is used mainly in sauteing the slope sides providing the ample and perfect angle for flipping your food. Ziploc bags are an indispensable storage device for kitchens they allow the storage of dry goods and other small quantity items they can even be used in sous-vide cooking. polycarbonate's trade name lexan or by the company trade name cambro consists of large food boxes they come in full and half sizes three and a half inch deep six inch deep and nine inch deep. The speed rack is essential for storage and movement within the restaurant they can fit full size and half size sheet pans readily. notice that this two inch hotel pin will fit directly into this and it'll fit snugly. This is because you'll have water underneath in your four inch hotel pan that will be simmering. You do this by using sternos and these sternos will go in those little indents on the bottom and you'll fit this whole thing into a stand. You also have perforated hotel pans which are basically hotel pans with holes in them. These can be used as steamers you can use them to drain things in a steam steamer setup.