CASEY RODRIGUEZ: Theorems: A sequence converges to x if and only if the limit as n goes to infinity of the absolute value of xn minus x goes to 0. squeeze theorem: If you have three sequences-- a sub n, b sub n and x sub n-- so that x subN is in between a subn and b sub N, then the sequence x sub N converges. Limsup and liminf: The limit of aSub n as goes to Infinity is the limit of the sub n that exists. So we're going to show that a monotone sequence is increasing. Binomial theorem says that [? for all ?] [? N, the ?] natural numbers, x, y in R, x plus y raised to the n is equal to the sum from k equals 0 to n of n. If p is positive, then limit as n goes to infinity of p to the 1 over n equals 1. And the third is-- it's just that a certain limit exists-- limit asN goes to Infinity of n to 1 over N equals 1, OK? we've only defined what it means to take a real number to an integer power, but-- and n-th roots. So using that, we can then define how totake a real numbers to a rational power. All of that is just to say that what we've done up to now-- these things actually do make sense. You don't need the exponential and the logarithm to make sense of a positive real number. So in summary, the liminf of 1/n is the limit as n goes to infinity of the inf of this set. Bolzano: We're looking at now the set 1 over k, where n is-- where k is bigger than or equal to n. So 1/n plus 1-- that's always smaller than 1/ n, and so is 1/N plus 2, andSo on and so on. So as I move to the next entry, things are getting smaller and smaller. And in fact, this sequence just here now, written as-- thinking of this as a new-- so this is not a sequence-- this is a set. So we've seen sequences that don't necessarily converge, like minus 1 to the n. So we're now moving on to the topic of limsup and liminf of a sequence. Now, not are going to be certain limits, so it's not clear that they exist at all to begin with. But we'll show that they always do exist. We define limsup x sub n. And sometimes I'll write n goes to infinity underneath. Sometimes I'll just write limsup or just have an n underneath it. on hold just for a second, and now prove a very simple theorem that, if A and B are subsets of real numbers, A, B, both not equal to the empty set, and is A subset of B-- so also need to be bounded. So the sup of a smaller set is smaller than the Sup of the bigger set. And that inequality reverses for infs. The inf of the smallerSet is bigger than or equal to. the inf of a biggerSet. So the limsup of minus 1 to the n is 1. Now, if I change all these sups to infs, then the inf of this set is going to be the inf. And therefore, we also get-- OK? So the lim sup is 1 and the liminf is minus 1 for this set. That's just supposed to be a squiggly line, not necessarily looking like sigma. OK, so there's one sequence. How about our next favorite sequence, x sub n equals 1/n? to these two numbers, which may or may not be the same. So the reason this is so powerful and so strong is that it-- to get your hands on something, it doesn't require you to show something as strong as showing there is a sequence converging to that. So quite often, you can think in terms of variational problems, where you want to show that a minimum of something always exists or a maximum ofsomething always exists. Well, what you can try and do is take a sequence of guys that you stick into your-- so this is a general nonsense that youstick into your machine or function that spits out output. And these outputs are approaching the maximum or approaching the minimum. And what you'd like to say is that there does, in fact, exist an element that you can stick intoYour machine and