The configuration of a particle is given by, or described by, a wave function. In 3D, the wave function would be a function of all three positions x, y and z. All reasonable, or non stupid, functions psi of x are equally reasonable as wave functions. There's no primacy in wave functions or in states. Some wave functions are more equal than others. Probability is basically 0. It's nice and smooth. It converges to 0 infinity. The superposition principle. If there are two possible configurations the system can be in, which in quantum mechanics means two different wave functions that could describe the system. Professor: All reasonable functions are features, I'm going to talk about it as something with large momentum. In a quantum mechanical system, something with short wavelength is something that carries large momentum, he says. Professor: Being able to have a Fourier transform where you don't have arbitrarily high momentum modes is going to turn to be related to the derivative being continuous. The uncertainty in x is equal to the expectation value of x squared minus the expected value of X quantity squared, Professor says. Professor: Any function can be expressed as a superposition of states with definite momentum. He says a state with definite position, x0, can be written as a 1 over 2pi integral dk. Professor: To calculate the expected value of momentum do you need to transform the-- PROFESSOR: Excellent question. OK, so the question is, how do we do the same thing for momentum? If you want to find it, dx squared is the probability of finding it in this domain. question I want to ask you. Is that a superposition? Yeah. I mean every vector can be written as the sum of other vectors. And it can be done in an infinite number of ways, right? So there's no such thing as a state which is not asuperposition. Every vector is a superpositions of other vector. There's no God given basis for the universe. We look out in the universe in the Hubble deep field, and you don't see somewhere in theHubble deep field an arrow going x. Professor: To construct or detect an arbitrarily small feature, you need arbitrarily large momentum modes. Professor: In order to reproduce that as a superposition of states with definite momentum, I need arbitrarily high wavelength modes. He says it's really about the range, not just the number, of a feature, and that you need an arbitrarily large wavelength to detect it. The professor says he wants to encourage people to think to conflate distance and momentum because he wants it to be something that becomes intuitive to you. of sines and cosines, do you ever get a discontinuity? No. Do you get something whose derivative is discontinuous? No, you don't. So it's going to take an infinite number of sine and cosine to reproduce that little kink at the edge. So how would you ever reproduce a thing with a discontinued thing? Well, you'd need some infinite sum of sines & cosines where there's some technicality about the infinite limit being singular. Quantum mechanics professor: Average age is the sum over all possible ages of the number of people with that age times the age divided by the total number. Professor: The average need not be an observable value. Average value of the square of ages is, well, I'm going to do exactly the same thing. It's just a squared, right? 14 squared, 15 squared, 16 square, 16 squares, 16 squared. And so that's all I've written here. But notice that I can write this in a nice way. That's just the probability that any given person has a particular age. Is a squared equal to the expected value of a squared? No, in general no, not necessarily. How do we define the width of a distribution? This is going to be like our uncertainty. How happy are you today? Well, I'm not sure. How unsure are you? well, that should give us a precise measure. What does it mean if the average of a is 0? It means it's centered at 0. So if the standard deviation is 0, one then the distribution has no width, right? in this fashion or this fashion. And the notation for this is delta a squared. Different probability distributions are going to give me different delta a's. And one answer is, indeed, the uncertainty relation works out quite nicely. But then I think important to say here is that there are many ways you could construct quantities. There is no God given reason why this had to be the right thing. I can say more, but I don't want to take the time to do it, so ask in office hours. In quantum mechanics, momentum is represented by a specific operator h bar upon I. The next lecture will be about the evolution of the physics of the real world. The first 18 lectures of notes are posted on the web page, and so they'll be posted on this page as soon as they're posted. In the next lecture, we'll talk about the Noether's theorem, named after the mathematician who three principles today, and we've let ourselves to some sort of association between the momentum and the derivative. algebra, looked at the problem and was like I don't even know what it means in classical mechanics. So she went back to classical mechanics and, from first principles, came up with a good definition of momentum, which turns out to underlie the modern idea of conserved quantities and symmetries. Noether tells us the following statement, to every symmetry-- and I should say continuous symmetry-- to every symmetry is associated a conserved quantity. OK? So in particular, what do I mean by symmetry? Well, for example, translations. x goes to x plus some length l. This could be done for arbitrary length l, but these are translations. These are conservation of momentum. Less trivial is conservation of energy. This is a series that you should recognize, a particular Taylor series for a particular function. It's a Taylor expansion for the AUDIENCE: Exponential. e to the minus L derivative with respect to x f of x. Which is kind of awesome. So let's just check to make sure that this makes sense from dimensional grounds. So that's a derivative withrespect to x as units of 1 over 6. But I'm going to write this in the following suggestive way. This is equal to 1 times f of X minus L. Professor: We're going to do this all the time in quantum mechanics. We'll talk about it in more detail, but we're always going to define it in this fashion as a formal power series. Can you transform operators from one space to another? Professor: Oh, you totally can. But we'll come back to that when we talk about operators next time. But from this what is a derivative with respect to x mean? What does a derivative of x do? Well a derivative is a function of length, so this is dimensionless, so we can exponentiate it. eyes, of foot, of eye, of brow. I see the antique pens do but express the beauty that you master now. So are all their praises but prophecies of this, our time. All you prefiguring. But though they had but diving eyes, they had not skill enough you're worth to sing. Your praise shall still find room, even in the eyes of all posterity. So no judgment arise till you yourself judgment arise. You live in this and dwell in lover's eyes.