In the second half of the course, we'll talk about multisequence alignment. This is a generalization of the two-dimensional array that we had before. As k grows, the space complexity grows by n to the k-th power. And we'll show a program called MSA, which is short for multispecies alignment, when we get into the transcript of the part of course that we will talk about later. And the two that we'll illustrate in the next couple of slides is a tree alignment, as illustrated by ClustalW. general is going to be 2 to the k minus 1 or about roughly 2 to k. And so the time complexity is have to do 2 to. the k comparisons per node. And the larger k is, the more you can explore. It's like doing a huge mutagenesis experiment and exploring viable mutants. So we pairwise alignments. And you get this 4 by 4 matrix. The best score is S1 with S3, which has a score of 9. And this is-- basically, we're starting to describe the method by which we construct a tree. best score for S1 with each of the others, and have S1 in red in each case, and use that as the anchor. And so then in the multialignment, you take all the indels relative to the red one, and introduce them so that it's the anchor, and so on. So those are two radically different ways. And we'll get to the Gibbs sampling later. The Gibbs sampling, just in a nutshell, is in general when you have a hard problem, where you can't comprehensively go through the entire space, what you do is sample it. cell type and the rare [INAUDIBLE],, rare messenger RNA within a cell type. Let's talk about the sizes of proteins. How is it that it precipitously drops off at 100 amino acids? Why are there so few proteins that are short? And there are slightly more short proteins in Mycoplasma? Any guesses why they're so few? Why does it drop off at100 amino acids?" STUDENT: There are more but we can't find them? GEORGE CHURCH: Right, there probably are. If you have an AT-rich genome, you're going to tend to have a lot of stop codons. You tend to run into a stop codon at random quite frequently. You need to have more codons in a row to the same motif, ATG. C would be rare because the Cs mutate into Us. You can have rare tetranucleotides if you, for example, have a methylase, the methylase is a pentanucleotide. row happen to be-- the next gene down is a histidine biosynthetic gene. And not only that, but about eight histidine genes in a row come after that. And the same thing with phenylalanines. This weird excess of tryptophan is upstream of tryPTophan biosynthesis genes. So what does this all mean? What it means, probably-- and there's actually quite a bit of experiments on this-- is that this is an excellent feedback loop, where you want to do feedback in the most relevant way. do that is now take this weight matrix, and ask for each-- we're scanning the genome, and we run into the sequence [? AAT ?] AATG. Now you want to know, how good a match is that to this weight Matrix, which was taken from either 4 sequences or 1,000 sequences? And the way you do it is for each position, you ask what was the score in the whole learning set? And now this should be a now independent test set you're trying this out on. Bayes' theorem says that the probability that the model given the sequence is equal to the probability of the sequence times the model divided by the sequence. Now let's see what all this Bayesian stuff is useful for. We're going to be doing-- of the various applications, we had recognition discrimination and database search. We'll have two models, a model that we actually have a hydrolase and the model that is randomness. We want to report all the sequences where the. probability that that sequence, given the model, is better than that sequence given a null model. George Church: The context for a dinucleotide is either an ocean or an island. Church: There are eight different states, and so we just divide 1 over 8 is a starting point, or 0.125. He says there are two possible places it can be, and they're equally probable. Church says the boundary occurs at this first CG din nucleotide. The next step is to find out if the dinucleotides can be in an ocean, an island or both. are 0s. 0s are a problem, both for the CG dinucleotide in the ocean and for the transitions between oceans and islands. The way you handle it is called pseudocounts. You basically say, what if we just missed finding that thing? We're going to add 1 to it because however big the counts are, you can always add 1. And so you can see. You can actually calculate these conditional probabilities by hand in the privacy of your home, not while the hordes are waiting to get into the room.