Borat: I want to talk about my favorite part of the Second Discourse, a book that never grows old. Borat: Inequality begins in a faculty or a disposition that is untranslatable into English. He says it is amour-propre, the first term I put on the board, which is the first and most durable cause of inequality. The miserable is everybody else, Borat says, and Rousseau wants us to feel how bad things are, how bad we are. Rousseau says amour-propre only arises in society and is the true cause, he believes, for our discontents. "Amour de soi-meme" is a kind of self-love, he says, that is at the root of our desire to preserve ourself. Rousseau speculates about this and, again, this is part of his hypothetical or conjectural history. The desire to be seen and respected by others is the underlying cause of our sense of justice, Rousseau says. gaze of another, and it is from that gaze, from the look or gaze of another that the passion of vanity was born. The one who sang or danced the best, the handsomest, the strongest, the most adroit or the most eloquent became the most highly regarded. From these first preferences were born vanity and contempt on the one hand and shame and envy on the other. Our own sentiment of self and existent comes entirely from the judgment, as he puts it, of those around us. Rousseau: Amour-propre and society gave rise to the state of war. Do you remember that, about the cartoons of the prophet Muhammad and the outrage and the protests, often violent, that occurred about that? To some degree, I think, Rousseau would believe the protesters over those cartoons had a point. Their views were not being respected and to which you might say a Lockean or a liberal formulation of the problem or response would be, "Well, so what?" The task of government, according to Locke or the liberal view, is to ensure the respect.proportionate to the esteem in which he held himself. Government's job is not to impose a gag order on what can and cannot be said, he says. This is a respectable, sort of liberal line of thought going from Locke to John Stuart Mill, he adds. But there is something powerful and true about what the government is supposed to do, he writes. It is to protect you from harm and provide you with the freedom to practice what religion you like, consistent with others' freedom to do so too, he argues. The Danish prime minister has refused to apologize for the cartoon. of civilization is responsible for all of our miseries. Yes, it is society's fault. It's not your fault, he wants to tell us, it's society's. Yet he also leaves us with no real apparent way out. He denies that we can, as a practical solution, return to simpler, more natural forms of political association. But how then do we resolve the problem that he left us with? And his answer to it is contained in his book, yes, called the Social Contract.