Professor: "I'm going to briefly wrap up the lecture we were doing on Friday" "We'll move on to section 2.3 about amino acids, peptides, and proteins" "What do the non-covalent forces at that membrane interface may be?" "What are all the types of interactions that you might have there? Give me a minute to think about it" "Why is the structure, negative charge, positive charge, and what is the solvent with that layer?" Bonds take on a particular shape because there's not freedom of rotation around double bonds the same way there is around single bonds. Many of these bonds show free rotations, you can twist them around, there's nothing stopping that conversion. The amide, or peptide bond, is unique in that there's restricted rotation about that bond. So it's as if you've got a linear polymer, but every third bond has kind of stuck in a particular orientation, which starts to define a lot of details about protein tertiary structure. And then in some cases, proteins may be a mixture of a secondary structure elements. is a really cool video of someone doing micro-injection into eukaryotic cells. You can drop something into the cell, and then the cell closes and maintains its integrity of the barrier. So this is a very cool observation. People do this. They have to not drink too much coffee because it's quite complicated to do a lot of micro- injection, because you can really cause carnage in your cell population if you're not very dexterous. So I just want to ask a couple of questions before, give you a couple more things to think about before we close up. The amino acids that are encoded in our proteins are all what are known as alpha amino acids. The amino acids are also chiral, but you'll learn more than you ever wanted to know about chirality in 512. Proline is a little odd because its side chain is kind of in a cyclic structure, and towards the end of the class, I'll talk to you about collagen, whose structure is totally dependent on the involvement of proline. And then the last sorts of unusual amino acid is cysteine. Compact, globular structure that's functional is encoded in that primary sequence. We may not be able to tell by looking at it what it really looks like, but all the information is there in order to program the folding. The primary sequence determines the fold, and it's the fold of the protein that mandates its function. It's not simple because what you're doing is you're solving a massive energy diagram, where as you fold a structure up, you're trying to maximize all those non-covalent forces. This is a simulation. This is all computation. It's not looking at anything by spectroscopy or in solution or anything like that. What I'm going to do is just show you for a few seconds, you know, this thing's like trying to find its thermodynamic minimum, and it's actually failing pretty badly. And then that defect gets propagated into all the fibrils and results in the weakening of the bones. So I think that's a good place to stop and I'll pick up next time with hemoglobin. Collagen is the most abundant protein in the human body. It plays enormous roles. A single amino acid change in the primary sequence of collagen can destabilize the structure, so it is no longer viable. The disease type I'm going to talk to you about is a set of diseases known as collagenopathies, and the particular one is called osteogenesis imperfecta. And here's the X-ray of a baby born with brittle bones syndrome. The bones in the upper arm are all irregular because the bones are brittle, and they'll break even in utero.