Al shalot is the CEO of GT Sports. He is also a member of the Esports commission the international Olympic Comm. He has been advising in the background for a while now. He says the turning point for him are the Asian Games. The Olympics need to build the connection with this Olympic movement and the youth and we need to create something special to find the balance between the historical games and the new games, he says. The Olympic Games will be a dedicated event to celebrate Gamers and eorts F. moving around very much they're going to be in one location can you explain why Saudi Arabia as the host I'm not sure that from from what I heard um this is a strategic partnership with a with with a host that has a lot of capabilities. I think 70% of their constituents are passionate Gamers um and and if you're a gaming publisher or gaming team like us this is the fastest growing region of the world right now for gaming and eort so this is why finally I would just like PC always brought the idea to bring a property and events to a country to create some bridges. view to elevate the Excellence but it's not the case for all teams. There's not a lot of competition if if you don't qualify for the Mixed environment which is very difficult. I'm very excited because I think one of the direction that these events will take is 50/50. Paris Olympics this summer will be the first time in 120 years that the Olympic Games have been held in Paris. It took them 120 years to get to that point Paris Olympics will be held in the French capital this summer. similar to the summer and winter games uh there'll be something you know with a flag ceremony uh probably at the beginning. I think you know to see some of the players that we selected when they were underage that we help become the best version of them themselves as athletes being selected to represent you follow a bit like the conversation about but uh rocket league and OverWatch back in the days at the at the World Cup for for their game and and and League of Legend also often have this conversation about creating the Euro Cup or World Cup.