Alberto Riva: The most important resources for finding and using biomedical information, especially information connected with the study of the human genome. He says the best resource, in his opinion, is Golden Path, a genome browser for several different organisms. Golden Path gives you the absolute of all the known elements of our genome, and maps each one of these maps to a different set of objects in the world. Riva says the most important resource, of course, is GenBank, the largest repository of DNA sequence data. Phenotypes are generalizations, too. Phenotypes are qualitative in nature. They cannot be measured exactly or precise, they cannot even be defined precisely in most cases. You always have to take into account the effect of environmental factors that, again, are very hard to describe in a quantitative way. For DNA, you just look at the sequence and you know essentially all that there is to know about DNA. For proteins, you cannot look at. the subsequence of a protein and understand just by looking at it what the protein. is going to do. Not even how it's going to be. was discovered, more or less, the same years. But at the time, nobody had any idea that there was any connection between these two things, between the DNA and inherited traits. It took over 80 years for this concept to be proven. And finally, the Human Genome Project, that was officially declared a success last year, brought us to the point where we now know the exact base pair sequence of our genome. But even if we're all human beings, there are no two human beings that are exactly the same. SNPs are the most common form of variation in our genome. They're important because for example, they can be used as genomic markers. SNPs are at a fixed location in the genome. If a SNP arises in a population, then it tends to be limited to that population. You're not going to find it in a different population, unless there is some genetic interchange between the two. So when you look at the frequency of a SNP, it's very important to specify what population you're looking at. GenBank is a database of DNA sequences that refer to a region of the genome where a gene is known to be. UniGene puts them all together in one cluster, and then tries to provide a description of why all these sequences are so similar. HomoloGene has 470,000 ortholog pairs-- so pairs of genes from different organisms that are highly similar to each other. Swift: I think it's a blast to blast, but it's also part of the blast of the human genome. LocusLink is a repository of information about genes, and it collects everything that is known about the genes. It gives you information about the sequence, itself, about the functions of the gene, links to other databases. And in the end, you get the gene is expressed, because it was latent in the protein is produced. And the transcription factors, as I was saying, don't act alone. They have to interact with the target gene, but they also interact with each other in a combinatorial fashion. And we are still doing the very early steps in the process of trying to understand how these patterns are actually structured. phenotype. What I mean is that, for example, if you have a SNP in the coding subsequence of a protein, you're going to get a protein that has an abnormal sequence. There are many diseases that are due to the fact that you have SNPs that truncate proteins. They can be used as evolutionary markers, because SNPs arise randomly during the replication, and then they are transmitted from one generation to the next. And it's very interesting to study how the gene it belongs to, notch 4, tells you that this gene is in the codes of the gene. SNPs get-- how the frequency of the SNP changes in a population. Most SNPs are deleterious. But in some cases, the SNP can also provide an advantage, if it generates something that was not present before, and that works better than the original. If a SNP is neutral, then there is no selective pressure, and it will either go away by chance, or will stay at a certain basic level of frequency. So you can study the frequency to understand if it's undergoing if the SNP was validated. these domains are overlapping. And this information comes from Swiss [INAUDIBLE] database of protein information. And so you see for example, this first domain covers almost all of the protein. AUDIENCE: So six would be the maximum number? ALBERTO RIVA: No, no, it's just that these domains can be overlapping, just because the Swiss people, they annotate the protein sequence saying OK, from here to here, we know that this happens. But-- well, well, there are some domains that cover the entire protein. is a consequence of the fact that there is a very complex machinery behind it that determines which genes are active or not, and how much, in different conditions. This is actually a system that integrates a lot of different factors that might include the following, in no particular order-- The tissue, we know very well that the set of genes that are expressed in one tissue is very different from the set that is expressed in another tissue. External signals, of course, all response to external stimuli. And it also depends on the expression state of any number of other genes. The first thing you need to do is need to be able to reliably identify which transcription factors bind to a given gene, and where, exactly, in the promoter region of the gene they bind. And transcription factorsbind to locations that are called transcription factor binding sites. They're small stretches of DNA that are recognized by the factor. If you know that two factors have to interact with each other, probably their binding sites will have to be close to each other. Or, at least, let's say if you find two binding sites that are close to Each other, there is a very high chance that they will interact. The Stanford microarray database is a repository of all the-- of a large number of micro experiments performed at Stanford. NCI60, again, from Stanford, is a famous data set that includes gene expression profiles for 60 human cancer cell lines. Other resources for gene expression are found in different PGA projects, PGA are programs for genomic applications, they are are large projects managed by the NIH. So the [? tracks ?] PGA, for example, offers 565 microarrays from mouse and rat models of sleep, infection, hypertension, pulmonary.