Ka-Yen: "I walked into MIT not knowing a single thing about nuclear energy" "What causes nuclear resurgence? This is the perfect time to talk about why nuclear power's cool" "I'm going to be honest with you. I don't know all that much about potentially spewing out that much information" "How do you calculate this? Bozeman Tzeman. Cool? Whew." "What is the difference between fissile, fertile, and fissionable material?" In 1951, the first nuclear reactor to produce electricity was the experimental breeder reactor, the EDR1. The first nuclear powered submarine, the USS Nautilus, was launched in 1954. The real heyday of nuclear was between 1960 to 1975, when people like Westinghouse were creating nuclear reactors. From 1975 to 2002, you can see a massive decline. And then today, we're kind of-- I say we're back, but basically we're entering what people like to call a nuclear renaissance. Nuclear creates 75 times less carbon emission than coal does, and 35 times less than natural gas does. After a nuclear accident you can see a steep decline in the amount of nuclear reactors that are being commissioned. Nuclear power is accidents. It can serve as a good baseload source of energy. It's just about $0.01 per kilowatt hour, as compared to natural gas, which the majority of the costs of electricity actually come from the fuel. The majority of cost actually doesn't come from nuclear fuel at all. The fuel core is basically just a bunch of rods of uranium, sometimes it's clad in something like zirconium. Neutrons can simulate other fissions, and the control rods are there to make sure that there's not too many fissions happening in the fuel core at a certain time. The heat that gets created during these nuclear fission, that goes and heats up the water. The water flows through the core and heats it up. It creates steam so the steam goes and spins a turbine. The turbine creates electricity. With BWRs there is a higher chance of leaking radioactive material into the environment. Heavy water has a much lower absorption cross-section than light water does. So because it's absorbing less neutrons, you're actually able to use a lower enriched uranium, which is really great because that lowers fuel costs. But the downside is that, even your fuel costs, deuterium is really expensive. It's about 1,000 or so dollars per kilogram. So even though even though you're counteracting the lower fuel with higher water, you actually have to change out your fuel more often. here is basically just showing that there are a lot of redundancy systems inside these reactors. We don't just have one single primary loop and if it fails, it fails. We actually have four at the same time, and this is just called the n minus two redundancy, something like that. So the next kind is something much cooler. It's got a heavy water reactor. Actually it's just a little bit cooler. But the main heavy water reactors that everyone can kind of think of on their minds is CANDU, which is the one that's located in Canada. Three Mile Island, Chernobyl and Three Mile Island are all examples of nuclear reactor accidents. The first one happened in 1979 on March 28. The second one happened on April 25, 1986 at Chernobyl. The third one happened at the Chernobyl nuclear plant in 1986 on March 31. The last one was at the Fukushima Dai-ichi nuclear reactor in Japan in 1986, on March 30. It's the same kind of accident that happened at Three mile Island and Chernobyl, but it's not the same. Yucca Mountain is the primary push by the U.S. to find a deep geological repository somewhere in the United States so we can deal with our spent fuel. If you were to just keep all the spent fuel that we create in fuel casks, it'd take about 300 acres of land, which is absolutely insane. We also have to make sure that there's not a lot of water that leaks through, because the water can carry the radioisotopes and carry them into the environment. Yucca Mountain is located in Nevada. People in Nevada weren't happy about this. There was a lot of opposition. Because of the social opposition there was government opposition and many loopholes we had to jump through. They also realized that it wasn't as geologically sound as they had hoped. There's a lot more groundwater running through and seeping through Yucca Mountain than they thought there would be. So there's a huge debacle. Basically the costs are rising, nothing much was happening. And then 2011, under the Obama Administration, he just called it quits.