Liz: Social intelligence should pervade our thinking about the mind and brain. Liz: Trying to get a coherent account of everything from your hand motions and your perception of other people's hand motions all the way to politics and sociology is daunting and, frankly, deeply unlikely. LZ: I think an incredible gift to our ability to understand the human mind also imposes a huge number of limitations on what we can discover. And so what I'm going to tell you guys is two phases of my attempt to attempt to discover what we do that we can so discover. Psychologist David Frum: How much blame do we assign to people based on our beliefs? Frum says we assign blame based on what we think we deserve, not what happened. He says we can change the meaning of knowingly murder than to unknowingly murder. Frum's work focuses on how we assign thoughts or internal mental states to people around us. The more we know about someone, the more we can blame them for their actions, he says. The less we know, the less we should blame them. false belief task or give a false belief task? How many people would like to see a false Belief task? OK, so then I'm just going to show you one. I'm almost exclusively going to talk about the first one, so how we think about what other people see, think, and know-- but not want or feel. At the end I'll come back to wanting you thinking about thoughts-- is there any sense in which that's special or different from the whole rest of the logical and cognitive capacity of your brain? false belief task looks like. This is being given to a five-year-old human child. Do you know what pirates really like? CHILD: What? REBECCA SAXE: Pirates really like cheese sandwiches. Here comes Ivan. He says, I want my cheese sandwich. And he takes this one. Uh oh-- why did he take that one? OK, and so the traditional read of what just happened there is that's a kid who gets wanting. But he doesn't get believing. stories in the scanner, and we record activity in the brain region-- here, for example, the right TPJ-- while you're reading those stories. And so what we do with that is we make arguments about selectivity and these kinds of things that we've been talking about this entire time. These experiments typically proceed in what's called now the forward or encoding direction. And that turns out in many contexts-- especially in the back half of the brain, the representation regions-- to correspond in some sense to the stimulus type. MVPA is an old, discredited theory of concepts, but nevertheless a powerful strategy in neuroscience, including in this context. The idea that we're going to look at is that populations of neurons will respond differentially to features or dimensions of our stimuli. And we're doing this using a key assumption which comes from systems neuroscience, which is that we can think of representations in terms of population codes of features or Dimensions. And by figuring out what the main features or. dimensions are of a stimuli, we can infer something about the representation underlying. the representation that this brain region participates in. fMRI that V1, for example, has an orientation map, that neurons in V1 have an orientation preference. And the answer in standard analyses is-- no, you can't, because V1 as a whole will activate to big images regardless of the orientation of the content of the image. So you need to be able to get to something more fine-grained than V1. And that's the decoding perspective that says, if we wanted to look at V1 and know is the line like this or like that, the way we would tell. Researchers used a multivariate analysis to see how different people's brains reacted to knowing harm compared to unknowing harm. The more that you represented knowing harm as different, the more you judged them as different when we asked you for moral judgment. The pattern difference in your right TPJ accounts for 35% of the variance in your moral judgment, which is pretty amazing, because that's a pretty noisy measurement of your brain and a pretty noise measurement ofyour behavior. But we'll get to the method. The amount of activity in the right TPJ is a big signal. The relative activity between one voxel and another is a tiny signal. It's superimposed on a lot of noise. But if there's anything there at all, then you'll still be able to pick up a little more similarity for pairs that are matched on the feature of interest compared to pairs that aren't matched on that feature. So that's another way that you can use this method-- hypothesize two or three orthogonal dimensions within the same stimulus set. There's something more real about it than if you knew the hypothesis before you ran the experiment. There's just this experience like, if I had the hypothesis in my head, maybe it somehow got from my head to the data. But when the data were already there and then you went back and analyzed them and the effect was hiding in the data that you'd had on your server, there's something way more real and magical about that. So anyway, because it was there in all of our old data, I just believed it.