Bentham's principle is "the greatest happiness of the greatest number" He thinks all utility is quantifiable. If you take one unit of utility from one person and give it to another person their utility will go up and the first person's utility is going to go down. If it turns out Leonid Eichmann has a vastly superior capacity to anybody else, then we could get a huge increase in total utility. Or we could change from the status quo to a more inegalitarian society. Prof: In the first instance we say that utility is quantifiable and expressible through money. Then related to that, we can work with a doctrine of revealed preference. We can vary the price that we charge admission for the course. Anyone think there's a problem with that idea? Yeah? Student: The idea with shoes. If you're given one shoe you're going to get absolutely no utility, but if you're. given two shoes, a right and a left, then maybe you'll get more utility? Prof: Okay. If we just kept giving you lots of right shoes, there'd be a problem. just need more money to get the same amount of happiness. For Donald Trump to get more utility, you have to give him a huge amount of new money. So the more money you have, the more you will want in order to of diminishing marginal utility. So we should take the dollar from Trump and we should give it to the bag lady, and the greatest happiness of the greatest number will have increased, right? But then maybe we shouldtake another dollar, shouldn't we? I mean it worked the first time, so we shouldn't stop. When are we going to stop? Student: What about other values like integrity? If you have a little bit of integrity and you get some more. Prof: Okay, so it's a possibility. Any other examples of where this becomes problematic? I mean, think about beer. So there might be some goods like integrity that are not easily capture-able in this logic. We should put that out there, but yeah, over here? Professor Ian Shapiro: Health. It's tricky to think about redistributing health, right? Although you'll see we will come up against some pretty bizarre cases. as all that, and he wanted to temper the downward redistribution that flows from his principle. He says, Suppose but a commencement made, by the power of a government of any kind, in the design of establishing it. He's basically saying, if you want to reduce that to a bumper oil goes up, or commodities collapse, or the dollar, or this, or that. So that when it gets down to it, you're never going to get a definitive answer to the question what is the point of practical equality. that the rich will burn their crops before giving them to the poor might not be true. And even if we get to less extreme circumstances like South Africa before and after the transition, this is what we see. Ronald Reagan comes in and says, "If we cut taxes, the pie will get bigger for all and they'll be actually more revenue," and so utilitarianism says do it. And you will find, if you go back now and look at what happened during the 1980s, perfectly credible economists will line up on both sides because they cut the taxes. classical to what we're going to all neoclassical utilitarianism is a subject with which I will begin on Wednesday. See you then for the next installment of this week's Daily Discussion, which will focus on the role of utilitarianism in the development of the modern world. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from. Click here to read the first installment of the Daily Discussion. Follow us on Twitter @CNNOpinion and @jennifer_newton.