JUDY HOYT: Hopefully everybody's recovered from their Thanksgiving feast. What I'm showing up here is the schedule to orient us. This is lecture 22. We'll talk about silicides, device contacts, and I've added in a new material this year on novel gate materials. And then next week we have two class periods scheduled. There'll be four speakers in each. And those will be the oral reports and the student reports given on Tuesday and Thursday. And I just want to remind people, if you're doing an oral report, you're expected to provide handouts. The contact itself is still generally considered part of the frontend because you're contacting the silicon. The advantages of aluminum has a low resistivity. It's the second lowest of all the metal candidates, copper being the lowest. And it has very good adhesion to silicon and to silicon dioxide. So it's a very stable metal, and it makes good electrical contact to heavily doped silicon, as long as the silicon is heavilyDoped. And the energy band diagram for that chip is a 19 to the 10 -6 centimeter contact. That's a four orders of magnitude difference. So you need to get this to get to 20, and you're going to have to do some math to do it. A local interconnect is a wire that connects a device to another device. In the early days, if this was the drain is shown here, where the metal is on the left and the semiconductor on the right. And a Schottky contact is governed by thermionic emission. So it's a thermionic process emitting carriers over this barrier. It's this barrier between the Fermi level in the semiconductors and the Fermani level. in the metal. The resistance of the contact itself is the contact resistance from the current flowing through and drain. The modern interconnect material is copper. A few places are still using aluminum. Copper oxidizes very readily, even at room temperature. Copper is more difficult to deposit than aluminum. But copper is the material of choice for today's interconnect. And aluminum has a finite solubility for silicon. And this is one reason why, if you have a very deep junction that's many microns deep, many people never put aluminum directly in the old silicon. It would never spike because it would never get that deep. we want to talk about that is shown here on slide 6 is called the specific contact resistivity. The resistance of a given contact in ohms is just the voltage divided by the current flowing through that contact. And you can calculate it by rho sub C, which typically has units of ohm centimeters squared or ohm micron squared. And basically what this tells you is-- and you notice you it's inversely proportional to area. So if I make a smaller contact area for a given specific contactresistivity, you're going to have a higher resistance. exponential in the applied voltage. So what we do in practice is we look at that equation and we try to get into a different regime. Instead of being in the regime where we're dominated by tunneling over this barrier by thermionic emission, rather, excuse me, over the barrier, if we make the barrier distance really narrow, really small, you can actually get quantum mechanical tunneling through the barrier. So here on slide 8, what I've shown is a tunneling contact. It's a Schottky contact in the limit of very, very high doping. The resistance that we really, when we scale the channel length, what we're really trying to scale is the channel resistance, R chan. So there are three resistances we really want to be able to think about. One is this little resistor right here, which has been the mainstay of technology for many, many years now. It has a lot of advantages. It's self-aligned. It reduces the sheet resistance of the deep source drain region. And it reduces the gate sheet resistance because you put silicide on the gate. The metal is deposited over the entire chip. It was reacted with the silicon, and then it was just etched off in a blanket etch. So this kind of a salicide process was a big breakthrough in CMOS technology, say around the 80s or so. And it also avoids the PVD damage to the gate that we showed last time that the replacement gate scheme that showed in the last time is easier than the original scheme. It's not as simple as using the old fashioned Salicide process where the thickness that you silicide on the gate was the same as the thickness you went in the source. figure 11-35. There's a reference to it in your textbook, a paper that an article that talks about it in much more detail on how it's actually made. And what you do is you have these dark regions here that are funny shaped are considered to be the N plus region that you want to contact. The dashed lines represent the metal. So that would be the metal level. So this is going to take at least three masks to powder. And these little square regions with the X's going through them are the contacts. 1 and 4 and you measure the voltage drop across that face. And then you just divide V divided by I, whatever you measure. And that's going to be equivalent to rho C divided by the area of the contact, L squared. So this is a very common way to do it. You might say, well, why do you go to the effort of having separate probes? Why don't you just measure the current and the voltage on the same probe points? And the reason you do this is because you don't want to have extra contact resistance, say, of your probes going down. You don't want excess carbon or other things at the interface because that's going to cause an increase in your contact resistance. The latest silicide that people are exploring in research and development-- and at some point will probably be in production-- is nickel silicide. Nickel silicide has the lowest silicon consumption. It can be formed at very low temperatures. It doesn't have very bad narrow line effect for silicide in the gate. Big problem with nickel is you have to be careful of your thermal budget. Industry moved a number of years ago primarily from Ti-silicide, although some people may still use it, to cobalt bisilicide. Cobalt has a little less lateral encroachment over the oxide spacer. It does not have that narrow line effect, but it gives you a slightly higher resistivity. It's a little more sensitive to surface contaminants. And at the end, I've added a few slides that show you that people are actually using silicides as metal gates. silicide. It went down and it stopped at the gate stopped. And this is the silicon channel region. It's reasonably smooth. People were concerned that the nickel might diffuse in and react with the oxide. But according to this particular temperature and time that they did, they get a reasonably smooth interface. The carriers are going to be flowing right in the silicon underneath this. So you don't want to get any nickel into that channel. This is, on slide 32, that same paper. They also did some Auger analysis. interesting thing that was also done in this paper, if you end up wanting to do research in this area, is shown here on slide 34. This is something called gate work function engineering. We hadn't really talked about it, but the work function between the metal-- I think we may have talked about threshold voltage control. The work function, which is a property of the metal material, to a certain extent. And the silicon, that determines the threshold voltage of the transistor, the voltage at which the transistor turns on. control the PT or adjust the PT a little bit. It's still a very tricky process. The reaction temperature or the thermal stability temperature is reasonably low. So you cannot take these and then take them to a backend process that is too hot. So they're very much a research. It was only published by IBM a couple of years ago. They're certainly not ready necessarily for manufacturing right now. Perhaps in the near future, but just to give you an idea of the types of things that people are concerned about. about your oral report or whatever, please get back to me. OK, thanks. About your oralReport.com. About. Your oral report. About Your Oral Report. Please get. back tome. about your oralreport or whatever. about. your oral Report or whatever,. please getback to me about.your oral Report. about Your OralReport.org. OK. Thanks, thanks, thanks for your report. You can send it to me via e-mail at jennifer@dailymail.co.uk.