Professor Donald Kagan: Spartan constitution is very much an oligarchy. The average Spartan did not ever speak in the assembly, it appears. So it's not a democratic assembly, even though every single citizen is there, if he wants to be. So, the Spartans gain a reputation of being hostile to tyrants because they often fight against tyrants. They will not like to see either extreme. They won't like democracies and they won't. like autocracy. The Spartans will not. like oligarchically governed states. All adult male Spartans were participants in the assembly. They came to the meeting dressed in their military uniform, apparently including their shields. When a question was put to the Spartans, the way they responded was by shouting and banging on their shields, whereupon the presiding official would try to determine which side had the loudest noise. The reasons for that are really what I want to make you see. At the core of it all, according to Thucydides, it was the fear of the Helots. Some scholars go far too far in suggesting that there never was a debate in the assembly. Most of the real life of the state in the earliest days would have been out in the countryside. You must imagine that it is something like, nothing like precisely, but something like the feudal manners that we find in western Europe after the fall of the Roman Empire. The gerousia was, by far, the most significant council in the state, most able to have the necessary prestige and functions that I have talked about. Aristotle tells us that they in fact were just any Joe Spartan, that they were ordinary people, not distinguished in any way. Dorian's versus Achaeans still seems to have some meaning to the Greeks. When they defeat the Tegeans, instead of simply annexing their territory, subordinating the people, they do something different. They offer the TeGeans an alliance. The Spartans, of course, have a need of a collection of states that stand between them and their potential enemies of whom the Argives are the most important. ancient Greeks referred to as the Spartans and their allies, which modern scholars have come to call the Peloponnesian League. The Spartans who had been successful apparently in turning around, to some considerable degree their defeat back in the seventh century in fight with Argos. They suffered a defeat in the region of Arcadia to the north of Laconia--that by the way is mountainous country and poor typically, relatively speaking and it provided some of the toughest warriors in the Greek world. So, it's no miracle that the Spartans had a hard time up there. It's a very important state for the Spartans, not just because it's the neighbor right to the north of them, but because remember what I told you, if you want to get to Mycenae from Sparta you can't go across those mountains. So, its strategic importance is very great. The Spartans got into this war with Tegea and they claimed to have discovered the bones of the great Homeric hero, Orestes and taken it away. Also, there was a legend that maybe they propagated that showed up in some poetry we have. try to enjoy these things in spite of their being barred. Why? Because in a way, necessity becomes a virtue. That's what the Spartans did. Their way of life was imposed upon them by the decision to maintain their command of the Helots. After that it all makes perfect sense. Look what they had to give up, to do it. They said, of course, we gave that up, because that's what makes us the great people we are. It's the way we cope. Attica was not one of the most desirable, certainly agriculturally rich areas in Greece. It has one splendid harbor; up in the northwestern part of Attica is Piraeus, the port of Athens. The silver mines in the south of the peninsula gave the state a source of income that was very, very unusual among the Greek city states. Another natural resource of great value and great blessing to those of us who can still see the remains of the Athenian experience is the marble that comes from Mount Penteli. An aristocratic republic is what we have, not a monarchy, but a republic. Aristocracies love equality; equality among aristocrats, and then tremendous inequality between them and everybody else. Yalies are very nervous about anybody sticking his head up above the crowd, because the question is always why not me? You have high expectations of yourself and so sometimes unless you're invaded by later religious ideas that the Greeks didn't have you're not humble, you're vying for honor. We hear about the new class distinctions, which are now based not on birth but on wealth. early seventh century, the date he gives us, of course we shouldn't put too much credence in it, it's too precise, but it's 683 B.C. On that occasion, we are introduced to a new thing, magistrates are chosen from the aristocracy to do various jobs in the city. In Athens, the magistrates were called archons, it means, in the most technical sense, rulers. One of these was called the War archon, polemarch, presumably he led the army. Next came the archon who was actually the most important archon and gave his name to the year. opponents that he was defeated. The leader of the resistance was the family known as the Alcmaeonidae. They went up there, locked up Cylon and his supporters in the Acropolis, in a temple. They cut the cord and killed the Cylonians. That put an end to the Cylonian conspiracy but it brought something to AlcMAeonidae as well, a curse. They were declared accursed and driven from the city. Later on we will hear they're back again and they're very important. But the curse continues to be attached to the family. that there are the kinds of discontents that we have been talking about which find the leader in the form of a man who is an outstanding figure for some reason, who is willing to try to establish a tyranny. That it fails, I think, is an indication that the same forces haven't reached the power in Athens that they had reached in Megara, Corinth, Sicyon, and places like that. It's a warning about troubles ahead and I'll turn to those troubles in the next hour.