"Between the Folds" is on PBS at 8 p.m. ET Tuesday. Professor: Today, we're going to talk about infinitesimal rigidity. He says it's about the lack of motion in a graph. Professor says it can be used to tell if a 3D graph is generically rigid in 3D. "I just wanted to say goodbye to Eric Joisel, who died on Sunday, sadly," he says. "That sucks," he adds. of an informal notion-- a valid first derivative of a motion. I want to take such a motion, essentially, take its derivative with respect to time, And evaluate that derivative at time 0. This is useful because if we can ever find something that is infinitesimal and show that it's rigid, then we've determined it's infimally rigid. Question: Is a dot product [INAUDIBLE] at left or at right, that is, the terms that are identical to that at right? In two dimensions, there are four terms in two dimensions in this equation. The fancy way to write this is as a matrix equation, if you want. So we have a whole bunch of these constraints, one for every edge. And what we care about, what we're trying to solve for, is d. We know this entire matrix, because we know c. We close. This is called the nullity of the matrix. There's a fun theorem called the rank nullity theorem from linear algebra. So this is like a conserved quantity about the space of motions. it's another way of thinking about essentially everything we've seen. And if you know linear algebra, it's useful. Otherwise, I'll tell you how we can use it. OK, for this definition we need the notion of a minor. So we have some matrix. Actually, our matrices are pretty rectangular. And I just choose, let's say k columns from the matrix-- let's I'm saying is if it's non-zero for some choice of C, then it should be non- zero for this choose of C. Roland Martin: I'm going to use basically everything I proved today to prove a big theorem-- the Carpenter's Rule Theorem. Martin: If you can find a stress that is nonzero on every particular strut or cable, then all of those things are effectively bars. He says if you compute an equilibrium stress, which is easy to do by linear programming, and draw-- you can directly construct from that the 3D lifting, which would be kind of cool.Martin: It would be fun to actually see it implemented, so another fun project. Tensegrity is a generalization of a linkage and where we allow three kinds of edges. We can have cables, which is the length can decrease, but it can't increase. And there are struts, which are the reverse-- you can increase but not decrease. All these struts are preventing is compression. They don't prevent expansion. So that's the thing we want to model. This is duality. This goes back to Roth and Whiteley, 1981-- good year. I have linear equations. I also have linear inequalities. So in fact, I can write it as some other matrix R prime. Actually, it's the same matrix. R prime times d is greater than or equal to 0. This is the general form of a linear program. You can write an equality constraint in this world just by taking it and its negation. That forces them to be equal to zero. All you need to know is it there are fast algorithms to solve this, also. or you can say those edges have some negative stresses. Or another way to think of it is there's a point off to infinity, which is how this is drawn, and you can have a positive stress. And at infinity, you don't have to satisfy equilibrium. There's a little something special at the boundary, but everywhere else-- interior and all these vertices in here-- you have equilibrium, and all the stresses are positive. And it turns out in this case, you're automatically infinitesimally rigid. In general, you're going to have a lot of non-triangles. Those should all remain planar. One thing you can do-- there's some freedom here. If you have any lifting or, for example, you could not lift them at all. Set all the z-coordinates to zero. That's fine. You could also just lift everything onto some other plane, and generally have a rigid motion of freedom. You to show it can't happen. If everything's a valley, something's going to go wrong at the top picture. the chain. I could take this one, find a motion that straightens the chain. For convex cycles, it's a little less obvious, but it's also true. There's one catch which I didn't say here. I need to add outermost. When you have nesting like this, you're in trouble. This guy is not going to get straightened out. It could be super long. It may not have room to straighten out inside that convex chamber. So these guys will come along for the ride, but they won't actually getting straightened. The outermost guys will get straightening and convexified. might actually only get something around here. But again, you can't get from here to around there without some mountain. It's hard to even imagine, because it can't happen. So that's the one way it can happen. You can't have strict valleys, but you could have them all 0. So in fact, the one case where you can have stress is when you have all of this outside stuff flat. And then inside you don't know. I can prove, using this generalized lemma, that that's not possible. dimensions, and maximum degree 2. We can think about what happens with degree 3. Then you can get locked things. What happens in three dimensions? Then you Can't get locked Things. What happen in four dimensions? then you can't get Locked Things. Oh, and why is it called the Carpenter's Rule Theorem? Because this is a carpenter's rule. And in a car Carpenter's rule, actually, all the edge lengths are the same. But as far as we know that doesn't make this theorem any easier to prove. still buy them at the hardware store. That's it. You can't buy them online. You have to buy them from the store. They are not available online. They can be bought at the store, but you have to pay for them in cash. They're not available on the internet. You must buy them in the store to get them. You cannot buy them on the Internet. They must be bought from the hardware stores. That is it. They have to be bought in the stores.