Professor: angular momentum can only take one of two values. He explains how an electron's internal form of angular momentum only exists mechanically. Professor: If you send an electron through a Stern Gerlach Apparatus, it always hits one oftwo spots that's that's right? And this is how we describe the experimental fact that we describe that's an experimental fact, right? It's an intrinsic form of momentum. It's not related to a rotation. It is an intrinsic momentum. And what do you mean by that? to the very first lecture, and so, we'll do this in more detail, but I'm going to quickly tell you-- imagine take a magnet, a little, tiny bar magnet. In fact, well, imagine you take a little bar magnet with some little magnetization, and you send it through a region that has a gradient for magnetic field. If there's a gradient-- so you know that a magnet wants to anti-align with the nearby magnet, north-south wants to go to south-north. So, you can't put a force on the magnet, but if you have a gradient of a magnetic field, then one end a dipole-- one end of your magnet-- can feel a stronger effective torque then the other guy. And you can get a net force. Lapland: Imagine you have a sphere of uniform charge distribution, and you make it rotate. And that's charged, that's moving, forming a current, right? And that current generates a magnetic field along the axis of rotation. So, for a charged sphere here which is rotating with angular momentum, let's say, l, has a magnetic moment which is proportional to l. If it's rotating, it's gonna deflect. And here's the experimental results. Every electron that gets sent through bends. And it either bends up a fixed amount, or it bends down a fixed. amount. know of a fundamental particle. If super symmetry is true, then there must be a particle called a gravitino, which would be fundamental, and would have. spin 3/2, and four states, but that hasn't been observed, yet. So, we still need a reason for why the hydrogen system, quantum mechanically, is stable. We'll talk about that a little more when we talk about hydrogen, but it was observed and deduced from experiment before it was understood there was such a physical quantity. we're gonna talk about real, physical systems in three dimensions. And as we'll discover, it's basically the same as in one dimension, we just have to write down more symbols. But the content is all the same. So, the energy for this is p squared upon 2m, plus a potential, which is a function only of the radial distance. But this is gonna be equal to, from the first term, minus h bar squared-- let me just write this out-- times r dr squared r. And so, the upside here is that when we have a central potential, the potential energy is invariant under rotations, then the energy commutes with the angular momentum squared. guys cancel, right? 1 over r times dr. So, this is equal to 1 over R dr squared r. But, why is this equal to dr squared plus 2 over R times dr? And the answer is, they're operators. And so, you should ask how they act on functions. And finally, the third fact is that r must be strictly positive, so as a 1D problem, that means it can't be negative, it must have an left on the left. these guys? Absolutely, we can. However, we're using separation. We're gonna look at a single term, and then after constructing solutions with a single eigenfunction of L squared. We can then write down arbitrary superposition of them, and generate a complete basis of states. General statement about separation of variables. OK. So, here's the resulting energy eigenvalue equation. This is purely a function of r. We've removed all of the angular dependence by making this proportional to yLm. Professor: "What do you expect to be roughly the ground state energy of this system?" Professor: " Roughly minus e0.lL 1 over 2mr squared. That's the wave function. That is V" "I'm terribly sorry! I've abused the notation terribly. Let's-- Oh! This is-- Crap! Sorry. This is standard notation. And in text, when I write this by hand, the potential is a big U, and theWave function is a little u" Professor: As you come to smaller and smaller radius, holding the angular momentum fixed, your velocity-- your angular velocity-- must increase. Professor: Is hydrogen stable because of conversation of angular momentum? Audience: No. Absolutely not, right? So, first off, we're calling that a potential term just because we can. Because we've worked with definite angular momentum, OK? You should have done this in classical mechanics as well. So, this is called theangular momentum barrier. The energy is equal to 1 over 4 n squared, where n is an integer, n plus l plus 1. The wave function phi sub E0 of r theta and phi-- oh god, oh jesus, this is so much easier in [INAUDIBLE] so, phi [INAudIBLE] 0 of rtheta andphi isequal to y0m. But what must m be? 0, because m goes from plus L to minus L, 0. do I have a 0 at the origin? Is that the question? AUDIENCE: Yeah. PROFESSOR: It's true. There's nothing special about the origin, except for two things. One is that we're working in a system which has a rotational symmetry. Second, saying that little u has a 0 is not the same as saying that the wave function has a0. So, the physical thing is the probability distribution, which is the [? norm ?] squared. From this, we can build two nice quantities. We can build something with units of a radius. This is equal to 4 times the binding energy, which is also called the Rydberg constant. We've discovered the energy is, in fact, not just independent of m, but it's independent of l, too. Why? What symmetry is explaining this extra degeneracy? We'll pick that up next time. We're off by a factor of 4 from the observed binding energy of hydrogen, 13.6 eV. because solving it is a sort of involved undertaking. So, we had this differential equation-- this guy-- and we want to solve it. We first did, we did asymptotic analysis. Then we did a series approximation. And here, I'm just going to write down the answers. And the reason is, first off, this is something you should either do in recitation, or see-- go through-- on your own, but this is just the mathematics of solving a differential equation.