Professor: The plan for today is as follows. We're going to look at this unitary time evolution and calculate this operator u, given the Hamiltonian. Then we will look at the Heisenberg picture of quantum mechanics. Professor: We'll find the heisenberg equations of motion and solve them for a particular case today. It's a pretty useful way of seeing things. It makes the relation between classical mechanics and quantum mechanics more obvious. So it's a very important tool. The Schrodinger equation is there. OK so now let's solve this. We'll go through three cases. Case one, h is time independent. So H of t is really H like that. So what could that be? For example, you know that the particle in a magnetic field, the spin in a Magnetic Field is minus gamma B dot the spin. And you could have a time dependent magnetic dt equals this, which is the same as this equation. Now finally, I want to discuss for a second the general case. So that's case-- there was a 1, a 2, a 3 H of T general. But it's not too much you can do. U of t t0 is going to be e to the minus iHt0 over h bar, some constant matrix. When t is equal to t0, this matrix becomes the unit matrix. U0 is the inverse of this matrix, which is nothing else but e. The Heisenberg version of this operator using the definition that anything, any operator that we have a U dagger in front, a U to the right, is the Heisenburg version of the operator. So what did we have? Here it is. ih bar d dt of A He Eisenberg of t. The magnetic field is time dependent, but its direction is not time dependent. And the Hamiltonian at different times commute because Sz commutes with itself. So if you have a magnetic field that is fixed in one direction but change in time, you can have a situation where your Hamiltonian is timedependent. And you will discuss such case because it's interesting. But later on as we do nuclear magnetic resonance, we will have the more interesting case in which the magnetic field isn't time independent. the derivative of this quantity with respect to time. But in terms of completeness, it's kind of pretty in that you go from the exponential to the time ordered exponential. And I think you'll see more of this in 806. And what we're going to do now is turn to the Heisenberg picture of quantum mechanics. Yes, questions? Audience: Why does R dot [INAUDIBLE]? PROFESSOR: Because that's really a property of integrals. of this, you will get H times that thing. So since it's a power series, you'll differentiate the first term, and you'll get the right thing. Then the second term and you will start getting everything that you need. It's reassuring that something like this success, but in general, you would want to be able to do all these integrals and to sum them up. So it's of limited usefulness. But when you have a practical problem, generally that's not the way you solve it. We will try to figure out the solution some other way. T is not an operator in the usual sense of quantum mechanics or anything like that. It's an instruction. Whenever you have an exponential of this form, the time ordered exponential is this series that we've written down. At time equals 0, the Heisenberg operators are identical they to the Schrodinger operators. And therefore Xh of t is equal to A, which is X hat cosine omega t plus B. And at t equals. 0, Ph of t becomes equal to this is 0 m omega B. U t 0 dagger 1 U t 0. But 1 doesn't matter. U dagger with U is 1. This is a 1 Schrodinger, and therefore it's the same operator. So the unit operator is the same. It just doesn't change whatsoever. OK, so that's good. But now this is something interesting also happens. Suppose you have Schrodingers operator C that is equal to the product of A with B, two Schrodingers. And then you see why this is really nice. Whole thing is the same. So this is something very useful and we'll need it. One more comment, expectation values. Comment number four on expectation values, which is something you've already-- it's sort of the way we began the discussion and wanted to make sure it's clear. So the Heisenberg operators, at this moment, are a little mysterious. They're supposed to be given by this formula, but we've seen that calculating U can be m omega squared cosine squared omega t X squared. P Heisenberg times the commutator of X and P, which is ih bar times a factor of 2. And then what do we get? The ih there and ih cancels. Well, it actually looks like an equation in classical mechanics. So how do we solve for them now? Well, you sort of have to try the kind of things that you would do classically. Take a second derivative of this equation. So d second Xh dt squared is equal to minus omega squared Xh, exactly the equation of motion of a harmonic oscillator. variables in, it just becomes identical to the Schrodinger Hamiltonian. All right, so that's all for today. I hope to see in office hours in the coming days. Be here Wednesday 12:30, maybe 12:25 would be better, and we'll see you then. [APPLAUSE] We'll be back at 12:50 on Wednesday, and be here at 1:30 on Thursday. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from.