Christine Hayes: The Book of Deuteronomy describes God's choice of Israel as the chosen one. She says the idea that Israel is a holy people entails obligations and responsibility. Hayes: God is repeatedly testing and correcting the Israelites until they are ready for the Promised Land. Some scholars say the texts may be understood as a kind of internal polemic against those elements of Israelite society whose practices didn't conform to the Yahweh-only policy, or YahweH-only ideals. Moses warns the Israelites not to say to yourselves, "My own power and the might of my own hand have won this wealth for me" He emphasizes, it is only because the wickedness of the Canaanites is so great that the Lord has to drive them from his land, and now he is giving you a chance. But it is conditional for you, just as it was for them. Don't fail him or he will choice. They love the person, and they make a bond with them. It does not imply anything about other people. Deuteronomy is not simply the concluding book of the Pentateuch, or the story that began in Genesis. It's also the first part of a much larger, longer literary work that runs from Deuteronomy through to the end of 2 Kings. We are going to consider today the program and the work of this so-called Deuteronomistic school. This section of the Bible is divided into two parts we refer to as the "Former Prophets" and the "Latterts" of times are some of the debates that occur on the question of dating. There is a great deal of ideological baggage that is involved in the dating of the sources. The reconstruction of the evolution of Israelite history, Israelite religion, excuse me, is really driven more by theological prejudice than it is by historical evidence. All scholars agree that the Priestly materials reach their final form in the exile or post-exilic period. So the period of the exile is the sixth century, right? obedience or disobedience to the covenant with Yahweh. And that conviction is going to color its presentation, its evaluation and its interpretation of Israel's history and her kings from Joshua right through to 2 Kings. The structure of Joshua is really somewhat simple. We can really divide it into two major parts. The first 12 chapters form a unit that conveys the invasion and conquest. There are certain important elements. in chapter 2 we have Joshua sending out spies to scout out the land. In chapter 3 we have the account of crossing the Jordan River. In the past 4000 years more wars have been fought for the possession of the tiny strip of land known as Canaan, or the land of Israel, or Palestine. In times of peace it would bring prosperity, but, of course, in times of war the land was perpetually invaded as armies would crisscross the land. Despite the fact that this is a very small piece of land, it boasts great geographical diversity. The area around the Sea is basically semi-desert. You have the semi-nomadic farmer settled in the more fertile areas. In Joshua 13:1, Joshua opens with the statement that they had not been captured. in Israel, it rises about 10,000 feet above sea level. As you move from the central area over to Jerusalem, that area is dramatically lower. By the time you get to the Sea of Galilee you are 700 feet below sea level, and the Dead Sea is nearly 1300 feet below. That is the lowest point on the earth's land surface--so this dramatic drop in just a very short geographical area. Up in the north, the river is surrounded by very lush vegetation on both sides, but there is no life 65 miles south down by the dead Sea. that are said to be destroyed by Joshua and the Israelites weren't even occupied in this period, the late Bronze Age, beginning of the Iron Age. Excavations at Jericho and Ai indicate that both of these towns were laid waste at least 200 years before the probable time of Joshua. Of 20 identifiable sites that were said to have been conquered or captured by Joshua, only two show destruction layers for this time, Hazor and Beth-el. In Judges 4 and 5, it is said that it is still a Canaanite city and Joshua failed to take it. So the conclusion one can draw from all of this is that Joshua didn't destroy Jericho. perhaps not exclusively, and adopted the national story of the Exodus as its own at some point. The Hebrew tribes, themselves, were likely still in the process of formation. But the tribal structure of Israelite society that would develop would be strengthened by the natural division of the land into these separate geographical areas. That only reinforced the tribalization of society. And these local tribes probably did assimilate elements of the local population. We've really seen already the ethnic mix of various elements reflected in religious imagery and institutions. century BCE, written by King Mesha of Moab Moab is to the southeast of the Dead Sea. In the inscription he writes, he boasts: "And the god Chemosh said to me, go, take Nebo from Israel" It is likely that such claims are hyperbolic in Moab, and it is likely they were hyperbols in Israel. But that does not lessen the shock value for a modern reader, says Andrew Keen. "War in our time is no less savage and no less brutal," he says.