Expectations play a huge role in economics, says Ricardo Caballero. He says they play a big role in the decision of all economic actors, including investors, consumers and firms. He gives a shortcut to think about the role of expectations in the kind of models we have already discussed. CaballERO: I want to revisit the consumption function and the investment function, now taking into account expectations and motivate how you should really think about consumption and investment in a more realistic model than we have been discussing. Milton Friedman called it the permanent income theory of consumption. What really matters to you in a consumption decision is what you expect to get on average during your lifetime. How wealthy you are will pin down more or less the consumption you have more than your current income. The very rich seldom sell assets. They borrow against those assets to fund consumption. It's easier to borrow against your human capital than your income. But even if you have no income, you will probably borrow against that wealth to the extent that you can. you're going to consume more for any given level of wealth, OK? It's temporary, but that's what it is. What about investment? That's a decision by the firm. How much physical capital? I'm talking about physical investment, real investment, not financial investment. The decision also depend on current, but particularly on expected profits. And when you think about expected profits, you need to think about interest rate as well. We put the interest rate, as I said, OK, it's more expensive to borrow if the interest rates is high. But actually it matters a lot more than just that. machines, is some sort of geometric depreciation-- so meaning, it's not deterministic. It's more or less-- machines break down occasionally, but there is certain probability that they break down. We typically call that notation in economics-- we refer to that as delta. That's the depreciation probability. So if you think in terms of expected value, if you buy a machine today, and you ask, how much of a machine I'll have next year, well, it'll be a weighted average of 0 and 1 probably. The Fed is trying to cool the economy, but the loan rates have begun to decline already. The Fed would like you not to believe that will happen. And that's a big issue. Monetary policy depends a lot on its ability to convince people that things will remain in the direction that they want. If they fail-- there was a famous episode in US monetary policy during the times of Alan Greenspan. It was known as the Greenspan conundrum. He kept hiking interest rates. But he couldn't cool off the economy. but are the variables we expect of those-- are the values of respect for those variables in the future and, again, with the same sign. So if output-- so if taxes go up today, aggregate demand will decline, and output will decline. But if I expect future taxes to go up as well, then that's going to depress aggregate demand even more. That's the type of logic I want you to develop. So this is the IS in the same space I had before-- interest rate and output, current output. Mervyn King described good monetary policy very much like Maradona's goal scored against the UK, England, in some World Cup. And he reason, the perception of fiscal deficit, was really dragging the economy down because people didn't know when there could be a financial crisis in the near future. So most of the fiscal contractions are contractionary. But there are some famous episodes of what are called expansionary fiscalcontractions, such as in Ireland in the late '80s. was expansionary. That was contractionary. But it was overwhelmed or offset, more than offset by the improvement in the outlook that you had. And that also happens with monetary policy. Countries that have high inflation problems and so on sometimes get-- and they have to go through dramatic tightenings. Yes, most of them get very short-lived recession. But sometimes they are veryshort-lived recessions because eventually the reduction of the instability caused by high and unstable inflation sort of ends up dominating any direct contractionary effect.