Professor: Today we're going to talk about partial differential equations. Next time I'll be lecturing to you will be a week from Friday. homework involves a COMSOL problem which might take some extra time, since it's the first time you're doing it. There's no lecture on Monday, but you have the quiz, too, Monday night. Wednesday, next week is Veterans Day so it's a holiday. There're no classes at MIT. The homework following the quiz will be posted and so you can get started on that. an equation like this, is that whatever partials you see-- When I have this and it has a term that's like d squared, dx squared, is one of the terms in this thing. This says t, this says x. The convention is, oh boy, I better hold x fixed. And here must be, I must hold t fixed. Because there's another one in the same equation. Now, you can change coordinates however you want. Just really watch out that you carefully follow the rules about what you hold fixed. Otherwise you can cause all kinds of craziness. methods. So all those methods basically look the same. You just get equations that have more unknowns in them. And so fundamentally, there's no problem, but there's a big problem if the number of unknowns gets to be so large. 10,000 unknowns are a lot harder to solve for than 100 unknowns. And once you get up to a million unknowns, we're starting to talk serious math, now. And then in reality, we have problems like the Navier-Stokes equation. A lot of combustion problems are very sensitive to the physical initial conditions. A very small spark can make a really big difference in a system like that. Another class of PDEs where it's stable in some sense, but it causes a problem. A lot of these things, light a spark on a stove, it ends up basically how you light it. So I do a lot of work on combustion problems. So that's one idea about what to do for initial guesses. Another idea is the time marching idea. If it does, then this is a good idea. a flow in a pipe. And you have a nice, fast velocity flow down the pipe. What's happening downwind is very much affected by what happened upwind, but not vice versa. So it has a directionality, even though I might do it as a steady state problem and not have time in it at all. And so if you look at figure 6.8 in the textbook, you see you get perfectly stable solutions when you do that. But where you do this one, you get crazy, oscillatory, unphysical solutions. If you look in the textbook at figures 6.7, 6.8, it's kind of a very famous problem. If you make the local Peclet number too large, actually anywhere bigger than 2, and you try to solve this equation, what you get is oscillations, unphysical oscillations. It's crazy. It looks like the simplest equation in the world, right? It's a linear equation, so what's the problem with this? But it doesn't work. And so, then you could think, well, why doesn't it work? And there's, like, multiple ways to explain this. a diffusive flux coming in here. So basically, it's coming up and it's making a right-hand turn. And so then I could think, well, if I was going to try to figure out, what's the steady state concentration of drug in there, I could say there's a certain amount of drug entering. And it's probably, my units are screwed up so there's-- Well, maybe not. You guys will get it right. It's probably an area. 16th numbers in this matrix are zero. So we don't have to represent them. But there still might be quite a few. Probably the diagonal events are non-zero, so that's like 10 to the 8th of them right there. So you try and vary and find the delta y that makes this go to zero by minimizing it. And then this method, it turns out that the conjugate gradient, if everything works great, this is guaranteed in n iterations to go directly to the solution. iterations like this, you tend to pick up numerical problems. And so, they've worked out better methods. And there's one that people use a lot for these problems called bi cg stab. Which is biconjugate gradient stabilized. And this is the one that, I think currently, people think is the best. Though probably, there's a lot of research on this, so maybe there's even better ones now. But inside Matlab,. I think this isthe best on they have. set up is right, so you can use it. But if you can, it can be pretty good. All right. See you on Friday. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from. Click here for the latest from CNN.com. Back To the pageYou came from the page You came from: Back to the Page You Came From: Back To The Page You Were Originally From: The page you were originally from: The Page you were initially from: the Page you started from.