Learn how to use the t matrices, or the t dagger matrix, to solve quantum mechanics problems. Use the Schrodinger equation to solve for the energy levels, and we can solve for basically all of the eigenvalues and eigenvectors. Learn how to solve time independent quantum mechanics and a lot of problems in time dependent quantum mechanics. Learn about non-degenerate perturbation theory to solve an n-level problem, and that's the subject of this lecture and the next. The energy levels and properties of the Hamiltonian. We're not allowed to determine the wave function by any experiment. But we are able to observe the energy levels. The molecule more or less tells you how to focus on the part that you care about and to get rid of the stuff that is of no trouble whatsoever. This is an amazingly powerful. tool that you can use to solve, basically, any problem involving molecules with a potential like a harmonic oscillator at the bottom. But it's usable for all problems, but there's a different basis set. The columns of t dagger are the eigenvectors. They are linear combination of the basis vectors that correspond to each eigenvector. And so it's possible to show-- and I don't want to do it. I did it last time. You can show that this transformation t dagger c equals c. Do I want?-- above, above. This is telling you that the columns of T dagger are. the eigenevectors of a particular eigenvalue. It's really quite simple. But it's just this extra notation. to know J, CJ eigenstates. Once you have this, then you know how to write the time dependent wave function. And then there's the origin of life. You need two particles to come together and start to condense into a liquid. That's the beginning. Perturbation theory explains the long range interactions by which all gas phase particles attract each other weakly. So that's important too. And so you'll be able to do all of this stuff. So here we have non-degenerate perturbation Theory. And it is important too, because it is just mechanical and boring. we do is now we write the full equation and we sort it into sub equations corresponding to powers of lambda. So the lambda to the 0 equation is really easy. It's just H0 psi 0 is equal to E0 psi0. We could put n's on this. And this is the exactly solved problem. It says, yeah, you build your foundation from the Lambda to 0 equation, and it's just what you know already. And what you're going to do is use the psi n 0 and en 0 to do everything else. level V1 minus 1 V2 plus 2 V3. Because of the energy denominators, these two guys are nearly degenerate. One gets shifted up, one gets shifted down a little bit. And it might also be that this state is what we call bright and this is called dark. This is called a spectroscopic perturbation. And so you can learn about some of these coupling terms because, instead of hiding in the forest of these small corrections, you get a big effect. says, well, tough luck. You can't do spectroscopy in emission. But you can still see the absorption spectrum because then your signal is the removal of photons from your beam. So there's a huge amount of photochemistry and interesting stuff connected with a large density of states. And again, when I was a graduate student, there was a huge controversy about non-radiative transitions in medium sized molecules. And that got resolved by two gentlemen called Bixon and Jortner.