Professor: We're going to be taking this IV curve that we've so laboriously set up and understood. And now we will subject it to illumination. So that's the essence of our lecture today, the diode under illumination. And as part of today's lecture, we have some wonderful little kits over there in the corner where we'll actually be testing IV curves of solar cells. So we should have sheets that describe essentially the equivalent circuit diagram, the IV characteristics and the energy band diagram for our pn-junction in the dark. The goal is to understand solar cell conversion efficiency, which is the ratio of output to input energy. For most solar cells, this breaks down to the following progression, from the solar spectrum to charge collection. Under all other conditions of operations of the solar cell, we're putting power into the device, not getting power out of it. The total system efficiency in blue is somewhere, depending on the plant, somewhere around 1%, maybe as high as 7% or 8%, depending on very specialized plants that are experts at converting sunlight. a little confusing for some folks. So just to be totally clear, in a device like this one, if it were subject to illumination you would have light coming in from the side, right, either from the p side or from the n side. To transfer this into what we've seen so far with the solar cell devices facing up toward the sun, you'd have to rotate this by 90 degrees. The drift and diffusion currents for electrons-- electron diffusion, electron drift-- there is an abundance of electrons over here in the n-type side, and so they want to diffuse over to the p-type. In a real device, when we you have a two-dimensional device within homogeneities, the current will travel through the weakest point of that pn-junction. Wherever the barrier height is lowest, current will begin crowding through that spot. So it's a way of probing or testing the quality of your junction characteristic in the dark. OK. Let's flip our page over and now device in theDark. Here, in the forward bias conditions, we're actually forcing carriers from the n-type material into the p- type material. But under illumination, now we have all of our carriers traveling from theP-type into theN-type. And that's why our current has changed signs. let's try to imagine what will happen under illuminated conditions, and let's start out in a very simple case. We'll assume that the principle of superposition applies here. What do we think will happen if our light intensity goes down by a factor of 2? So now if the amount of sunlight falling on our solar cell drops by 1/2, what do we predict will happen based on this right here? AUDIENCE: [INAUDIBLE]. PROFESSOR: The curve will shift, the red curve willShift up by about 1/1. Professor: Open-circuit voltage is just as you would think it is. When your solar cell is in an open circuit, when you-- say you took a pair of scissors-- please don't this-- and cut the leads, there would be a bias voltage have the right load. So the two need to be matched to each other. And that's where some of the power electronics come into play. Yeah? AUDIENCE: So in the last problem set, where [INAUDIBLE], we assumed that output voltage would be [INAudIBLE] volts. power out versus power in, the power out being the maximum power point power and the power in being the illumination from the sun. The ratio of the two boxes is defined as the fill factor. The fill factor indicates the quality of your diode. If your fill factor is very poor, that means that that sun right over there is being dragged toward the origin. That means you're filling less of this maximum square box function defined by the Voc Jsc. OK. So we have defined efficiency as power out divided by power in. box is Jmp times Vmp. OK? And notice I have another box around here. I have this clear box that starts at the Voc point and the Jsc point. And now I have two rectilinear shapes, this blue one and the clear one right here, the bigger one. The bigger one has an area of Jsc times Voc. And I'm going to define a parameter called fill factor, which will be the ratio of these two areas. If this is 1, which is virtually impossible to do, but if this were 1, it would mean that these two boxes were the same size.