Charles Brockden Brown: The Enlightenment is a critique of a kind of impoverished view of mind or consciousness that over-relies on reason. We started to look at it a little bit with Barlow's [assumed spelling] Raven poem with Poe. The idea that in fact there is something wrong with reason as a faculty, and this can take a couple of forms. It may be that there are real reasons that all of the vaunted ideas of The Enlightenment in fact co-exist with those things, tolerate them, maybe even require them. Franklin believes that you can identify error. He prizes appearance in a way that no good Calvinist would. He's stressing that he's doing something American. If you could read the little epigraph here it says from virtues blissful paths away, the double-tongued are sure to stray. Good is a forthright journey to still, and many paths but lead to ill. That's the way the S was originally printed at the beginning of a word. And yes, if you can actually see it, that is not an F, that's an old fashioned way of setting an S. book tells you it's set in Philadelphia in 1787, all right? The same time as the Constitution is being framed a hop, skip, and a jump away. There's a way in which we might say this is also if not a critique, then a cautionary tale you might say about the principles of enlightenment that are enshrined in The Constitution. A kind of meditation on what the dangers to the new nation might be at the moment that the new country is being formed. Now, Brown is an interesting character because he is one of the first US writers to try to take advantage of thefirst American copyright law which is passed in 1790. appears in 1798 and it's the first novel that he actually publishes, and he talked he echoes what he had said before there, and says that the novelist should be regarded as a moral painter. And he proposes, he says, to illustrate some important branches of the moral constitution of man. In Edgar Huntly there's another kind of scientific fact that is played with right? Sleepwalking. And this is Wieland: or, The Transformation, the title is still a very interesting book although if you read the subtext of the book, it suggests it's an account of American literature. In the early English epistolary novel there's the worry about what it is we're writing and reading. One solution early on was well, it would be realistic if these were letters that you were getting to read. But it's interesting that the novel, the Gothic novel itself as a form doesn't take off in 1764. It has to wait about 25 years in and around the French Revolution and then it really takes off when a woman named Ann Radcliffe writes her Gothic novels. Gothic becomes a pejorative term by this time that is, that takes on the medieval association and makes you think of you know it's so Gothic, it's medieval. Romantic writers are gonna mobilize the medieval and Gothic and dark over against The Enlightenment to show you what's wrong with The Enlightenment. The Castle of Otranto, this Gothic novel which seems like kind just too much of the actual supernatural. Classic Scooby-Doo is Ann Radcliffe. The ghosts are fake. like that. There appear to be manifestations of the supernatural. She often finds herself in the various kinds of settings crumbling castles, dungeons, graveyards, darkened churches. Usually she almost escapes her persecutors, then they catch her. They are trying to get her out of greed or lust or both. Usually there's a Theodore-like protector who's kind of chasing after trying to save the day. In the end, all of the ghosts and supernatural manifestations that have tyrannized her are shown to be fakes. It's a very popular formula and it continues to this present day. Brown: The story reinforces the novel's picture of identity as confusing and inconstant right? Think about the motif's in there. There's that strange co-partnership of being that Mrs. Loramer has with her brother Arthur Wyatt who was taken for dead, turns out to be alive. Clithero takes Clarice, who is Mrs. Lieramer's niece, and his fiancee to be Mrs. Lieramer and he almost kills her. He portrays Edgar here not as a redeeming confessor, but as an agent of perdition, of damnation. every eye was a loathsome and disgusting object. To every eye but a mothers. In vain did human feelings bid me recoil from this emblem of mortality. I was not insensible at that moment of the impulses of vengeance. But they were transient. I detested the sanguinary resolutions that I had once formed. Yet I was fearful of the effect of my hasty rage and dreaded an encounter in consequensive wish I must, I might rush into evils which no time could repair, nor penitence expiate. well as he sends Edgar out into the wilderness. But the sublime, if the wilderness is about the sublime for many romantic writers, for Edgar Huntly the wilderness becomes about something else altogether. Terror and disgust is what Agnes feels in The Monk. Ann Radcliffe makes a distinction between what she calls, let me see if I have it here, the distinction between terror and horror. So Monk Lewis' Gothic is horror. Her Gothic she would've offered was a form of terror, okay? There's grounds of hope for everybody, he says. But it also means destroying old systems of obligation. What if the total depravity of human beings is true, not because of something called the fall of human kind, but just because that's human nature? Then, we've got a big problem. All of this you might say is the context for Charles Brockden Brown's Edgar Huntly. Okay? Now, let's take a look at the first pages of this. This is the preface to the book. Be impossible to arm myself with firmness? If forbearance be the dictative wisdom can it be so deeply engraven on the mind as to defy all temptation, and be proof against the most abrupt surprise? My late experience has been of use to me. It has shown me my weakness and my strength. No caution indeed, he says, can hinder the experiment from being hazardous. Curiosity is vicious if undisciplined by reason and inconducive to benefit. Except that he's gonna be experimenting with a person who might well be a murderer. he descends into madness which is a state of sleepwalking in which Edgar finds him. So that you might say that Clithero's story in these 4 chapters act as a kind of narrative counterweight to the primacy of reason that Edgar is trying to say this larger story is about, is a dramatization of. On page 88, he describes himself as a dispassionate observer still. And later on, take a look at this on page 90, he still is unwilling to accept the evidence of what is in front of him. the hand and by which force could be exerted. Some spring therefore secretly existed which might forever elude the senses, but on which the hand by being moved over in all the directions might accidentally light. The process was effectual. A touch, casually applied at an angle drove back a bolt and a spring at the same time was sent in action by which the lid was raised above half an inch. No event could have been supposed more fortuitous, by chance than this. No measure that I could adopt enabled me to place the lid in the same situation in which I had found it.