Professor Steven Smith: I want to talk today about Aristotle's discovery of America. Smith: Aristotle's proposal for a mixture of oligarchy and democracy seems, in many ways, to anticipate, 2,000 years before the fact, James Madison's call for a government where powers must be separated. He says Aristotle would have been critical of the American tendency to organize into what we call political clubs. Smith says he believes when political functions become concentrated into the hands of, again, the too few hands, we risk arbitrary government. any sensible reader of Aristotle would reach is that Aristotle, in fact, discovered the American Constitution 1,500 or 2,000 years before it was written. Aristotle understands the mixed constitution as a balance of classes--the one, the few, and the many. He doesn't so much insist, as you will see in your reading, on the actual separation of functions of government, putting them into separate hands. But that leads to a further difference. We tend to think of the separation of powers doctrine as necessary for the security and liberty of the individual. to war, but in fact to peace. The citizen of the best regime, he says, must be able to sustain war if duty requires, but only for the sake of peace and leisure. Aristotle tells us he is slow to act, unless something of great importance is at stake. He repays favor with interest so as not to be under any obligations to others. He speaks his mind without fear or favor, somewhat like the New York Times, because to dissemble would be beneath him. the great-souled person or the great-Souled man. The megalopsychos, the gentleman, whatever else he is, is not a philosopher in the strict sense. The statesman, again, to the highest degree is the founder of regimes, laws, and institutions. They provide the constitutional framework within which we, later figures, operate. The qualities we will see beginning on Friday and next week that Machiavelli and later Hobbes or Locke, believe are necessary for the great founders. sense in which trainers know their animals or parents their children. Aristotle describes this political knowledge as phronimos. How is this knowledge acquired? Are we just born with it? Do some people just have it or is it a product of experience? Aristotle doesn't say, but I think the answer is clearly some of both. It is a quality, as I agree with Berlin, possessed by some of the great psychological novelists. I mention the names of some of them in this article. animal means first to possess speech or reason that allows us to participate in a community or a way of life governed by shared standards of justice and injustice. To be a political animal, for him, is to engage or not to demand more precision than the subject matter allows. But that formulation seems, in many ways, to be question begging. How much precision does the subject allow? How do we know? There will always, he suggests, appear to be something ad hoc about the methods used in the study of politics. These four questions are intended to guide inquiry, to shape and direct inquiry. They are not intended to yield sure or certain results, but to guide and inform statesmen and citizens in the U.S. The political scientist must have a grasp of the best regime, given the most favorable circumstances. He must also know something about the techniques of reform and persuasion, what we might call the area of political rhetoric by which existing regimes can be brought closer to the best. And he must have some knowledge of how to render any regime, no matter how imperfect, more stable and coherent. Most contemporary political scientists tend to be liberals. Their values are liberal values. This raises a question. Whether the relation between contemporary political science and liberalism is merely accidental or whether there is some intrinsic, some necessary connection between them. One might do well to ponder which political science is really more scientific--Aristotle's, which is explicitly and necessarily evaluative or that offers advice and exhortation to the statesmen and citizens about how to care for their regime, says Julian Zelizer. the back door. On Friday, let me just remind you, Il Principe. We'll study Machiavelli. On this very partisan note I conclude. On Thursday, we'll study the life of the Italian statesman and play a game of chess with him. We're going to see how well he can play the game of poker. I'm looking forward to it. I hope you'll join us for the game on Friday night at 8 p.m. ET on CNN.