"Apparently This Matters" is CNN Radio's weekly, offbeat look at stories you saw on CNN.com. This week, Jarrett ponders the meaning of the word "unlockable" "Unlockable," means either it's possible to unlock it, or it is not possible to lock it," Jarrett says. "Un-" combines with verbs and makes adjectives that mean more or less "not (adjective) " " Unfortunate" means not the adjective, whatever it is. could imagine that it would, but that's not what it means. Joseph, did you have a-- AUDIENCE: Yeah, I was going to-- based on what Raquel said, does the final-- after you "un-" something, is that going to be able to be redone? So if I untie a shoelace by cutting it up, now-- NORVIN RICHARDS: Yeah. It can't be tied again. If you undo an operation on a computer, does it have to be possible to do the operation again? I don't know, maybe. You can ask questions like, "Up which stairs did John walk?" It's a strange way to ask the question, but you can say it. syntacticians have to care passionately about the difference between one sentence, which is complete gibberish, and another sentence. There's a fair amount of great syntax that's built on those kinds of distinctions. This way of talking about vocabulary has the virtue of giving us a vocabulary for those those sentences that we don't know about but that are OK. CNN's John Sutter and CNN.com's John D. Sutter take on the idea that syntax is the ability to remember things you've heard people say. They argue that the existence of the second class of sentences shows that that's hopeless. They say the problem is we're capable of distinguishing grammaticality, even in sentences that don't mean anything. The debate continues at 10 p.m. ET tonight on CNN's "Sutter and Sutter" and "CNN.com Live" In many languages, you never leave a preposition at the end of the sentence. In English, there's a distinction between the examples. "To whom are you talking?" sounds fancy and snobbish, but still right. But you can't do that in English, "About what are youtalking?" NORVIN RICHARDS: It's not a meaning thing. It's something about syntax. You want to try to understand that. The only point of these few slides has been it's possible to study syntax independently of meaning. whereas the first one, it doesn't mean anything, but you feel as though-- and this is what I'm slowing down right about here where I say it doesn's mean anything. But it obeys the rules for how words can be combined. If the words meant something else, the sentence would be fine. We can have English sentences that consist of two adjectives modifying a noun. And that certain types of words are categories that you can add more words to, even if you don't know what they like. your English teacher? Yes? AUDIENCE: Is this another example because that's how it's done in Latin? NORVIN RICHARDS: Yes. Your English teacher told you to do that because Latin, actually, among many other languages, doesn't allow you to say this. You have to do this. English is quite rare in being able to doing this. Most of the languages of the world can't. Some time in the 15th, 16th century, a number of grammarians decided that English would be way cooler if it were more like Latin. here's another useful distinction. It's sometimes called competence versus performance. Imagine that I'm standing up here talking to you and I say, "This is the--" and then I Inhale a fly. And then imagine that this experience is so traumatizing for me and also for the fly, that I just I never complete that sentence. So we're going to be talking about speakers' competence, what they would do if there were no distractions and no problems. There's also performance. That's the study of what people actually do. Journalists know that the best way to make someone look like a complete idiot is to quote them accurately. What journalists, in fact, do is to clean up all that stuff so that people sounded like they were talking in complete sentences. So we're going to develop a theory of what English speakers say, but it's going to be a theory that's divorced from reality to a certain extent. We're Going to Imagine what English Speakers Say is going to look like to you and me. "The red book," we want it to be a substring that has certain privileges, can be used for these various types of phenomena. But there is no unit that we've created as we've been putting these pairs together that consists just to "find the red" Do people see that in this tree? So there's a node in the tree, if you want. It's the one that I circled in red that consistsjust of the words "the red book" But there's no thing that I could circle that would consist just of the word "find" is that it contains a noun. "Find the red book" we're going to give that the label verb, because having a verb is the important part for that. "In the garage" is a unit, it's a constituent. It's the kind of thing syntax gets to care about. If I want to, I can topicalize "in the garage." I can say things like, " in the garage I will find the book" It's a prepositional phrase. "the day after tomorrow" sure looks like a noun phrase. It's got a noun in it, "day," and then "the" before that, but we know that can go at the beginnings of noun phrases. So there are probably-- so the word "adverb" can be used to cover a bunch of things, including things that we don't have any other word for. And so I think you might be right that this is an adverb in the sense that it modifies the verb. "Waking the cats up" is a little bit like painting the cats red. We want "up" to not be a preposition that's combining with the cats. "I will walk her up," you're absolutely right. That's the way to say that. But I think you also have to walk the student up. You can't walk up the student, unless the student is lying down and you're walking on her. But if you mean you're going to walk with the student so that the two of you are up, so we want "walk the student" up to be different.