If you have a complex polyhedron, we found general unfoldings. We proved one of them. If you want an edge unfolding, that's the centuries-old open problem. For non-convex polyhedra, we know this is too much to hope for. Even if it's topologically convex, there's not always an edge unfolds. But for general unfolding, we don't know. So today's lecture is actually mostly about these two open problems and different variations of it that we know how to solve. Theory of the facet-path: A path that alternates between visiting faces, triangles, and vertices. Professor: It's an open problem for something like a cube where you actually have quadrilateral faces. He says the claim is facet- Paths always exist for any triangulated, connected surface. The theorem works not only for a polyhedron-- it works for any manifold, any sort of locally, two-dimensional thing, Prof. Peter Kuznetsov says. original thing, we think of this triangle as being an ear, and this triangle is an ear. I like ears because they're kind of on the boundary, on the surface, so they're just triangles that are adjacent to only one other triangle. Now, the next step is to color what are called the second-level ears. If you remove those ears, what would, then, become an ear? And I'm going to stop there, just two levels. But for the general cases, if I find that that for two ears or three ears, I can just draw that in. Even if you have 2 k vertices, no more than 2 k alternations, slight, the place where we're making a little improvement is for the odd case. At every level of the tree, you're going to double what was below you, so have a face of 2 k or 2 k plus 1 edges, then it will have, at most, 2k alternations. I'm going to try and prove an upper bound, sandwich it between, and show that, actually, the upper bound is smaller than the lower bound, and that's a contradiction. The algorithm is called non-selfintersection. The general approach is always proceed rightward in the unfolding. You can unfold every orthogonal polyhedron this way. It also works if t is on the other side of s. The algorithm could also be inset into the [INAUDIBLE] voxel, but it's not quite sure what that would look like, yet. It's going to be exponential. Exponential number cuts is a lot. But it works. face at a time, you can't do that, but if you visit faces multiple times and kind of weave around in a clever way,you can do it. So if you follow along here, I just turn right here. So now, I go down here. And that is a left turn because it's on the bottom, a little hard to think about. So I turn left here, and then, we can zoom out, and you get the unfolding. They're so much fun. It's like exploding a city. Boom! If your tree is ugly like something like this, you'll start with something nice and small down here, maybe constant number of terms. Then, you'd double again, and it will be exponential. On the other hand, if your tree happens to be nice and balanced, doubling is not so bad because here you'll have constant. This a double everything below, but there's only log n levels. So is that linear? It should be about linear. It's certainly 2 to the theta log n. My conjecture's, in general, you need to omega n refinement. So ideally, k is one, and you're not subdividing at all. But maybe, you take every rectangle, divide it in half. Maybe that's enough to then be edge unfoldable. That would be sort of a refined level two grid-like unfolding. There are a ton of results about this. They're all partial. But one thing you could do, with merely 5 by 4 refinement, is something called Manhattan Towers. That's a Manhattan Tower. And in that case, 5 by four refinement is enough to unfold these things. glue whole edges to whole edges. If you want something sphere-like, in fact, those gluings have to be non-crossing. We know it must make a convex polyhedron. If it made two, Cauchy's rigidity theorem would tell you that they're the same. Even once you fix the gluing, you know that there's a unique convex realization, and there will be a unique set of edges from the shortest paths that actually realize it. Cauchy-Steinitz rigidity theorem is often attributed to both of them. It's sort of a proof by contradiction. We want to prove uniqueness. So we're supposing, well, maybe, there's two polyhedra, p and p prime, and they're combinatory equivalent and have matching faces congruent. What I want to do is look at corresponding vertices, let's say a vertices v and p and a vertex v prime and pprime. a sphere. Think of it is as almost flat. What that would mean is there's some other way to draw this thing. Basically, there's a way to flex this linkage so that all of these angles increase and this one stays the same. How could I get a polygon where all of the angles increases and still be convex? Ain't possible. Why is it not possible? I think we've used this fact a couple lectures ago. It's not possible by something called the Cauchy Arm Lemma. And here's the thing. If you have a convex chain but open chain here. There's a missing bar. true just viewing p prime as p and p as p prime. If there's anything in there other than zeroes, there has to be at least one plus, at leastone minus. Alternation is either going from plus to minus or from minus to plus. What's interesting here-- before we were thinking of labeling the vertices of the spherical polygon, but in fact, whatever this edge does, it does the same thing local to that vertices. So really the labels are on the edges of the graph. The number of alternations is at least 4 times the number of vertices. The other natural way to count angles is by looking at the faces. Every phase has a bunch of angles that have some degree or whatever. They're really kind of the same thing. This number's at least 8 larger than this number. It could be even more larger, but at least that contradiction done. It can't be both. This works as long as there's at at least one face. And that is Cauchy's rigidity theorem. conveniently relates vertices to faces, but it involves edges. If I look at every face and I count the number of edges, I will end up counting every edge twice, once from each side. So now, things are starting to look similar, and I want to get some cancellation going on. Use my cheat sheet here. I'm going to rewrite this formula as V equals 2 plus E minus F. OK? All I did here was decrease by-- well, because there's a half out here, I decrease each coefficient by 2. nothing surprising. Now, here it gets bigger. It's going to go 10, instead of 6 and 7. We also have a plus 8. We don't know whether there any faces of degree 6 or more, so we can't rely on that. But we have plus 8, which is at most, the number of alternations. Hm. So I could get a formula for 4V here. Right? 4V is going to be 8 plus this isgoing to be like 2.