Using our survey results, we estimate that almost all physicians practicing on January 1, 1996, whose waivers were processed through federal agencies were practicing in primary care specialties. The most prevalent subspecialty was nephrology (medicine concerned with kidney disease), which was reported for about 7 percent of the primary care physicians. Requesting facilities and state officials had mixed views on the usefulness of subspecialties for meeting their needs. See appendix VI for more detailed information on the results of our survey of facilities. waivers come through the states, other agencies do not. This leads to situations where the states are unaware of the level of placements that are occurring. Waivers for physicians also are not well-coordinated with other programs addressing underservice, such as those operated by HHS. When combined with NHSC physicians, federal agencies and states have requested waivers for more physicians than are needed to remove the shortage designations in some states, authors say. They found that for eight states, the number of physicians who received waivers in 1994 and 1995 (or had waivers in process) exceeded the number in service at the end of 1995. Waiver physicians are practicing in virtually every state; most are primary care physicians. The number of waivers being processed for physicians to practice in underserved areas each year has grown from 70 in 1990, to 1,374 in 1995. In 1996, waiver physicians were practicing in 49 states and the District of Columbia—every state except Alaska. However, the degree to which they are relied on to relieve physician shortages varies greatly from state to state.. We found cases in which a facility made the request and then determined that the physician was no longer needed. waiver physician in a medical shortage area is no guarantee that the needs of the underserved will be addressed. An area’s underserved may be only a specific part of the population (such as migrant workers or low-income people) Not all federal agencies’ and states’ policies contain requirements or monitoring to ensure that a physician's practice includes such groups. Establishing penalties against a facility for failing to comply with agency policies does not establish any penalties. The new regulations and the 1996 amendments do not establish no penalties. In 1995, about half of the foreign physicians that were supposed to return home were granted waivers of this requirement to practice in an underserved area in the United States. Other reasons cited for hiring these physicians are their superior foreign language skills and cultural familiarity with a facility’s patient population. For example, several physicians received waivers to practice at a migrant health center in Eastern Washington. These physicians were recruited, in part, because they are native Spanish speakers, which enables them to effectively treat the center's Spanish-speaking patients. of physicians for whom waivers were processed equaled more than 75 percent of the number of physicians needed to remove these designations in the state. In other states, such as California, such physicians equal less than 10 percent. More than one-third of physicians who received their waivers through federal agencies are practicing in nonprofit community or migrant health centers. About one-fourth are in a private or group practice. The rest arepracticing in hospitals, for-profit health centers, or other settings program. State and federal health officials said they have been inundated with inquiries from physicians. Some facility officials and physicians reported paying up to $25,000 in immigration attorney or recruiter fees for assistance in matching a physician with a facility and processing the waiver. In addition, officials at several facilities said that they were contacted by professional recruiters or immigration attorneys regarding the availability of a physician to meet their facility’s needs if the physician could obtain a waiver. During our site visits to facilities where this waiver was offered, we found that the waiver was available. Agency officials said that they would like to limit the number of waivers processed by their agencies, but have not found a way of effectively restricting them. The four federal agencies have no formal process for coordinating their waiver requests and they have overlapping jurisdictions. Coordination between the agencies involved in the requests and other programs to address medical underservice is important. For example, not all the agencies processing the waiver requests have expertise in addressing health care issues, the authors say. In USDA, waivers for physicians are processed in the department’s Agricultural Research Service by an office that has experience processing waiver requests. Warrant policies vary considerably between agencies, authors say. This can lead to ‘shopping’ by physicians seeking the most advantageous terms, they say. ARC restricts physicians to practice locations in federally designated Health Professional Shortage Areas, they write. ARC practice in other areas, including designated Medically Underserved Areas, the authors add. They say there is no mechanism for each federal agency to know how many waivers the other has requested to address the physician shortage in an area. Transportation (DOT) has requested waivers for a handful of physicians to practice in one rural area where the U.S. Coast Guard operates. The rapid growth in waivers began in late 1993 and 1994, when the Departments of Agriculture (USDA) and Housing and Urban Development (HUD) began requesting them for physicians to serve their rural and urban constituents. Senior officials at both agencies said that they initially responded to a constituent request to support a specific physician; but their offices were subsequently flooded with requests for waivers for other physicians. Federal efforts to address physician shortages are not coordinated among the federal agencies or with the states. Despite some improvements, monitoring efforts to ensure that physicians fulfill the terms of their agreements remain spotty. The rapid growth in waivers for physicians makes this an opportune time for the Congress to reassess what it wants the waiver provision to accomplish. This should include determining the size of the waiver program and establishing how it should be coordinated with other federal programs.. Establishing penalties against facilities that fail to comply with requirements of the waivers. care Health Professional Shortage Area designations in that state as of December 31, 1995. We used the shortage area dedesignation level because it is the primary measurement used by HHS and the requesting agencies to establish the need for physicians. We identified instances where physicians did not comply with the terms of the waiver through (1) discussions with the ARC Inspector General and (2) a identified by HHS as needed to remove primary care Health Professional shortage areas from the state. Although physicians with waivers may also practice in designated Medically Underserved Areas, HHS does not remove this designation. While HHS is the federal agency responsible for addressing physician shortages it does not use waivers to do so. HHS endorses the philosophy that exchange visitors return home to make their new knowledge and skills available to their home countries. HHS does not support waivers for physicians to remain in the United States to practice number of physicians needed to remove shortage area designations in the state. Another HHS program with which physician waivers are not well-coordinated is the Community Health Center program. In an effort to ensure that the employers have a true need for a physician, ARC, USDA, and HUD policies, require the facilities to provide physicians. agency, USDA, also expressed concern about the lack of available funding to operate its program effectively. USDA suggested that an alternative to funding the program from appropriated research funds would be to initiate a fee-for-service type application fee to offset operational costs. We concur that any entity involved in managing waiver requests for physicians should commit adequate resources for oversight and operational support. We are sending copies of this report to the Secretaries of Agriculture, Health and Human Services, Housing and Urban Development, and Transportation. USIA has proposed regulations to make the waiver requests more consistent. Recent amendments to the Immigration and Nationality Act impose additional requirements for waivers obtained through federal agencies. The new regulations, if finalized, and the 1996 amendments could address many of the coordination and compliance problems. But not all of them.violation of the policy receive additional scrutiny to ensure that the problems have been corrected. The growth in the number of waiver physicians has not gone unnoticed by federal agency officials and legislators. They have recently taken actions that could address some of the compliance problems identified. Director of the department’s Office of International Affairs told us that his office had fully reviewed the draft report and was in general agreement with the findings. HHS favored the option of delegating responsibility for the waivers to the states. The three agencies that provided formal written comments also expressed their support for the need for better coordination between the participating agencies, states, and other programs to address medical underservice. One agency, USDA, also expressed concern about the lack of available Regional Commission, and the Attorney General. We obtained and analyzed data on requests for waivers for physicians from USIA and the requesting federal agencies. We also visited three states—Washington, Texas, and Georgia. Washington was quick to establish a state program; Texas had a large number of physicians with waivers through federal agencies but the state was not requesting waivers. We interviewed state and federal agency officials, reviewed their written waiver policies, and analyzed the results of our state survey. To look at coordination of physician placements, we cross-tabulated the agency data on waiver requests received. USIA and INS officials said they recommend and approve virtually all waiver requests. USIA officials said that while they check for required documentation, they almost always rely on the interested government agencies’ assertions that the waivers are in the public interest. INS officials say that refusal of the waiver is extremely rare if USIA has given a favorable recommendation. We used the date that the agencies sent the request to USIA in our calculations because neither USIA nor INS has a cost-effective means of identifying waiver requests by occupation. We sent a questionnaire to the contact person at the facility that had requested the waivers. requested in 1994 or 1995 were either already practicing at the facility listed in agency data on December 31, 1995, or had their waivers in process to begin practicing shortly thereafter. We compared this number with (1) the number of physicians needed to remove the primary care Health Professional Shortage Area designations in the state on December 1, 1995. In addition to those named above, the following individuals made important contributions to the NHSC’s efforts to meet the identified physician need in a state. HHS administers other federal programs, such as NHSC, to address physician shortages in the United States. NHSC supplies physicians and other health professionals to underserved areas. We obtained the number of physicians who were NHSC scholarship or federal loan repayment recipients who were practicing in each state as of December 31, 1995, from HHS’ Bureau of Primary Health Care. We used data from the requesting agencies and states on theNumber of waiver applications sent to USIA from 1994 to 1995. a physician never practiced at the intended facility, unbeknownst to the agency processing the request. We estimate that 90 percent completed the minimum employment period required by ARC. On January 1, 1996, over one-fourth (28 percent) were still practicing at the same facility that requested the waiver. Nearly half of these (13 percent) had been there for more than 4 years. We also examined the shorter-term compliance record of all physicians practicing on January 1. 1996, after receiving waivers through federal agencies between 1994 and 1995. ARC minimum contract period at that time, which was 2 years. We used 1.75 years of practice as our measure of compliance to allow for vacation and other leave. At a 95-percent confidence level, the rate of compliance among the 1990 to 1992 requests is at least 80 percent. The percent still at the requesting facility on January 1, 1996, is at at least 19 percent. We counted those physicians who were working for the facility listed in agency data as in compliance as in 1995. Federal agencies and states have different controls to help ensure that physicians comply with waiver agreements. HUD and USDA officials said that they do not have the staff resources to monitor physician compliance. HUD officials also said that their monitoring efforts were limited by the availability of staff resources. Under existing procedures, locating a waiver physician in a medical shortage area is no guarantee of success, the authors say. The authors say that the use of waivers to address physician shortages is not authorized or funded as a program, and their agencies do not know how to effectively manage it. not have the resources available to effectively manage it as a program. In its site visits to monitor compliance, ARC’s Inspector General attributed most of the problems identified to the employers. For waivers requested through both federal agencies and states, the applicable federal laws and regulations do not specify penalties against employers that fail to comply with agency policies. ARC tries to address this shortcoming by requiring employers to sign a statement certifying that they will comply with the waiver policy, and applications from employers found to be in violation of the policy receive additional scrutiny. hospital and when USDA officials told him he could not because the hospital was not in a shortage area, the physician broke off contact with them. In the second instance, the facility reported the physician’s firing directly to INS, which revoked his nonimmigrant work status. Six of eight reviews conducted by the Inspector General from 1994 to 1995 found that contrary through (1) discussions with the ARC Inspector General and a review of reports from that office, our survey of facilities where requesting agencies believed that the physicians were practicing. provided by the federal agencies. For each physician, we asked the contact person to tell us if the physician worked or planned to work at the facility. We received responses for 39 of the 40 physicians in our 1990 to 1992 ARC sample and for for the 1990-1992 ARC sample. We also asked for the physician’s medical specialty, subspecialty, and practice setting, and the date he or she stopped working at a facility. For more information, go to: http://www.cnn.com/2013/01/29/health/healthcare/cnn-healthcare-reputation-reporter-cnn/2013-01-29/index.html. A medical group asked HUD to request waivers for three physicians to work at a practice purchased from a retiring physician outside of Atlanta. When we called the practice site, we were told that only one of the three physicians was working there. The third physician was practicing only part-time at the practice sites for which the waiver was requested. He said that because there were not enough patients in that location, he spends about half his time working at the main clinic in Champaign, Illinois. The second physician was transferred from the location on the waiver request to another location that is not in a federally designated shortage area. site, we were told that only one of the three was practicing there. An official from the medical group said that the practice no longer had enough patients to support these physicians. One physician never worked at the site, one physician worked a brief period and then went to practice at a prison in Michigan, and one physician remained to work for the new employer after the practice was sold. INS officials said that waivers had been approved for all three physicians, including the one who was never employed there. requirement before they are eligible to apply for nonimmigrant visas (H and L) There was no 2-year foreign residence requirement or waiver provision in the exchange visitor program authorized with the passage of the U.S. Information and Educational Exchange Act of 1948. The act required participants to depart the United States after completing their programs. An amendment to the foreign residence provision in 1970 removed the blanket application of the foreign residency requirement for exchange visitors and imposed it only on participants whose participation was financed in some way by United States or their home countries. programs accredited by ACGME was an exchange visitor in August 1995. Only these exchange visitor physicians are subject to the J-visa 2-year foreign residence requirement. Medical school type was not indicated for 454 residents (0.5 percent of all residents) does not include graduates of Canadian medical schools. ECFMG is the designated sponsor for exchange visitors participating in graduate medical education. It is expected that participants will return to their home countries and impart what they have learned and experienced to the people of their country. We obtained these data from HHS’ Health Resources and Services Administration. The number of waiver requests for physicians to practice in underserved areas that the agencies sent to USIA in 1995 (1,374) We subtracted the number of exchange visitor physicians who were continuing applicants in the 1995-96 academic year from the physicians sponsored by ECFMG in the prior academic year. We also compared the number. of waivers with thenumber of NHSC physicians practicing in.underserved areas on September 30, 1995, including NHSC. physicians who did not have NHSC scholarship or federal loan repayment obligations. also reviewed case files at the requesting agencies and USIA to check for documentation, if any, of the physician’s departure from the facility or noncompliance. For physicians that did not work at or left the facilities, we tried to locate the physician through AMA data. Exchange visitors are only a portion of physicians in graduate medical education programs. As shown in table II.1, about 1 in 10 physicians in programs accredited by ACGME was an exchange visitor in August. For more information, visit the American College of Physicians website. to those named above, the following individuals made important contributions to this report: Sarah F. Jaggar, Issue Area Director, Susan Lawes, Susie Anschell, Julie Rachiele, Evan Stoll, Jerry Aiken, Stan Stenersen, Lisa DeCora, Kathleen Belfi, William J. Carter-Woodbridge. Council on Graduate Medical Education. First Report of the Council, Vols. I and II. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 1988. Report: Managed Health Care: Implications for the Physician Workforce and Medical Education. Institute of Medicine. The Nation’s Physician. Workforce: Options for Balancing Supply and Requirements. Pew Health Professions Commission. Critical Challenges: Revitalizing the Physicians Workforce. The National Academy Press, 1996. The New England Journal of Medicine, Vol. 334, No. 25 (1996), pp. 1679-83. The Journal of the. American Medical Association, Vol 273, No., 19 (1995), p. 1521-27. Health Care Shortage Areas: Designations Not a Useful Tool for Directing Resources to the Underserved. National Health Service Corps: Opportunities to Stretch Scarce Dollars and Improve Provider Placement. U.S. Information Agency: Inappropriate Uses of Educational and Cultural Exchange Visas. Pew Health Professions Commission. Critical Challenges: Revitalizing the Healthprofessions for the Twenty-First Century. San Francisco: University of California San Francisco Center for the HealthProfessions, 1995.pp. 1521-27. The first copy of each GAO report and testimony is free. Additional copies are $2 each. Orders should be sent to the following address, accompanied by a check or money order made out to the Superintendent of Documents, when necessary. VISA and MasterCard credit cards are accepted, also. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. VISA and MasterCard credit cards are accepted, also. Orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent. Each day, GAO issues a list of newly available reports and testimony. To receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past, call (202) 512-6000 or by using fax number (301) 258-4066, or TDD ( 301) 413-0006. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. affidavits to INS attesting that they would return to their home countries upon completion of the education or training for which they came to the United States. U.S. officials were required to issue an annual report to the Congress on participants who had submitted affidavits. The House Committee on the Judiciary “notes the flagrant abuse of the exchange program during the past decade,” it said. It said that the bill seeks to alleviate possible ‘brain drain’ from various countries. of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days, please call (202) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone. A recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists. The list will be available on a daily, weekly, monthly and annual basis. For more information, please visit the Washington Post's website or call (206) 456-6000. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. In 1981, USIA asked the Congress to extend the limit up to 7 years for medical doctors to encourage them to study in the United States rather than in a Communist country. The House Committee on the Judiciary questioned USIA officials regarding the likelihood that physicians would be willing to return home after 7 years. The Congress increased the usual permissible duration of stay to7 years, but it imposed additional requirements. Graduate medical education or training participants were required, as a continuing reminder, to furnish annual affidavits to INS attesting that they would return to their home countries. The amendments subject physicians seeking waivers through interested U.S. government agencies to some of the same requirements as those sponsored by state agencies. For example, the amendments require such physicians to (1) agree to work for at least 3 years for the health facility named in the application, (2) work in an area designated by the Secretary of HHS as having a shortage of health care professionals, and (3) begin work within 90 days of receipt of the waiver. If the alien physician States with a J-visa or acquiring such status through May 31, 2002. obtain a waiver of this requirement and remain in the United States. For most physicians, the waivers are requested on their behalf by a federal agency or by a state agency or department that is responsible for public health issues. No single agency has management responsibility for use of the waivers to address physician shortages. Because of the lack of coordination, the number of waivers processed for physicians to practice in some states has been more than the amount needed to alleviate the identified physician shortage in that state. If the alien physician is otherwise contractually obligated to return to a foreign country, that country’s government must furnish a statement to the Director of USIA that it has no objection to a waiver. The regulation would condition approval on the physician’s commitment to practice primary care for at least 3 years in a designated Health Professional Shortage Area or a Medically Underserved Area. In the preamble to the proposed regulation, USIA noted that with the entry of USDA and HUD into the waiver process, inconsistency in the administration of waiver requests among the different agencies has created some confusion. To prevent physicians from shopping between agencies, the foreign medical graduate would be required to practice in a shortage area. By 1995, four U.S. government agencies and 23 states were requesting waivers of J-1 visa requirements for physicians. Before 1993, the only agency requesting waivers for a number of physicians to practice in underserved areas was ARC. HUD officials have recently decided to reassess the department’s waiver policy and stopped accepting requests after August 30, 1996, to conduct a review. Health care facility officials, as well as state and federal health officials, said they would like consistency in waiver policies across federal agencies. weak controls mean there is little to deter physicians or their employers from failing to comply if they choose to break these terms. No single entity is responsible for coordinating practice locations of waiver physicians. The use of waivers is now a ready means for acquiring physicians, some of whom are being actively marketed by the physicians themselves or recruiters. The current statute and regulations do not require waivers to be used only as a last resort. It is unclear whether agencies would devote sufficient resources to effectively monitor compliance.. Many health care facilities and disagreement between HHS and other federal agencies about the role of waivers in addressing physician shortages. HHS did not submit formal comments by the end of our 30-day comment period. HUD and Justice (the parent department for INS) chose not to provide formal comments. DOT has had limited involvement in waivers for physicians with J-1 visas and did not have comments on the draft report. The Director of the department’s Office of International Affairs (who also also works for HUD) raised no objections to our findings. These comments indicate general agreement with our conclusions and matters for congressional consideration. The 1994 amendments apply only to exchange visitors who were admitted to the U.S. under a J-visa or acquired such status before June 1, 1996. Other amendments to the Immigration and Nationality Act regarding waivers for physicians with J-1 visas were passed in the 104th Congress. These changes (1) make the waiver conditions much more consistent, which may help to alleviate the confusion cited by agency officials, and (2) help to strengthen controls with regard to penalties for waivers requested through federal agencies. requirement by residing in other foreign countries but had to reside in the countries of their nationalities or their last foreign residences before coming to the United States. This requirement still applies. The 1970 act also established two additional bases for waivers: persecution because of race, religion, or political opinion and statements by the participant’s home countries that they had no objections to the waivers. These bases still apply except that the statement of no-objection waiver is no longer available to participants in graduate medical education or training. J-1 visa waivers did your state receive from employers between October 1, 1995 and March 31, 1996? (enter 0 if no applications were received during that time) 112 (total) applications please continue on next page--> ) 5. Based on your current situation, how. adequate is the annual limit of 20 state J-1. visa waivers to meet your state’s needs for physicians under. this program? (check one) state conducts to monitor compliance with the conditions of the J.1 visa waiver. There is no longer an insufficient number of physicians and surgeons in the United States. Amendment of the Immigration and Nationality Act in 1994 established another basis for physicians to obtain waivers of the J-1 visa foreign residence requirement. Under the amendment, up to 20 waivers may be granted at the request of a statedepartment of public health or its equivalent each fiscal year. The law imposed several conditions for state-requested waivers: The alien physician must (1) demonstrate a bona fide offer of full-time employment at INS service centers. areas that the agencies sent to USIA in 1995 (1,374) is about 64 percent of this figure. To identify characteristics of the physicians who received waivers of the J-1 visa foreign residence requirement, we selected a random sample of 40 from 355 physicians for whom ARC requested waivers between 1990 and 1992. We analyzed the practice specialties and practice settings for the 150 physicians who were practicing on January 1, 1996, for the facilities listed by the agency. The estimates at the 95-percent confidence intervals are shown in tables VI.2 and VI.3.  NHSC professionals who received scholarships or federal loan repayment were practicing in underserved areas of the country. HHS has other programs to address medical underservice. For example, HHS provides federal grant funding to community health centers that are required to accept all patients regardless of their ability to pay. “In summary, this Department has viewed the J-1 visa to be a means of sharing advanced medical knowledge and allowing the benefits of training to accrue to the home country. The Department does not view waivers as a mechanism to help resolve the problems of shortage areas” In 1995, over 9,000 foreign physicians with J-1 visas were in the United States for graduate medical education or training. These exchange visitors constituted about one-tenth of all individuals receiving medical education. Each year a few thousand new physicians receive J- 1 visas and enter the United states. These physicians are required to return to their home country (or to their country of last legal residence) for at least 2 years after completion of training. However, they may obtain a waiver of this requirement and remain in the U.S. Many officials said that their facilities had turned to these physicians because they were unable to recruit U.S. physicians. This procedure, however, does not ensure that the use of waivers for physicians is the option of last resort for areas with physician shortages. In some cases it appears that other qualified physicians are available, but the facility prefers to hire the physicians with J-1 visas. For example, officials from one multispecialty clinic told us that they interviewed several applicants for a specialist physician position, including candidates who were not under J- 1 visas.