UN member states agreed to continue a review of UN programs and activities (known as mandates) in 2007. Member states continue to disagree on the scope and process of the review and lack the capacity to carry out the review. New parameters for the continuation of the mandate review process have been proposed, but progress remains to be seen. Various factors have slowed the UN’s efforts to improve the management of the Secretariat. Many remaining UN management reforms cannot move forward until these factors are addressed. 15 of the 17 delegations told us that the number one challenge to continued progress on management reform efforts is member state disagreements on the priorities and importance of the remaining reform efforts. Representatives of member states repeatedly stated a clear need for more constructive engagement on reform efforts, particularly between the United States and G-77 countries. Four member states have launched the Four Nations Initiative in an effort to provide new ideas and perspectives on governance and management of the UN Secretariat. A State official told us the process appears to be a “credible effort” by member states that complements the UN. efforts because of the recentness of their implementation. Little or no progress: There is evidence that few or no steps have been taken on the reform effort. Substantial progress: The reform effort has been mostly or fully implemented. To identify factors slowing the progress of the UN reforms we examined, we reviewed reports and documentation of the reforms. The GAO determined which category of progress to assign to each reform effort based on documents we collected and discussions we had with State, UN, and other officials. evaluation methodology. State and the UN Secretariat provided technical comments that we have incorporated into the report, as appropriate. We are sending copies of this report to interested congressional committees, the Secretary of State, and the U.S. Permanent Representative to the United Nations. We will also make copies available to others upon request. The report will be available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staffs have any questions about this report, please contact me at (202) 512-9601. In 2004 and 2005, a series of UN and expert task force reports recommended a comprehensive reform of UN management and the UN human rights apparatus. In September 2005, world leaders gathered at the UN World Summit in New York to discuss global issues such as UN reform, development, and human rights. Completion of the reform agenda will require overcoming several factors, particularly disagreements among member states regarding how to achieve the goals they agreed to at the 2005 World Summit. Some past reform efforts remain incomplete because they did not get sustained and broad support of member states. awaiting General Assembly review or had been recently approved. Many of the proposed or approved reforms lacked an implementation plan with time frames and cost estimates for the goals stated in the 2005 outcome document. Disagreements within the General Assembly continue to limit the implementation of management reforms. Progress on UN management reform efforts is dependent in large part on member states reaching consensus, which can be a time-consuming process as the UN is composed of 192 diverse member states that have differing views on a wide array of issues. Secretary-General proposed a broad reform agenda to transform the UN. 60 percent of the reform efforts, including the U.S. government’s share, remain unclear. The UN currently has no formal plan to evaluate the effectiveness of its management reform efforts to determine whether they have achieved the goals set out in the 2005 World Summit outcome document. The 2005 reforms applied to the Secretariat and the UN's governing bodies, such as the General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council, and the Security Council. GAO staff who made contributions to this report are listed in appendix V. We obtained and reviewed official reports of the Secretariat and the Office of Internal Oversight Services. We also interviewed senior officials from UN departments in New York City. We discussed the status of UN management reforms with officials from the Department of State in Washington, D.C., and the UN in NYC. We met with representatives from 17 of 192 member states representing various geographic regions, including Africa, Asia, Europe, and Africa. State endorsed the main findings and conclusions of our report and noted that our assessment of UN progress on management reform efforts was accurate and balanced. State agreed fully with the need to keep Congress informed of the effectiveness of management reforms, adding that the department will continue to monitor and inform Congress, as we recommended. We selected management reform issues in the key areas of ethics, oversight, management operations of the Secretariat, and review of programs and activities (known as mandates) to examine in more detail. We focused our work on management reforms that began in 2005. Calls to reform the UN began soon after its creation in 1945. Despite cycles of reform, UN member states continue to have concerns about inefficient management operations. The United States, through the Department of State in Washington, D.C., and the U.S. Mission to the United Nations in New York, continues to advocate reform of UN management processes. In July 1997, the Secretary-General proposed a broad reform agenda to transform the UN. The UN is the largest contributor of 192 member states. The UN’s existing resource management framework still lacks flexibility and is largely headquarters-based. The Secretariat has made progress on some administrative reform initiatives relating to human resources and information technology. But it has not addressed several other administrative policies and procedures issues, including conducting a one-time staff buyout and outsourcing and telecommuting for certain administrative services, such as payroll processes, staff benefit administration, andInformation technology support. The overall restrictiveness of these policies and policies and the lack of flexibility is a concern. stated that staff mobility is essential to creating a more-versatile, multiskilled, experienced staff. A one-time staff buyout could enable the Secretary-General to realign staff to meet the UN’s changing priorities, while facilitating retirement or separation of staff who can no longer meet the needs of the UN. An effective career development policy serves both the UN and its staff members by building and maintaining an international civil service capable of meeting the UN's needs, as well as meeting the development needs and aspirations of the staff. Reforms Progressing Slowly with Many Awaiting General Assembly Review. United Nations: Lessons Learned from Oil for Food Program Indicate the Need to Strengthen UN Internal Controls and Oversight. U.N.: Sustained Oversight Is Needed for Reforms to achieve Lasting Results. United. Nations: Procurement Internal Controls Are Weak. United UN: Funding Arrangements Impede Independence of Internal Auditors. United Nation: Oil for. Food Program Provides Lessons for Future Sanctions and Ongoing Reform. The outcome document from the World Summit, endorsed by all members of the UN, outlines broad UN reform efforts in areas such as oversight and accountability and human rights. The document also called for the Secretary-General to submit proposals for implementing reforms to improve management functions of the Secretariat. In April 2006, we reported on weaknesses in the UN’s oversight and procurement systems, both of which have been identified as important areas for reform. Numerous reform proposals were either awaiting General Assembly review or had been recently approved. We reviewed reports and documentation of the Secretariat, General Assembly, OIOS, and the ethics office. We interviewed outside observers of the UN system, including nongovernmental organizations and members of academia. Many cost estimates for the proposed reform initiatives are preliminary, and detailed longer-term cost estimates are being developed. We did not analyze the assumptions underlying these estimates to determine whether they are reasonable and reliable. We believe that the cost estimates and the associated funds that the General Assembly has appropriated to date for reform efforts are sufficiently reliable for the purposes of this report. Since our October 2006 report, the Secretariat has issued several reports on management operations that the General Assembly is expected to consider during the current (62nd) session. Progress on reforming management operations of the UN Secretariat is shown in figure 4. The UN has made some progress in improving human resource functions. The General Assembly agreed in April 2007 to establish a new internal justice system, but many issues involving organizational relationships, personnel, and funding of theUN are still to be resolved. If implemented, these proposals could make little or no progress in reforming the UN’sinternal justice system. The review has not advanced due to the lack of capacity among member states to evaluate the mandates in a substantive matter, according to State.of the organization. Phase I of mandate review, which covered all mandates 5 years old or older and not renewed that originated from the General Assembly, was completed in November 2006. Member states agreed to carry out a Phase II review of mandates to include mandates both renewed and not renew. The planned approach was to review mandates by thematic cluster. The initial goal for beginning Phase II was January 2007. Working Group on Mandate Review from January 2007 to April 2007 and again from July to October 2007. In October 2007, the process was far from complete, with only one of the nine clusters addressed. The General Assembly adopted an oral decision to continue consultations among member states on how to proceed with mandate review in the 62nd session. State officials told us that a new approach is necessary for the review and that it would be meaningless to proceed unless member states identify a new way of doing things. The UN has worked with potential vendors to help ensure that the new system, when implemented, will adequately support the global functions of the UN. As of October 2007, the Secretariat had not selected the firm that will implement the system. According to UN officials, the secretariat is expected to announce a decision in 2008. The Secretary-General did not submit a comprehensive report on information management, including cost estimates, delivery of certain services. In May 2006, the General Assembly asked the Secretary-general to conduct several cost-benefit analyses to determine whether certain UN services could be improved. program objectives to be integrated with budgetary and financial data into one process. The goal is to enable the Secretariat to act more transparently and efficiently in managing staff and procuring goods and services. The UN has made little or no progress in reforming its internal information system. The Secretariat plans to present reports on information technology to the General Assembly during the 62nd session, on topics such as the implementation of the ERP and governance of information and communications technology. The CITO is especially important at the present time because the UN is in the process of developing a new organizationwide information system known as the Enterprise Resource Planning. The UN has made some progress in improving information technology. The position of chief information technology officer (CITO), created by the General Assembly in August 2006, was filled in July 2007. The leadership of a CITO is necessary to help ensure greater integration of the Secretariat’s workflow and knowledge management by allowing program objectives to be integrated with budgetary and financial data. Of the 17 member state delegates we spoke with, reforming these and other human resource functions is likely to continue to be difficult because of long-standing disagreements. The General Assembly did not consider several procurement reform issues during the recently completed 61st session. Issues that are currently unclear include operational procedures, such as establishing lines of accountability, delegation of authority. The UN has taken actions to improve some of the management operations of the Secretariat, but many reform proposals still have not moved forward. Some progress has been made on issues involving human resources and information technology, while little or no progress on reforming the address these issues. The U.S. government has been a priority of the United Nations for many years, as long-standing weaknesses and inefficiencies have persisted. From March to May 2007, the Secretariat submitted reports to the General Assembly, as requested, on human resource issues. The General Assembly’s focus on the reorganization of the DPKO and other issues during that time frame did not consider these issues, which are currently rescheduled for consideration during the 62nd session. According to U.S. and UN officials and most of the 17 member state delegates we spoke with, reforming the UN Secretariat is a priority for the United Nations. responsibilities of the advisory committee include advising the General Assembly concerning any administrative and budgetary matters referred to it. Figure 6 depicts the typical management reform decision-making process at the UN for issues requiring General Assembly approval. In October 2006, the Secretariat’s estimated costs for implementing certain management reform initiatives were approximately $40 million. Since then, due to additional actions taken during the 61st session, the revised cost estimate, as of October 2007, had risen by about $13 million to approximately $53 million. and expected time frames for implementation and completion of each reform effort as it is approved. During our current review, we found little evidence that time frames, completion dates, and cost and savings estimates for completing the long- term implementation of specific management reforms had been established. Most of the approximately 20 cost-benefit analyses and other assessments of management reform issues have not yet been submitted to the General Assembly. As a result, the total long-term costs of the reform efforts, including the U.S. government’s share, remain unclear. The General Assembly considered the report during the 61st session and, in large part, postponed making decisions on key issues. Since our October 2006 report, competing priorities within the Secretariat and General Assembly have limited the capacity of General Assembly members to address the remaining management reform issues. In February 2007, for example, several procurement-related reform issues were not taken into consideration by the General Assembly during the spring 2007 session, as planned. The General Assembly did not address these issues because the new Secretary-General concurrently proposed a one-time staff buyout. General Assembly has rejected some proposed reforms and taken no action on others. The UN has made little or no progress in improving the delivery of certain services. The Secretariat has prepared a number of reports that the General Assembly is scheduled to review during the current (62nd) session. Other proposed reform actions, such as the management of trust funds, are also being reviewed by the UN Secretariat. The General Assembly has not adopted any of the financial management reform proposals that have not been adopted. many issues involving organizational relationships, personnel, and funding of the new system are still unclear. As of October 2007, the General Assembly had yet to decide who would be covered by a new system. According to the Secretariat, member states aim to implement the newSystem by January 2009. Since our October 2006 report, the UN has made little or no progress in improving certain budgetary and financial management functions. The General Assembly has rejected some proposed reforms and taken no steps to implement them. The UN has also taken no further steps to improve its financial management.  Steps have been taken to improve UN oversight capabilities. Independent Audit Advisory Committee (IAAC) established in June 2007. UN has made some progress in creating IAAC, but the committee is not expected to be operational until January 2008. State Department officials told us they were satisfied overall with the creation of IAAC despite the various compromises. The five members of the newly created IAAC were elected in November 2007, and the committee will be operational in January 2008, according to the UN. The office is conducting a review to determine whether financial disclosures should be required of officials other than the Secretariat. private sector as well as the experiences of other international institutions. membership of 5 individuals, preferably from a pool of at least 10 candidates proposed by member states. An evaluation process for candidates through consultations with an external relevant institution, such as the International Organization of Supreme Audit Institutions. membership appointment for a term of 3 years, with the possibility of a second term of three years. The General Assembly also established the committee’s terms of reference. These terms include the following guidelines and requirements. the member states, according to member state representatives and State Department officials. Member states disagreed on some of the initially proposed responsibilities of IAAC. The United States and several other countries had originally favored that candidates for membership be referred by the International Organization of Supreme Audit Institutions and that members not be eligible for re-election. Other member states disagreed. State wanted IAAC to be responsible for assessing the work of all UN oversight bodies, including the UN Board of Auditors and the UN Joint Inspection Unit. 16 complaints warranted a preliminary review. Of these 16, the ethics office referred two cases to OIOS for further investigation. Of the remaining 36 complaints, 19 fell outside the scope of its responsibilities and/or referred them to other offices. The ethics office provided advice and guidance on more appropriate actions to address 11 complaints. In addition, the office was copied on six complaints that were primarily addressed to other office or departments in the UN. In these instances, the UN ethics office keeps track of these complaints. activities remain. The OIOS Procurement Task Force reported in October 2007 that it had found multiple instances of fraud, waste, and mismanagement. The task force reported that a number of cases have been referred to national authorities for criminal prosecution or to the UN for consideration of subsequent legal action. It has also recommended civil recovery of monetary damages. As of October 2007, an estimated $1.2 billion in waste and fraud remains in the U.S. government's procurement system. Since our last report, OIOS has strengthened the capacity of its internal audit, investigation, and evaluations and inspections sections. Funding arrangements continue to impede the independence of internal auditors. Member states decided to keep investigations in OIos rather than move it to the Secretariat’s Office of Legal Affairs, despite a July 2006 progress in reducing its range of functions. In order to reduce some of its multiple responsibilities, the office has shifted several nonoversight related functions to the UN Department of Management. OIOS argued that such a shift would significantly diminish the UN’s oversight functions. Since 2006, about 16 new posts have been created for the investigations division. OIOS has established a separate special investigations task force for sexual exploitation and abuse. The UN has made progress in reducing its range of functions and improving the quality of its investigations, says the report. The report was based on an external evaluation of the UN Office of Legal Affairs, which is part of the Secretariat. OIOS must negotiate funding for nearly two-thirds of its budget with the entities it is chartered to audit. Without operational independence, OIOS is constrained in its ability to prevent or mitigate risks to the UN’s resources and personnel. These risks include fraud, waste, abuse, inefficiencies, and mismanagement. Serious deficiencies in internal controls have left the UN susceptible to mismanagement and fraud, particularly regarding procurement activities in Sudan and Congo, the report says. The U.S. State and OIos generally agreed with our overall findings and recommendations.  Discussion of the revision of OIOS’s funding arrangements was deferred from the 61st to the 62nd session of the General Assembly due to a lack of consensus on funding issues. The UN does not yet have a formal and structural internal control framework that would provide reasonable assurance to management that its financial resources are being handled effectively and that its objectives are being achieved. OIos pointed out that serious deficiencies in internal controls have been identified. The U.N. General Assembly is scheduled to meet in New York on September 14 and 15. As of October 2007, an independent bid protest system had not been established. Such a system would provide reasonable assurance that vendors are treated fairly when bidding. It would also help alert senior UN management to situations involving questions about UN compliance. According to the UN Procurement Division, a draft process, which includes an emphasis on best practices, these weaknesses on the implementation of a successful whistleblower protection policy. State and the UN Secretariat provided technical comments on the matter to the U.S. State Department. no progress in establishing an independent bid protest system for UN procurements is consistent with our evaluation methodology. The management reform decision-making process at the UN involves multiple entities. The Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, a subsidiary organ of the General Assembly, consists of 16 members appointed by the assembly in their individual capacity. The functions and responsibilities of the advisory committee include advising the General assembly. The committee's role is to advise the UN General Assembly on issues that affect the organisation's finances. Division officials, increasing the threshold would assist in expediting procurements and better utilizing their time. The training is part of a development plan to provide a career path for procurement staff. Those who complete the training will be eligible to be certified by internationally recognized procurement institutions. In addition, according to UN Procurement Division officials, all procurement staff in headquarters received ethics training in 2007. In July 2007, a Planning, Compliance, and Monitoring Section was established and a chief was appointed to establish tools to detect potential transaction problems and minimize risks. OIOS concluded that its dependence on extra- budgetary funding significantly affects its independence. The UN Secretariat has improved the UN procurement process, but a number of reform issues have not moved forward since our October 2006 report. Some progress has been made in strengthening the procedures for its procurement staff and suppliers, developing a comprehensive training program for procurement staff, and developing a risk management framework. However, the UN has made little or no progress in establishing an independent bid detect potential transaction problems and minimize risks. The UN has made little or no progress in establishing a lead agency concept. Draft process, which includes an emphasis on best practices from public- and private-sector procurements, is expected to be finalized by the first quarter of 2008. In the meantime, they have enhanced communications with vendors, including developing a more systematic debriefing procedure for vendors whose bids were unsuccessful. For example, the World Food Program might be best suited to procure items for air transport needs, while the UN Inter-Agency Procurement Services Office may be best at procuring certain vehicles. made little or no progress in establishing an independent bid protest system and creating a lead agency concept for procurements. In addition, since our October 2006 report, other organizational issues have arisen that may affect the UN’s procurement reform efforts. In December 2006, the Secretariat issued a bulletin on postemployment restrictions for former UN staff involved in procurement. The bulletin was issued following several incidents in recent years in which UN officials and former officials were involved in unethical and improper procurement activities. The UN Secretariat has made some progress in strengthening the operating procedures for its procurement staff and suppliers. The UN issued a revised supplier code of conduct in May 2007. The code requires that suppliers are responsible for adhering to the postemployment restrictions by not employing former UN staff members for at least 1 year. A proposal to increase the minimum threshold for contracts required to be reviewed by the Headquarters Committee on Contracts from $200,000 to $500,000 has not been approved. OIOS previously recommended that the threshold be increased, and, according to Procurement Division officials, increasing the threshold would assist in expediting procurements. UN has made some progress in collecting and analyzing financial disclosure forms for 2005 and 2006. The primary purpose of the financial disclosure program is to identify potential conflicts of interest arising from staff members’ financial holdings. About 1,700 staff members were required to file financial disclosure or declaration of interest statements for 2005. About 98 percent of staff complied, and the remaining 2 percent were referred to the Office of Human Resources Management for disciplinary action. The current UN Secretary-General and Deputy Secretary- General voluntarily made their recent financial disclosure Forms public. a private contractor and analyzed to determine any potential conflicts of interest between the staff members’ confidentially disclosed private interests and their official duties and responsibilities. In May 2007, the contractor identified potential conflicts. of interest in 17 of the cases reviewed, or about 1 percent. Of these cases, 14 staff members accepted the advice of the private contractor to address the potential conflict and 3 cases were referred to the ethics office for final resolution. The 2006 review is not yet complete. The deadline for submitting forms for 2006 was delayed until May. Deadline for submitting forms for 2006 was delayed until May 31, 2007. Private contractor developed an online e-filing system to simplify and expedite filing requirements. The ethics office plans to review the online financial disclosure form and accompanying guidelines in consultation with other agencies. The director of the ethics office told us that the process for the 2006 review was ongoing, and, as a result, the compliance rate was not finalized as of September 2007. The deadline for filing 2006 forms was May 31. In the fall of 2006, we reported concerns of UN experts that the newly created UN ethics office was insufficiently staffed. As of October 2007, the ethics office had six professional and three administrative staff. The office has also developed new ethics standards, such as postemployment restrictions standards. The ethics office has begun to develop a systemwide code of ethics for all UN personnel, including those of UN bodies and agencies other than the Secretariat as requested by the General Assembly in the 2005 World Summit outcome document. The UN has taken steps to improve organizational ethics since the fall of 2006. In the past year, the ethics office has hired a permanent director and additional staff. The office has begun to enforce a whistleblower protection policy, but concerns has been raised about the policy’s lack of jurisdiction over UN funds and programs. The UN has made some progress in collecting and analyzing financial records for 2005 and 2006.. The development of a systemwide code of ethics was one of his top priorities and would be undertaken in the near future. current system to be fair or impartial and, consequently, might not come forward with claims of retaliation. UN and State officials told us another concern about the whistleblower protection policy is its lack of jurisdiction over UN funds and Congress, as we recommended. State agreed with us that more could be done to ensure credible oversight at the UN. State did not agree with our statement that successful whistleblower protections cannot be established without substantial reform of the UN’s internal justice program. We agree with these concerns. Without a fair and impartial justice system that effectively executes corrective action, staff may not submit cases to the ethics office.