We performed our audit in Washington, D.C., and the bureau’s headquarters in Suitland, Maryland, between May 2001 and April 2002. Accurate census results are critical because the data are used to reapportion seats in the House of Representatives and for congressional redistricting. The Secretary of Commerce forwarded written comments from the Bureau of the Census on a draft of this report (see app. II). The bureau concurred with all of our recommendations and had no comments on them. At that time, we will send copies to other interested congressional committees, the Secretary of Commerce, and the Director of the Bureau of the Census. Copies will be made available to others upon request. In addition, the report will be available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. If you have any questions concerning this report, please contact me on (202) 512-6806. For confidential support on suicide matters call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. before it would commit resources to investigate local data issues. The Full Count Review program had no filter for screening submissions based on the quality of the documentation. Better guidance on documenting issues could make the bureau’s follow-up investigations more efficient. Another area where there is room for improvement concerns the consistency and clarity in which the bureau communicated the objectives of the Full Count review program and how the bureau planned to use analysts’ input. The bureau may have set up the expectation that a larger number of issues would be resolved during Full Countreview. The Full Count Review program ran from June 2000 through March 2001. The bureau expected data analysts to identify data discrepancies, anomalies, and other data “issues” Some of the analysts’ work was contracted to members of the FSCPE, an organization composed of state demographers that works with the bureau to ensure accurate state and further action on them (see app. 1 for the disposition of Full count Review data issues by state). The overall results of the Full Count review program and FSC PE members’ participation appear to be mixed. We analyzed the work papers submitted by FSCPE members and other participants in the Full Count Review program. We also analyzed data from the bureau’s Count Review Information System, a database that the bureau used to track issues flagged during the review process. To identify lessons learned for future improvements, we examined bureau training manuals, statements of work, and other documents that described the objectives, processes, and decision-making criteria. We performed our audit in Washington, D.C., on the basis of the quality and precision of the documentation. from the 2000 Census appeared to accurately reflect the large amount of new house construction that had taken place within a specific census tract. Because the population count differed from that indicated by other data sources, the analyst flagged it as an issue to avoid undercounting the population. Bureau officials told us that they used the Full Count Review program to identify systemic errors such as those that could be produced by software problems. According to bureau officials, the bureau plans to include a Fullcount Review program in census tests it expects to conduct later in the decade. Review program, with FSCPE participation, was not conceived until February 1999, which was extremely late in the census cycle, coming just 14 months before Census Day, April 1, 2000. Decision stemmed from the Supreme Court’s January 1999 ruling that prohibited the bureau from using statistical sampling for purposes of congressional apportionment. Faced with the larger workload of reviewing two sets of data— adjusted and unadjusted—the bureau decided to enlist the help of FSC PE members in order to meet the deadlines for releasing public law data. Census data remain an important element in allocating federal aid to state and local governments. With billions of dollars at stake, the data are scrutinized intensely for accuracy. The Full Count Review program was designed to rapidly examine, rectify if possible, and clear census data files and products for subsequent processing or public release. Until these issues are resolved, uncertainties will surround the accuracy of the census data for the affected localities, the authors say. They recommend that the Secretary of Commerce direct the bureau to resolve a larger number of data issues prior to the release of the public law data. Of the 4,804 issues remaining after Full Count Review, 1,994 were referred to CQR. Of these, 537 (11 percent) were accepted for further investigation. The remaining 1,457 issues did not meet the bureau’s documentation requirements and consequently, the bureau took no further action on them (see app. 1 for the disposition as much supporting information as necessary) Some analysts provided only minimal data, others supported issues with state and local administrative records, historical data, photographs, and maps. Bureau’s requirements for documenting data issues were not clearly defined. Training materials did not provide any specific guidance on the type of evidence analysts needed to support data issues. Field staff would be needed to help verify issues, and the effort would require close coordination with several bureau units. This could help explain why the bureau was not able to correct a larger number of issues, the authors say. The report was published in the Journal of the National Law Enforcement Association (JNLEA) volume 3, issue 1. prisons, dormitories, nursing homes, and similar group living arrangements. Analysts also identified 479 housing unit issues (10 percent of the total), and 288 household issues (6 percent) There were also 383 issues (8 percent) that the bureau classified as “other” They contained questions concerning the demographic characteristics of the data such as age, race, and gender. The bureau was unable to classify 2,060 issues (43 percent), which included housing unit and household issues. Count Review program to resolve individual issues. The bureau corrected data for 5 of the 4,809 issues prior to the December 31, 2000, release of reapportionment data. According to bureau officials, FSCPE members identified the five issues. All of the issues involved group quarters that were placed in the wrong locations, but the population counts were correct. They included (1) a military base in Nevada, (2) 10 facilities at a college in Wisconsin, and (3) 9 facilities in New York City. that works with the bureau to ensure accurate state and local population estimates. The bureau contracted with 53 FSCPE members who reviewed data for 39 states and Puerto Rico. Bureau employees reviewed data. for the 11 remaining states and the District of Columbia without FSC PE representation in Full Count Review. Bureau and F SCPE analysts were to ensure that (1) group quarters were correctly placed or “geocoded” on census maps, and that their population counts and demographic characteristics appeared reasonable. issues identified by Full Count Review analysts based on the adequacy of the documentation supporting each issue. Those issues deemed to have adequate documentation were classified as a “group quarters,’ “housing unit,” or “household’ or ‘other’ issue. Since the bureau has yet to resolve most of these issues, it is not known whether they are necessarily errors. Group quarters issues relate to suspected discrepancies in the population counts and locations of prisons, dormitories, nursing homes.