burden of a royalty is increased by its subtraction from gross income. For example, an 8% royalty without the gross income offset is effectively a 6% royalty at a 25% marginal tax rate. Equations (2) and (3) are the same as equation (1) under current tax laws. Given the current percentage depletion rates, the costs of gross income deductibility of the royalty could, in certain cases, offset the benefits from royalty. The effective royalty is shown as a gross royalty, the r term, and the offset term - rt (d-1) the Tax Equity and Fiscal Responsibility Act of 1982 ( P.L. 97-248 ). In effect this limitation reduces the 22% depletion rate to an effective depletion rate of between 17.6% and 22%, depending upon the amount of cost depletion. As noted above, the imposition of a royalty, where none existed before, would increase a mining firm's operating costs and reduce profitability. Further, due to the deductibility of the royalty (as an operating cost of doing business) against the federal income tax, the deduction reduces tax liability and therefore lowers the tax costs. laws for purposes of determining the percentage depletion allowance, one of several tax preferences or subsidies available to a mining firm. This royalty base has been suggested many times in the current and past royalty debates and is the base proposed in H.R. 2262. The main reason for suggesting this royalty base is that not only is gross income under the tax depletion rules consistent with the economic concept of an ad-valorem royalty, but the legal and regulatory apparatus has been in place since 1932. This depletion first became available to the hardrock mining industry. which the industry lowered its tax burden, or conversely, the loss in tax revenues to the federal government. The bulk of these preferences is claimed by corporations. The intent is to assure that all taxpayers—individuals and businesses—pay some tax, which is not assured if taxpayers are able to claim a lot of special tax breaks, writes Paul Waldman, the author of the book "Mining in the U.S. Taxpayer's Taxpayer Bill of Rights," published by Oxford University Press. Hardrock mining firms benefit from a number of tax breaks. Mining firms that mine hardrock minerals on public domain lands pay no royalty, and benefit from fairly significant tax subsidies. These special tax preferences or subsidies, combined with accelerated depreciation (a significant tax benefit for highly capital intensive business such as hardrock mining) have historically resulted in relatively low effective average and marginal tax rates. For example, CBO recently published a study of effective tax rates on different types of assets, and those used in mining. a depreciation method (as opposed to the recovery period) that maximizes the value of the deduction over time. This is more advantageous than the theoretical treatment, which would call for a depreciation schedule based on the actual economic depreciation. Given that hardrock mineral producers are highly capital intensive and that the equipment used (stripping shovels, drills, bulldozers, drag lines, and haulers) can cost tens of millions of dollars, the tax code is more favorable to the industry than theoretical treatment. even with the net-income limitation, which limits the deduction to 50% of the taxable income from the mine. Percentage depletion rates range from 5% for stone and clay to 22% for uranium and beryllium. Most of the hardrock minerals have a depletion rate of 22%, and several have either a 15% or 14% rate. For iron ore (and coal) mined by corporations (as opposed to noncorporate firms), the allowance must be reduced by 20% over cost depletion. The U.S. hardrock minerals industry is subject to the same income tax laws which apply to all other for-profit businesses. The federal corporate income tax applies a 35% rate to most corporate taxable income. Under IRC §199, "manufacturing" businesses are allowed a deduction, as a business expense, for a specified percentage of the qualified production activity's income subject to a limit of 50% of the wages paid. Effectively, the deduction is equivalent to a reduced marginal tax rate. Gross income from mining means sales revenue from the extraction of the ores or minerals from the ground and any treatment processes necessary or incidental to the mining process. Under IRS regulations, gross income for depletion purposes is defined as "the actual price for which the ore or mineral is sold" If the miner's output is sold in an arm's-length transaction (this would generally occur for certain iron ores sold by independent, i.e., "small" mining companies), then there is a sale of the mineral and that is the actual price used to determine gross income. In cases where there is no representative price from sales of the same ore concentrate (the mining output) in other markets, then gross income is estimated. The deduction was 3% of income for 2006, is currently 6%, and is scheduled to increase to 9% when fully phased in by 2010. For the domestic mining industry (which includes the oil and gas industry), the deduction applies to any primary product "manufactured, produced, or extracted in whole or in significant part in the United States" Note that extraction is considered to be manufacturing for purposes of this deduction, which means that domestic firms in the business of extraction are subject to the limit. The percentage depletion allowance is a tax deduction against the federal income tax available to a mining firm. It is intended to give the mineral producer a deduction for the depletion of the investment in the mine. The allowance is analogous to the allowance for depreciation of equipment and structures and other assets that is available to all businesses. Any depletion deduction in excess of cost depletion is considered by economists to be a tax subsidy or incentive because the present value of the total amount deducted typically exceeds the initial investment.. The total amounts that can be recovered through percentage depletion generally exceed the total investment cost. The present depreciation treatment is known as the Modified Accelerated Cost Recovery System. The applicable recovery periods are prescribed for each property class. Mining equipment, assets used in the mining, quarrying, milling, and beneficiating of metallic and nonmetallic minerals, are assigned a seven-year recovery period. This system also allows producers to use a depreciation method (as opposed to the recovery period) that is not prescribed for that class of property. It is analogous to the cost depletion allowance for investment in a mineral deposit (as discussed below) output first be determined? Further, since throughout the production stage value is added or increased, at what stage does mining value end, and non-mining value begin? Production of valuable mineral products from raw hardrock minerals (e.g., metals such as iron, copper, aluminum, gold, lead) generally involves various stages: extraction or quarrying of the raw minerals, delivery to a plant or mill in order to prepare for the initial processing, beneficiating or concentrating. Depending on the type of mineral, and the structure of the industry, there may be several different types of mineral products with value. Production stages are shown for the typical case or mineral in Figure 1. Within these production stages, from extraction to the first sale to manufacturers, there may be various points at which there is created a valuable output. At this stage, there is a demand for the mineral ore concentrate as an input into the smelting/refining process for final sale in the wholesale commodities or manufacturing markets (e.g., gold into jewelry, copper for automobiles and piping). Consider gold, for example. Raw gold is usually delivered to the refiner where it is purchased from the miner, processed, and refined. Excess of 50 miles unless the Secretary [of the Treasury] finds that the physical and other requirements are such that the ore or mineral must be transported a greater distance to such plants or mills. "Electrolytic deposition, roasting, calcining, thermal or electric smelting, refining, polishing, fine pulverization, blending with other materials, treatment effecting a chemical change, thermal action, and molding or shaping" It seems fairly clear from these statutory provisions that gross income from mining is not included in gross income. The term "mining" includes not merely the extraction of the ores or minerals from the ground but also the treatment processes considered as mining described in paragraph (4) (and the treatment process necessary or incidental thereto) The transportation of ores and minerals is not in excess of 50 miles unless the Secretary [of the Treasury] roasting, thermal or electric smelting, or refining, or by substantially equivalent processes or combination of processes used in the separation or extraction of product or products from ore or minerals. and sagger clay, rock asphalt, and ores or minerals which are customarily sold in the form of a crude mineral product. "Sorting, concentrating, sintering, and substantially equivalent processes to bring to shipping grade and form, and loading for shipment [613(c)(4)(C)];" "In the case of lead, zinc, copper, gold, silver, uranium, or fluorspar ores, potash, and Ores or Minerals which are not usually sold in that form" Mining companies pay a variety of claims fees (location fees, Bureau of Land Management processing fees, annual maintenance fees) These are charges for specific types of administrative services provided by the BLM. The annual maintenance (or holding) fee, necessary to hold a claim on public land, is presently $125 per claim. Both the location fee and the annual maintenance fee are adjusted for inflation. The fees help the BLM cover its costs of administering the mining law and regulations. They cover costs for such actions as processing and recording applications, certain exploration permits, name changes, and corporate mergers. both the claim's location fee and the annual maintenance or holding fee, from $30 to $50 per claim, and from $125 to $150 per claim respectively. The projected revenue effects from the proposed higher fees are shown in Table 3. The revenue estimates are net of federal income taxes. There would be some decline in income tax revenues due to the deductibility of royalty payments and fees against business taxes. Also, under federal budget rules fees collected by federal agencies, such as the Department of the Interior, are considered as offsetting budget receipts, or negative spending. companies incur geological and geophysical (or surveying, and reconnaissance investigation) costs. These include the costs of staking the claim, removal of property line obstructions, limited removal of overburden, and limited sluicing. The costs of exploratory drilling to ascertain the extent of commercially marketable ores are treated by the tax law as a mineral exploration cost. Expenditures made after the existence of ores or minerals has been disclosed are considered mine development expenditures. These are costs associated with bringing the mine to production. exploration and development costs. expensing applies only to domestic mines. Exploration and development cost of foreign properties must be either depleted or amortized over a 10-year period using straight-line amortization. corporate mining companies may only expense 70% of the exploration and development; the remaining 30% must be amortizing over five years. Recapture is accomplished by either including exploration expenses or when the mine is sold (for development expenses) or when production commences (for exploration expenses) in which the economic activity takes place. The Joint Tax Committee estimates the revenue losses from the above three special tax preferences or subsidies (formally called "tax expenditures"). The latest five-year estimates (from FY2007-2011) are as follows: $0.5 billion for expensing of mine exploration and development costs, $1.1 billion for the excess of percentage over cost depletion, and $ 0.2 billion for mine reclamation reserves deduction. Thus the total revenue loss from these three provisions over five years is $ 1.8 billion, an average of $360 million/year. markets, then gross income from mining is estimated by multiplying gross sales by the ratio of mining to total costs. As a hypothetical example, assume that the market price of the final cast copper on the commodities exchanges is $3.60/lb, which is $7,937/metric tonne of pure copper. Also assume that one metric ton of copper ore concentrate contains 30% pure copper and no other valuable minerals. The remaining 70% is sulfur, iron, and other impurities that have no value. or products from the Claims to any mint, smelter, refinery or other purchaser; and c) related insurance on such concentrates, metals (including bullion) or products. Thus, continuing with the above hypothetical copper example, the net smalter return would be the price at which cast copper could be sold after the costs of smelting and refining the copper ore are subtracted. Using the same figures as before, the market price of the final cast copper is $3.60/lb, and thus one metric tonne (2,205 lbs) of pure copper would be valued at $7,938. May be misleading because it may suggest a larger percentage depletion deduction, and therefore a larger royalty payment than a "net" royalty. Whether a gross royalty base is smaller or bigger than a net royalty base depends on the point in the production stage the price is measured, and the deductions allowed. Some advocates of the net after-tax profit type of royalty, for example the 1993 bill S. 775, would have measured net profits at the mine mouth, which would generally result in even lower royalties. Gross value will usually be defined with reference to the spot price of an average weekly or monthly spot price on specified markets for the commodity. The permitted deductions will include all charges by the smelter, such as smelting and refining charge as well as penalties for impurities in the ore. In some cases deductions may also be made for taxes except income taxes and, depending on the nature of the commodity, for marketing costs. If the operator ships to its smalter, charges should not exceed those that would be charged by an arm's length smelters in similar circumstances. In non-metal mines the selling price is usually 'fob mine site' because of the transportation costs involved in delivering the mineral product to the buyer. In Canadian law, net smelter return is defined in the same way. A net smalter return will be ... the net value of minerals from the property, where Net Value is Gross. No deductions are made for the operating costs of the mine-mill complex. In 2003, Baldwin (2003) writes: A net Smelter Return is the amount received by the mine or mill owner from the sale of the mineral products. Net smelter return is a common term used in the mining industry to refer essentially to the net average revenue per unit of the smelted mineral product sold by the miner. It is essentially an estimate of the price the miner receives, or equivalently, the price paid by the smalter, for the ore concentrate produced, based on the price for the pure metal concentrate produced. According to Cartright (2007), The Net Smelter Return is the amount of money which theSmelter or refinery pays the mining operator for. For geothermal resources, the Geothermal Steam Act of 1970 (as amended) instituted a 10%-15% royalty on federal leases based on the value of the steam or any other form of heat or energy produced and sold. Under amendments made by the Energy Policy Act of 2005 ( P.L. 109-58 ), if the geothermal energy is not sold but is instead used to create a marketable product, the costs are deductible. These rules for oil, gas, and coal clarify that value is determined as close to the mine as possible. geothermal energy is not sold but is instead used to generate electricity. The royalty is between 1% and 2.5% and it is based on the gross proceeds from the sale of electricity rather than the value or volume of geothermal energy used in the generation of electricity. In some cases, a deduction against gross proceeds for transmission and wheeling costs is allowed. With regard to a specific royalty rate, economic theory is less clear beyond the implication that a royalty rate determined in the competitive marketplace is generally the most economically efficient rate. at a posted price to a pipeline company, and that is the price on which the royalty is based. In situations where oil is not sold in an arm's-length transaction, or is sold without a contract, royalties are based on various types of benchmarks. Royalties on coal extracted from federal lands, at the 8% or 12% royalty rate, are also assessed on the "gross proceeds" from the sale of the coal. The price is determined at the point of sale, which for coal is typically at or near the mine-mouth. fixed interest payments on capital regardless of the value of the capital loaned. Federal royalties are calculated on the gross proceeds (or gross sales revenues) from the contract sale. For oil and gas this generally occurs close to the wellhead, and so the contract price is used to determine gross proceeds. Being assessed on only one variable— output, rather than price and output—it does, however, avoid the usual complexities associated with determining value (price), costs, or even profits. Typically, for example,Oil and gas is sold at a posted price to a pipeline company. Net smelter returns mean the actual proceeds received by the Purchaser from a smalter or other place of sale or treatment. The Purchaser acknowledges that the Claims shall be subject to a royalty or charge in the amount of two percent (2%) of net smelters returns payable to the Vendor. For the purposes of this Agreement and the payment of the Net Smelter Return, net smalters returns shall mean the Actual Proceeds Received by Warren or any of his respective assignees or successors. successors in interest to the Claims from any mint, smelter, refinery or other purchaser from the sale of concentrates, metals (including bullion) or products from the Claims and sold. After deducting from such proceeds the following charges levied by third parties to the extent that they are not deducted by the purchaser in computing payment: a) assay costs and umpire assay costs; b) smelting and refining charges, penalties, and the cost of transportation and handling of such concentrates. expenses. This provision is contrary to the general tax rule. Under the cash method of accounting, expenses can only be deducted when the payment is actually made. under the accrual method ofAccounting, future expenses may be deducted in advance of actual payment but not in advance. of the economic activity that gives rise to the expenses. They must be deducted. in the year in which the economic. activity takes place. The Joint Tax Council is the tax authority for the U.S. federal government. or "locatable" minerals were removed from the law's purview. In the case of mineral lands, rents could be paid in various forms such as a bonus bid, annual rentals, or a royalty, or in various combinations of these depending on the type of mineral, and whether there is a lease or not. The exception to this rule, of course, has been the cases of locatable minerals on public (or federal) lands in the United States, on which royalties are not paid. the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act of 1953, as amended, the federal government leases lands for oil and gas development in return for a bonus bid, annual rents, and royalties. Lease sales are conducted through a competitive bidding process, and leases are awarded to the highest bidder. Annual rents range from $5 to $9.50 per acre, with lease sizes ranging form 2,500 to nearly 6,000 acres. royalty rates are, as noted above, either 12.5% or 16.67%. production on public lands is part of a much broader debate relating to reform of the Mining Law of 1872. Many other issues, such as whether public domain lands should be patented, are not addressed in this report. The General Mining Law can be traced to 16 th Century English and Spanish property and mineral rights laws and customs, which, as practiced in Colonial America, formed the basis for the granting of the rights to lands including those containing minerals. One of the earliest statutes was 17 Stat. 91. One of the earliest statutes was the "Royal Code of 1783" This Spanish law became the basis for acquiring mineral rights in Spanish colonies in the Americas. Also, the land charters issued by England to the original thirteen colonies provided generally that 1/5 th of the minerals on chartered lands were reserved for the crown. Several ordinances were enacted. The Ordinance of 1781 was the first mineral law in the U.S. and was used to settle claims disputes. It was also the first law to establish a royalty on minerals. After the Civil War, congressional policy became more openly geared to encouraging westward migration, and the economic development of the West. The General Mining Law of 1872 was the consolidation of amended versions of both the 1866 Lode Law and the 1870 Placer Act. Under this law, as amended, public lands with hardrock minerals (metals such as gold, silver, copper, lead, etc.) are conveyed, rather than leased for a rent and royalty to the federal government as in the past. The "California gold rush" of 1849 and the silver strike in Nevada of 1860 caused a significant westward population migration for the purposes of prospecting and claiming public domain lands. The issue of land ownership and easy and free access to federal lands was very controversial and fiercely debated. The Congress had approved several temporary leasing or land sales acts for gold, silver, and other minerals. But these did not address the question of mineral royalties specifically.had to be decided. Several ordinances were enacted—the Ordinance of 1785, the Land Act of 1796, and the Preemption Act of 1841. General Mining Law was enacted to promote westward migration and the economic development of the West. Up until 1994, a claim holder could obtain title to the land and mineral rights upon demonstrating the discovery of economically recoverable minerals. Originally, the Mining Law applied to all minerals. But over time all but the hardrock or "locatable" minerals were removed from the law's purview. The mineral lands become private property. The claim holder may also claim and patent nonmineral, noncontiguous lands to mill and process the ores. Since 1872, hardrock mining on federal lands has been governed by the General Mining Law. The law allows virtually free access to open public domain lands for mineral prospecting, staking claims, exploration and development, and extraction without payment of a royalty. Until 1994, claimants on hardrock mineral lands could take title to both the mineral rights and the land, after paying to the U.S. Department of Interior (DOI) the required fee or either $2.50 or $5.00 per acre. of actions authorizing mining on public lands and allow citizen lawsuits challenging federal decisions. Of actions authorizing mines on public land and allow lawsuits challengingFederal decisions. of actions authorizing Mining on Public Lands and allow Citizen Lawsuits. of Mining onPublic Lands and allowing Citizen Lawsuit of Mining. of Public Lands. of Mine on Public lands. of Mines on Public Land on the National Mall. of the National Park Service on the U.S. National Mall on the East Coast on the West Coast. of The National Parks Service on The West Coast on The East Coast. services from the mineral land would increase federal revenues, although revenue generation is not the primary rationale for the imposition of a royalty. The Congressional Budget Office has estimated the budgetary effects, revenue and spending, of H.R. 2262. The estimates are replicated in Table 3 , which shows both revenue effects of the 8% and 4% royalty and from the proposed higher fees. The 4% royalties on existing claims would generate revenues early, although no royalties would be imposed. The 8% royalty on new claims would be levied at a higher rate. Most of the revenues estimated under H.R. 2262 would come from existing claims. The 8% royalty on new claims is unlikely to generate significant revenues during the forecast period (2008-2017) It typically takes at least 10 years for a hardrock mine to begin production. No royalties would be paid in 2008 due to a provision that would defer royalties during the first 12 months after enacting the bill. The bill would also reauthorize and raise both the claim's location fee and the annual maintenance or state, local, and tribal governments; under an amendment to the Committee-approved bill, 50% of the cleanup funding would be directed to the state in which the royalties were generated; direct the Secretary of the Interior to prioritize reclamation projects that protect public health and safety, particularly from water pollution. establish a new definition of "undue degradation" of public lands and resources; allow Native American tribes to petition the federal government to withdraw federal lands with cultural and religious values from mining activities. The House approved this committee bill, with minor amendments, on November 1 by a vote of 244 to 166. The comparable bill in the Senate is S. 2750 , which also proposes an 8% royalty on new production. This report analyzes the economic issues underlying proposals to impose a royalty on hardrock (locatable) minerals on public domain lands. It also discusses the federal tax treatment of exploration permits, name changes, and corporate mergers, as well as lease consolidations, transfers, and reinstatements. based on the value of the minerals as defined under the gross income definition of the income tax code. Use the proceeds for the cleanup of abandoned sites. The 8% royalty would apply to new production. Production from existing mining operations would pay a 4% royalty. On October 2, 2007, the Subcommittee on Energy and Minerals of the House Natural Resources Committee held a hearing on this bill. A substitute bill was marked up and approved by the full committee on October 23. The House approved this committee. of the proceeds for the cleanup of abandoned sites; impose an 8% gross income royalty future hardrock mining operations, and an 4% royalty rate on current mining operations; require miners to seek additional permits to explore for and develop mineral resources and meet certain standards related to reclamation of mined lands. create an abandoned mine reclamation program similar to the one currently in place for coal sites. make the income from hardrockmining fees and royalties available, subject to appropriation, to support reclamation programs and to provide assistance to certain state, local, and tribal governments. In 1993, President Clinton's comprehensive economic proposal, part of the State of the Union Address, included claims fees and a 12.5% ad-valorem royalty. Several bills were introduced in the 103 rd Congress to impose a royalty. S. 775 passed the Senate in May 1993 and was incorporated into H.R. 322 which was approved by the House in November 1993. H. R. 322 went to conference in 1994 but was not approved reportedly due to a lack of support. went to conference in 1994 but was not approved reportedly because of opposition from Western lawmakers, mainly over the royalty issue. In 1995, there was an unsuccessful attempt to incorporate a royalty as part of the FY1996 budget. In its FY1998 budget proposal, and again in FY2001, the Clinton Administration proposed a 5% "net smelter" royalty. At this writing, the major reform bill in the House is H.R. 2262, which, among other things, would impose an 8% ad-valorem royalty. Proposals to reform the Mining Law have been made almost from the time it was signed by President Grant, and throughout its 135 year history. One of the contentious issues has been that the law makes no provision for the payment of a royalty on the production of the hardrock minerals from federal lands. In recent years, the Congress has repeatedly considered, but not passed, reform of the Mining law. In 1990, committees held several hearings on proposed Mining Law reform, e.g., on S. 1126 which among other things would have imposed an 8% ad-valorem royalty. non-energy minerals—the common and less valuable minerals such as sand and gravel. For coal, this system of leasing continued until the early 1970s, when the Arab oil embargo and shortages of petroleum reserves focused attention on the vast coal deposits in the western states. In 1976 the Federal Coal Leasing Amendments Act was enacted, which among other changes, replaced the fixed royalty with an ad-valorem royalty of 12.5% for surface mines and 8% for underground mines. This kind of royalty payment system is now also used by the federal government in leasing oil and gas. would be a tax rather than to impose no royalty on the use of the land. This is the economic rationale for the abandoned mineland reclamation fee under SMCRA, the Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act. If private landowners exercise monopoly power or some other type of market power, then it would be possible to use a market-determined royalty rate. If the market for the leasing of mineral lands between landowners and mining companies is not competitive, and second, if the mining industry itself isn't competitive, then the fee could be used. financial results and further consolidation within the industry. Rates of return on capital for the U.S. mining industry have also been higher as compared with many other industries. These negative industry and regional effects would be a natural and unavoidable part of the transition from a policy of resource subsidization to a Policy of resource neutrality. The policy of introducing a royalty payment system for locatable minerals would be expected to have positive economic effects in other sectors (the non-mining industry) and in the remaining parts of the country. than sales revenue by the costs of doing business, thus resulting in a smaller royalty base from which to calculate royalty payments. Reducing royalty payments to the federal government might be a major reason that it is supported by much of the hardrock mining industry and its supporters. Such an arrangement would not serve to impose the market-determined factor costs (royalties) on the mining operations. If net profit were to mean net before-tax profits, then the royalty would essentially operate like an income tax. type of market power, then it would be possible to extract from the mining companies higher than competitive royalty rates. In the second case, if the mining industry is concentrated and exercises market power it might lead to underpayment of royalties. These are complex issues which are difficult to analyze. In reality, of course, the federal government policy is just the reverse: It charges a royalty rate of zero, which is definitely below the market-determined rate. It might be the case that the above two opposing forces tend to offset each other and the government would want to use the more appropriate competitive rate. The location system for the hardrock minerals industry has remained essentially unchanged since 1872. Arguments that imposition of a federal royalty on hardrock mining would damage most of the American hardrock industry may not be valid in today's economy. The hard rock minerals industry is not an infant industry, and there is no longer a need for settling the American West. The royalty rates currently in effect on various types of minerals, both leasable and locatable, from federal lands are shown in Table 1. The report addresses the following questions: What exactly is a royalty, and how does a royalty differ from other rental payments or, for that matter, taxes? Were a royalty imposed, what would be the best way to structure such a royalty? Would a royalty harm the domestic and international competitiveness of the U.S. hardrock mining industry? Finally, what taxes and fees does the hardrock mineral industry pay, and do they have any bearing on the question of whether or not a royalty should be imposed? financial effect on the producers of these minerals, particularly on marginal producers. Both average and marginal costs would increase, and profits and employment in the hardrock mineral industry would decrease. Hardrock mineral production would be lower as marginal mines closed. This would also adversely affect those parts of the United States that rely on these industries. The hardrock mining industry has been booming over the last four years. One indicator of this is the growth in metals and minerals prices, which have increased overall and have contributed to industry profitability. Hardrock mining is a highly capital intensive business and large enterprises can operate more efficiently. In the United States, many of the mining firms are large multinational mining conglomerates. Five of the top ten claim holders (who hold more than 16% of all claims on western public lands) are foreign corporations. Internationally, the hardrock mining industry is dominated by about 40 companies and the top four account for 35% of claims.a reliable indicator of competitive rates. For more information, visit hardrockmining.org. The mining industry was the largest contributor to growth in the Gross Domestic Product price index in 2006, accounting for 6.6% of price growth. PricewaterhouseCoopers predicted that 2007 should bring with it both record financial results and further consolidation within the industry. Table 2 shows this increase between 2002 and October 2007 for selected metals. Finally, rates have contributed to industry profitability, as shown in the table below. The table is based on data from the U.S. Department of Commerce. the subsidy and to the communities dependent upon that industry. But these benefits are not external benefits that the markets are not capable of taking into account. When resources are scarce, a condition that affects all economic systems and all countries alike, the use of resources in one sector means the loss of the resource in another sector. The loss of economic efficiency implies that the private benefits to the hardrock mining industry are smaller than the private costs to other sectors. This suggests that removal of the subsidies should be considered. mining would damage most of the American hardrock industry. Some argue that there is a national security aspect to subsidizing certain hardrock minerals. It is also pointed out that damage to the industry would harm those western communities that are economically dependent upon it. Subsidies for hardrock mining clearly produce economic benefits to theindustry receiving the subsidy and to the communities dependent upon that industry. It seems clear also that not all hard rock minerals are of U.S. national security concern. In any event, if a financial subsidy for certain strategic hardRock minerals industries was appropriate, a tax subsidy would probably be more efficient than total forgiveness of royalty payments. the remaining parts of the country. Less land would be mined and fewer U.S. hardrock minerals would be produced. This would likely contribute to a more economically efficient use of the nation's resources. The payment of a royalty to the federal government for the services from the mineral land would increase federal revenues, although not as much as a free-access policy would have. The current policy of free access involves a trade-off: Policymakers choose the benefits to the hardrock mineral industry above the benefits that would accrue to another domestic economic sector. subsidies for the hardrock mineral industry are discussed in the section "Federal Tax Treatment of the Hardrock Mining Industry," below. There is another side to the externality concept: external costs. Without land reclamation, there would presumably be damage to the environment, which is an external cost to society. This is a cost that the typical profit-maximizing hardrock Mineral producer does not usually account for in the normal business decisionmaking process. Consequently, since the accountable business costs are lower than the real costs (including external costs), prices are higher than they should be. to other sectors. This suggests that removal of the subsidies would produce a net welfare gain to citizens of the United States. As to the national security argument, there are minerals that are often referred to as "strategic minerals"—cobalt, columbium, chromium, manganese, platinum, and others. Excessive dependence upon foreign producers of these and other economically vital minerals might pose an economic disruption or national security threat to the U.S. These arguments are similar to those made about the U.-S. dependence upon other countries. the rate should vary by type of mineral in some logical way. Table 2 gives an illustration for metals. Another possibility would be to vary the royalty rates in direct proportion to the percentage depletion rates applicable to gross income from mining. Introducing a royalty payment system for locatable minerals could have an adverse economic and financial effect on the producers of these minerals, particularly on lead and zinc. The figures do not represent either itself would be a function of—it would vary positively with—the mineral's price. The royalty rates currently in effect on various types of be hardrock minerals, coal, or oil and gas. State governments also typically charge ad-valorem royalties for the extraction of locatable minerals. Hardrock mining on acquired federal lands (as opposed to public domain lands) is required to pay a royalty of 5%. The type of royalty that most closely is intended to capture the rents from mineral lands whose future productivity cannot be precisely determined due to risk is the ad-Valorem royalty. In the case of privately owned mineral lands, markets generally exist that determine the royalty type and rate for a wide variety of minerals. Most states with mineral resources imposed ad-valorem royalties at rates ranging from 2-10%. For leasable energy minerals on federal lands, the statutory royalty rates range from 5%-16.67%. For coal, the royalty rate is either 12% (surface mines) or 8% (underground mines). Finally, in international lease transactions, mineral royalties rate of 5%. profits royalty (i.e., one based on the net income or profit of the mining company)? If there is to be an ad-valorem royalty based on price or value, at what stage in the mineral producing process should value (or price) be measured? Should it be based on gross income (value of the mineral at the mine) or net smalter return (the value at the smelter less certain deductions)? When does a mining company produce a saleable or marketable product whose value can be measured. What deductions, if any, should be allowed from that price? What should the royalty rate be? 1 deer out of 5, it would perhaps be 1 out of 6). Likewise it would not be rational for the renter to pay to the landowner a royalty based on more than market value. The ad-valorem royalty appears to be economically the most efficient type of royalty. The question becomes to what base specifically should the royalty rate apply? The aggregate value of a commodity being the product of a price (value/unit) and a total output, the questions are: At what point can the value of the mine's output first be determined? Forgoing royalty and other payments through the location system in effect means that the services of a factor of production are provided free of charge. In economic terms, this is comparable to the free provision of labor or capital equipment. Economic theory suggests that a consequence of providing factor services for free that would otherwise have economic value would be to distort the allocation of resources. The development of public resources should only occur at a fair market. The federal government is the steward of the public lands which it holds as trustee of American public. of public resources should only occur at a fair market value return to the nation, it is argued. An implication of the location system on federal lands is that all economic surplus that may be earned by the industry in the long run is retained by industry rather than allocated to society at large. These profits are excess or surplus returns to a resource owner above the level required to produce or supply the resource. In theory, they accrue naturally to the owner of any natural resource but are not necessary to. A royalty is a factor payment, part of the rent paid, or the return, to land as both a marketable capital asset and input to production. It is a payment made by the renter of the land to the landowner (whether private or public) in a voluntary exchange for the flow of services provided by that land over time. As afactor payment, the royalty is analogous to the wage rate, which is a paid for the services of labor. The royalty is not a tax. A royalty based on a constant rate per unit, say $5/ton, of mineral output (i.e., the ore concentrate) makes little economic sense. This was the type of royalty instituted under the Mineral Leasing Act of 1920, the law which first introduced a federal leasing system, including a royalty, for coal. As a factor payment, thistype of royalty makes littleeconomic sense, being equivalent to charging fixed interest payments on capital regardless of the value of the mineral.be consistent with mainstream economic theory that a royalty is not a tax, but a factor Payment. risk is shared between landowner and mineral producer. The royalty becomes a way of allowing for mineral land rents to be paid, for the landowner to earn a return on the land. As a land rental, an ad-valorem royalty protects the mineral producer against excessive royalty payments (overestimation of rents) and the government against underestimation of economic rents. Being a factor payment, then, a royalty is not a tax, which is a compulsory levy on individuals and businesses to finance the cost of government. and businesses to finance the cost of government for the common welfare and not a return to a factor of production in exchange for specific services provided. This is an important point, one that might be used, for example, to argue against proposals to impose a royalty based on net profits. The distinction between a tax and the rental payment also distinguishes between the federal government as a sovereign entity with the power to tax, and as a landowner or proprietor with the right to pay a rental payment.  mineral rents are an attempt to capture the returns to the land above and beyond the returns paid to labor (wages), capital (interest), entrepreneurship (profits), and other factors. With perfect knowledge and no risks, for example, the rents resulting from mineral lands could be captured by the landowner as up-front payments. But mineral production, like all business, is risky; it is difficult to know in advance of production precisely the quantity and quality of the mineral. The precise division between royalties or bonus bids and annual rentals depends primarily upon how production risk is shared between landowner and mineral producer. minerals that provide utility to consumers. Just as mineral producers must pay a wage in exchange for the services of labor, or interest for the service of capital, they generally must pay landowners for the Services of land that contains a mineral deposit. Lands producing minerals of higher quality and value, gold for instance, pay a higher royalty amount. Those producing lower quality or value minerals, lead for example, pays a lower amount. It would be inconsistent with the concept of sharing and with a factor payment in a competitive market for a royalty to be based on other than market value. owner of any natural resource but are not necessary to secure the continued supply of the resource. Only a normal long-run return is necessary to ensure such a supply. This is an important rationale for the payment of bonus bids and other rental payments. The theory suggests that any pure economic surplus return from a natural resource should accrue to society. In general, the economic concept of a royalty as a factor payment implies that the payment should be based on the market value of the producer's output, whether it be hardrock minerals, coal, or oil and gas. example, if instead of payments in kind (deer or crops or precious metals) the landowner were to be paid in money, one would expect him to receive the monetary equivalent of the value of the output. Rational landowners would not settle for less than what the deer, crop, or metal is worth because they could always have the deer and metals taken to market and sold for at least market value. If they wanted less rent, then presumably that would have been negotiated as a smaller share (instead of 1 deer out of 5, it would perhaps be 1)