The Army and Marines had planned to put the majority of the earlier versions of the MRAPs into prepositioned stocks at various overseas locations. With the increase of U.S. forces deploying to Afghanistan and Secretary of Defense requirements, these plans have been adjusted. About 5,750 will be assigned to infantry brigade combat teams, 1,700 to heavy brigade combat units, and about 165 to Stryker brigades. The Marines are reportedly still developing their ground vehicle strategy and have previously suggested that MR APs have deployability limitations under a sea-based, expeditionary Marine force. sea-based, expeditionary Marine force. MRAPs have proven to be 10 times safer than HMMWVs in protecting soldiers during IED attacks. Pentagon's Joint Program Office for MR APs also reportedly estimated that as many as 40,000 lives had been saved. Some defense experts suggest that the Joint Program office's estimates seem too high. Secretary Gates also noted the morale value of the MRAP to service members. The MRAP has been used in both Iraq and Afghanistan. Congress appropriated $38.346 billion for all versions of the MRAP. The full FY2011 DOD budget request of $3.4 billion was authorized by the Ike Skelton National Defense Authorization Act for FY2011 ( P.L. 111-383 ). In the President's FY2012 DOD budget proposal, there was no request for procurement funds for the MR AP program. Many older MRAPs shipped to Afghanistan are reportedly not being used because their size and weight severely limit their effectiveness. Pentagon agreed to loan 300 MRAPs in Afghanistan for one year to 15 allied nations currently fighting in Afghanistan. All countries that are loaned MR APs can request an extension on the loan and the borrowing countries are responsible for the costs associated with maintaining these vehicles. Loaning unused MRaps to coalition partners could not only help to reduce allied casualties but can also help to recoup some of the associated costs. Approximately 85 MRAP's are already out on loan to Poland, Romania, Georgia, and the Czech Republic. MRAPs are vehicles with a "V"-shaped hull and armor plating designed to provide protection against mines and IEDs. The Army and Marines first employed MRAPs in limited numbers in Iraq and Afghanistan in 2003, primarily for route clearance and explosive ordnance disposal (EOD) operations. DOD officials have stated that the casualty rate for MR APs is lower than for up-armored HMMWVs. The MRAP family of vehicles is produced by a variety of domestic and international companies. DOD has approved an acquisition objective of 25,700 MRAP vehicles for all services. Of this total, 8,100 will be the new MRAP-All Terrain Vehicle (M-ATV) The use of larger and more lethal IEDs by Afghan insurgents has necessitated adding additional armor to M-ATVs. Substituting MRAPs whenever operationally feasible might be a more timely and cost-effective option as opposed to DOD's plans to arbitrarily uparmor approximately 7,000 M- ATVs. M-ATVs initially enjoyed success in Afghanistan, but reports suggest insurgents have increased the size of IEDs. In response to the enhanced IED threat, two additional layers of Israeli-made armor plates are being installed to the M-ATV's underside. Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology & Logistics Ashton Carter supposedly intends to outfit all of the almost 7,000 M- ATVs in Afghanistan with these armor kits. There are concerns that additional armor might have an adverse impact on vehicle mobility, which was the prime consideration. The Government Accountability Office (GAO) noted that "the introduction of MRAP, M-ATV and eventually the JLTV creates a potential risk of unplanned overlap in capabilities" Some analysts question the need for three distinct tactical wheeled vehicle programs. The use of larger and more lethal IEDs by the U.S. military can also help to recoup some of the associated procurement costs of these vehicles. But the services could run the risk of significant redundancies and not being able to afford recapitalizing and replacing the HMMWV fleet.