HUD found that its assumption that housing agencies would begin to feel a significant impact from welfare reform starting in 1997 was not borne out by what was happening across the country. HUD did not supplement the average unit cost with additional amounts even if they made sense from a policy standpoint unless the supplementary amounts could be supported with historical or other data. For 1998, HUD valued the welfare supplement at $138 per unit ($46 in 1997 and $92 in 1998). However, after submitting its budget estimate to the Congress in February 1997, HUD determined that this amount was unnecessary. In its fiscal year 1998 budget submission of February 1997, HUD used a value of $6,386 as the average unit cost for renewing tenant-based housing assistance contracts. This value is based on the program’s actual expenditure data for fiscal year 1996. It also includes several supplementary amounts for administrative fees paid to housing agencies, contingent or unexpected costs, and increased program expenditures caused by residents losing their welfare assistance in 1997 and 1998. In September 1997 HUD proposed—and the Congress accepted—changes in its contract renewal estimate. the office of the comptroller, and the departmental budget office could have prevented this error. For example, the program office’s comptroller reviewed the actual disbursement data obtained from the accounting system but did not review the final average unit cost calculation until after HUD submitted its budget to the Congress. The second supplementary amount was for covering unknown costs or contingencies. For this supplement, HUD added approximately $204 to the unit cost, or 2 weeks of disbursements. Also, HUD did not conduct an independent review of the added costs and underlying basis for the estimate. In 1995, Congress encouraged HUD to use available unexpended funds in the Section 8 program to offset assistance over the life of the contract. HUD subsequently shortened the contract terms to 5 years and, later, to 3 years. Finally, beginning in fiscal year 1995, Section 8 tenant-based contracts were written for 1-year terms, thus minimizing the amount of budget authority HUD needs to fund contract renewals. Renewing expiring contracts will require a sharp increase in budget authority over the next several years.  HUD provides housing subsidies through nearly 4,300 contracts with local housing agencies and state housing finance agencies. Housing agencies receive a fee from HUD for administering the tenant-based program and working with households to determine eligibility, verify income, and ensure that units meet quality standards. Because a significant number of the Section 8 tenant- based contracts will expire over the next 5 years, the estimated cost to renew contracts will rise from $3.6 billion in fiscal year 1997 to $18.1 billion in Fiscal Year 2002. In fiscal year 1998, the Congress appropriated $25 billion in discretionary budget authority for the Department of Housing and Urban Development’s ( HUD) programs. HUD provides rental housing assistance-about $21 billion in fiscal year 1996—that enables about 4.7 million low-income households to obtain safe, decent, and affordable housing. HUD assists about two-thirds of these households through its Section 8 housing assistance program. In fiscal year 1997, HUD spent about $7 billion to provide tenant-based rental assistance. certificate and voucher programs—provide direct rental assistance to about 1.4 million households. These programs are designed to allow low-income households to live in decent and affordable private rental housing of their choice. HUD enters into contracts with local and state housing agencies, including public housing agencies. These housing agencies certify applicants for eligibility, inspect units found by the tenant for compliance with housing standards, and verify that the lease is valid and up to HUD’s rent and quality standards. In turn, the voucher program assists they elect to live.  HUD intentionally established program reserves during the early years of a multiyear housing assistance contract to help fund the program in the later years. HUD does not factor the effect of this requirement into its budget estimates for Section 8 tenant-based assistance. According to HUD’s Office of Inspector General (OIG), HUD, for years, has been unable to $204 to the unit cost, or 2 weeks of disbursements. The build-up of reserves is indicative of long-standing problems with HUD's budget estimating process. units were not leased because housing agencies did not make housing subsidy payments for unleased units. As a result, the larger housing agencies, especially those receiving new certificates every year, developed significant reserves. While HUD began to consider tenants’ income in its contract renewal budget requests for fiscal year 1991, it continued to assume that all units were fully leased. For example, he stated that the Budget Office was unaware of the program office’s budgeting assumption that all tenant-based certificates are in constant use. But because the budget estimate assumes constant use, the effect is to estimate more funding than will actually be needed. available unexpended funds in the Section 8 program to offset the budget authority requirements for contract renewals. In fiscal year 1995, HUD began to draw on unused budget authority from previous years to extend the terms of expiring contracts. The funds are, in effect, credited to housing agencies’ program reserve accounts. HUD reflected it in the Department’s fiscal year 1998 budget request by reducing the estimate of Section 8 tenant-based contract renewal by $1.6 billion. In February 1997, we briefed the Subcommittee and provided testimony for a hearing on March 18, 1997. at the end of the year with the housing agency. HUD plans to no longer extend expiring tenant-based contracts with excess budget authority within the program reserves. HUD has recognized the need for improving coordination and oversight among program, budget, and housing agencies. HUD will compare monthly the number of contracted units in the system to the previous month’s total to reconcile any differences. The agency plans to improve the security over access to the unit tables within the information system and to compare monthly. updated its Section 8 tenant-based information system. HUD recaptured $7.7 billion of this excess balance and retained the difference of $2.2 billion to cover contingencies and to account for future transactions. The remaining $1 billion was not recaptured because it represented amounts that had not yet been credited to housing. About $1.2billion was left in the participating housing agencies’ accounts as a reserve for contingencies equal to about 2 months of assisted housing payments to landlords. In 1996 and 1997, HUD conducted a financial data reconciliation of all of its tenant-based housing assistance contracts. Congress rescinded $4.2 billion, and after other adjustments, the current balance is about $3.5 billion. With improved systems and better data, HUD has the opportunity to report in more detail its unexpended Section 8 funding and the potential availability of this funding to offset needs for new budget authority or for other uses, the report says. The report also says HUD has updated its Section 8 tenant- based information system. represented amounts that had not yet been credited to housing agencies’ reserve accounts at the time of the recapture. After two congressional rescissions totaling $4.2 billion, GAO has calculated on the basis of data obtained at the end of fiscal year 1997 that about $3.5 billion remains in the Reserve Preservation Account. While a reserve for contingencies is prudent, it is not clear that a reserve of $1.2billion is reasonable and necessary. HUD’s more recent financial information maintained by HUD shows that this balance may be closer to $3,7 billion. Agencies, House Committee on Appropriations, has expressed concern about HUD’s financial management of the Section 8 tenant-based program. Report: HUD has lack of timeliness and precision in identifying magnitude of unspent budget authority. Report recommends that the Secretary of HUD direct the Office of the Chief Financial Officer to modify the agency”s consolidated financial statements so that they identify the portions of the unexpended appropriations for the Section8 program that are excess to current needs and therefore available for other uses.  HUD’s consolidated financial statements comply with the federal accounting requirement to disclose unexpended budget authority by major budget account. The federal accounting standards established by available for other purposes. The standards do not, however, require agencies to disclose such information below the majorudget account level. Each agency should disclose information that is most useful to the users of their financial statements, the report says. In a note to its fiscal year 1996 consolidated financial statement, HUD disclosed unexpending appropriations by major program type. In May 1997, HUD estimated that the amount of unexpended budget authority that exceeded the amount needed to meet contract requirements in the tenant-based program was $9.9 billion. In fiscal year 1996, housing agencies used $353 million in excess budget authority to cover contingencies, far less than the amount that HUD has reserved for this purpose. HUD plans to adjust its reserve level after it examines in more detail housing agencies’ actual use of available unexpending budget authority in fiscal years 1996 and 1997. hearing on March 18, 1997. We informed the Congress that HUD had a significant amount of unexpended funds in the Section 8 tenant-based program. We contacted national associations representing housing agencies and discussed the need for retaining unexpending funds in housing agencies’ program reserve accounts. To evaluate the accuracy of HUD’s estimate of its unexpends funds and the reasonableness of this amount, we reviewed documentation and discussed HUD's examination of balances in reserve accounts with HUD officials. To assess HUD's budget formulation process, we discussed the results of Price Waterhouse LLP's independent evaluation of available funds.  HUD’s revised estimate of $9.9 billion has been verified by an independent accounting firm. In the June 1997 Emergency Supplemental Appropriations Act, the Congress directed HUD to recapture unexpended budget authority that was not needed to meet the current obligations of the Section 8 tenant-based program. Price Waterhouse LLP performed tests on a statistical sample of 158 housing agencies to confirm the accuracy of HUD's estimate of excess unexpending budget authority. For this sample, the accounting firm compared information in HUD's tenant- based information system with information in the housing agencies’ most recent year-end settlement statements.  HUD implemented a new Section 8 tenant-based information system in fiscal year 1995. The Chairman of the Subcommittee on VA, HUD, and Independent Agencies, House Committee on Appropriations, has expressed concern about HUD’s efforts to more accurately estimate their Section 8 budget needs. HUD officials believe that this process will eliminate overfunding and improve the accuracy of the budget estimating for contract renewals. HUD plans to modify its information system to calculate the actual average cost per unit before completing the annual settlement process at each housing agency. time of our review, a chief financial officer for the tenant-based program had not been hired. Second, the Office of the CFO is developing a model to analyze all budget submissions, including the contract renewal estimate. Previously, the departmental budget office accepted the cost estimates with only limited review of the supporting documentation that detailed how the estimates were developed. Although the Office  plans to develop budget estimating policies and procedures, it also plans to build in enough time for adequate coordination, oversight, and communication.  HUD’s OIG analyzed a statistical sample of HUD's contracts. For those contracts that were Section 8 tenant-based contracts, the OIG traced the information in the original contract files. The OIG concluded that, for the sample reviewed, the amounts reserved and obligated were correct. We provided a draft of this report to HUD for use in the report. We did not systematically verify the accuracy of HUD”s data or conduct a reliability assessment of HUD  databases as part of this assignment. We relied upon the work of HUD  OIG and our audit of the consolidated financial statement, which shows the information is generally reliable. Inspector General (OIG), HUD, for years, has been unable to estimate accurately the budget authority it needs for Section 8 contract renewals and amendments. Historically, HUD’s accounting and information systems did not contain reliable, complete, or accurate data on Section 8 contracts. As a result of these problems, HUD had to continually revise its Section 8 estimates and often request additional funding. While HUD has taken action to correct these accurate information, the OIG found that HUD continued to experience problems developing accurate and reliable contract renewal estimates. need for improving coordination and oversight among program, budget, and financial management officials. HUD’s budget operations have been fragmented and disjointed, preventing clear accountability and the necessary coordination. HUD has recently placed all departmental budget operations under the Office of the CFO to ensure that budgeting is integrated with financial management oversight. HUD also has implemented a risk management program to protect resources from fraud, waste, and abuse and to maintain the agency's financial integrity. The actions appear to be responsive to the problems identified but HUD has no specific time frames for their completion. Since 1989, HUD estimates of Section 8 contract renewals have been either too low or too high. This inability to accurately forecast budget needs persisted into fiscal year 1998. HUD recognizes these problems and has plans to correct them, but it is too soon to measure the effectiveness of the remedies because many have not been implemented. HUD’s Office of the CFO will need to exercise strong leadership to complete these changes and to develop specific budget procedures to guide the new organizational changes, the authors say.  HUD overestimated its need for funding to amend existing housing assistance contracts because accurate data were not available from its accounting system at the time. HUD has acknowledged many of its problems with its budgeting process and has begun corrective actions. HUD agreed with a draft of this report’s major findings and conclusions. HUD also provided several comments to improve the report”s factual representation and to ensure clarity. In response to the fiscal year 1995 Financial Statement Audit, HUD recently enhanced its tenant-based information system and plans changes to related procedures. process, the Department’s budget office did not use more reliable estimates developed by the program offices. Accurate budget estimates are essential to federal agencies meeting their fiscal responsibilities. HUD agreed with the report's major findings, conclusions, and recommendations, and said that the report presents a balanced assessment. In support of agencies being fiscally responsible, OMB requires them to submit reasonably accurate budget estimates. The CFO and officials of the housing office provided several comments to improve the report’S clarity, and we incorporated them as appropriate. improve the report’s factual representation and to ensure clarity. HUD believed that we should recognize that its initial estimate of the impact of welfare reform on fiscal year 1998 budget needs was based on the best information available. We agreed and made changes to reflect this concern. The report was released on October 1, 1998. It was the first time HUD had released a report on welfare reform since the 1990s. For more, go to: http://www.hud.gov/welfarereform.