Each is planned to be within an area 3,500 nautical miles from the United States and from the war zones. This distance is based on the maximum efficient range of the C-17 cargo aircraft without refueling. Operation of the ERS airfields is shared between the host nation, which owns the airfield, and a number of DOD organizations. Host nation responsibilities vary and are documented in the Status of Forces Agreement for each country. U.S. organizations with responsibility for the airfields include the Air Force, who provides day-to-day operations for all but two of the air fields. The Air Force operates 11 ERS airfields; the Navy operates the airfield in Rota, Spain; and the Marines operate the air field in Iwakuni, Japan. The airfields are located on bases owned by the host country, under agreements for support negotiated by the State Department. Each military service must operate theAirfield in accordance with its primary service mission. However, each service must also manage the Airfield in according with the policies set forth by the geographical command. These commands are responsible for supporting and achieving U.S. interests in their particular ERS-related areas. The Air Force operates 11 ERS airfields; the Navy operates for ERS needs. The ERS purpose is to act as a conduit for aircraft headed to war zones in the Middle East. While the unified commands have some management responsibilities for the airfields, they have no funding programs for base operations and construction. The military services and the Defense Logistics Agency generally provide U.S. funding for these purposes. In Europe, both the European and Central commands may act as advocates for the E RS airfields. The ability to fight and win two nearly simultaneous major theater wars is the cornerstone of U.S. defense strategy. For planning purposes, the military assumes that the two most likely places where these wars would take place are Korea and Southwest Asia. Mobilization of U.-S. forces for such conflicts requires a global system of integrated land, sea, and air resources, and supplies already stored overseas. The fleet of civilian and military passenger and cargo aircraft and the En Route System (ERS) airfields provide the critical air component. The ERS is fragmented among at least four unified commands and six subcommands, three services, host nations, and other organizations. Because of the absence of centralized responsibility for the ERS, the European and Pacific Commands established separate steering committees. The growth in importance of the En Route System has not been matched by a commensurate improvement in its information and management structures. Without such structure, one overarching organization with responsibility for strategic operations and coordination of overall ERS operations during peacetime is needed. has functional responsibility for managing the entire Defense Transportation System. It is not in charge of the ERS airfields and can provide only limited funding for repair and improvement projects. The needs of the geographical commands (such as the European, Central, and Pacific commands) take precedence over those of the functional commands. The North Atlantic Treaty Organization may also use the bases to assist in carrying out its strategic operations. Conflicts can and do occur. For example, in the late 1980s, the European Command had planned to return responsible for supporting and achieving U.S. interests. Logistics Agency generally provide U.S. funding for these purposes. For example, the Air Force provides funds for the operation of its ERS airfield in Fairford, England. If the base command needs funds for a construction project, it requests them from its parent command in the region. The Defense Logistics Agency has responsibility for funding fuels projects across all services. In deciding whether to include a project in funding requests, the services and the Defense Logistic Agency assign their own priorities to the project. are sending copies of this report to the appropriate congressional committees and the Honorable Donald H. Rumsfeld, Secretary of Defense. Copies will also be made available to others upon request. Please contact me at (757) 552-8100 if you or your staff have any questions concerning this report. The major contributors to this report are listed in appendix IV. According to Transportation and Air Mobility Command officials, all of the organizations with responsibility for the En Route System play some combination of three basic roles: owner/manager, funder, and/or advocate. The Transportation Command plans and coordinates movements through the overall transportation system. The Air Mobility Command uses the ERS airfields to help provide aerial refueling and airlift through its fleet of air tankers and cargo airplanes. Both commands may act as advocates for the resource needs of the E RS. The Transportation Command has functional responsibility for managing the entire Defense Transportation System, with the airlift portion handled by its air component, the Air Force Air mobility Command. The ERS is a joint operation of the Air force and the U.S. Air Force. funding. Only recently has the ERS begun to receive high priority for funding. In 1997 the Air Mobility Command proclaimed 1997 the “Year of the En Route System” and funding began to increase. However, the Air Transportation Command still struggles to fund the system. The ERS was established in the early 1950s to provide air transport for the U.S. military. It has since been expanded to include a number of other air transport systems, including the Air National Guard and the Army Corps of Engineers. whether all the construction projects will be completed as planned. U.S.-funded ERS projects in Europe must compete for funding against Pacific projects and others within DOD. DOD infrastructure is grossly under funded, with facilities currently funded for replacement every 250 years. (See p. 18 for a discussion of DOD problems in infrastructure management.) For confidential support, call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 or visit http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. For support in the UK, contact the Samaritans on 08457 909090. The proposed projects are intended largely to replace capability lost due to deterioration or base closures. Only 25 of the 516 projects provide additional capacity. The remaining projects either upgrade existing capacity to current environmental, safety, or operational standards or replace/repair equipment due to obsolescence or failure. The level of funding has been declining somewhat since the early 1990s, and is also constrained by prohibitions such as using the funds for projects viewed by the government of Japan as increasing war-fighting capacity. It is unclear whether all the construction projects will be completed as planned. Most of the costs (86 percent) are associated with projects that had not yet started construction as of October 2000. Host nations and U.S. allies are expected to fund about 55 percent of the total. It is unclear whether all the projects will be completed as planned, as the projects must compete with each other and with other DOD projects for funding and face other uncertainties. Since the end of the Cold War, many U.N. military locations overseas have been closed. The United States is expected to funding the rest. As of October 2000, about 4 percent ($75.0 million) of total funding had been spent on completed projects. Another 10 percent ($194.6 million) spent on projects in progress. The remaining 86 percent ($1.7 billion) of funding was associated with projects in various stages of planning, programming of funds, and engineering design. Funding for such projects is subject to future budgetary constraints and uncertainties. Projects funded by U.S. programs have progressed somewhat faster than those funded by host nations and allies. North Atlantic Treaty Organization ($132.6 million) and host nations such as Germany ($430.8 million) Japan ($523.9 million) According to officials from the U.S. Transportation, European, and Pacific Commands, funding commitments from the NATO and Germany are contained in formal agreements. Japanese funding is provided under the Japanese Facilities Improvement Program. Japan has provided some $21 billion for projects under this program, which started in 1979 to ease the financial burden of stationing U.N. forces in Japan. A formal, written strategic plan that lays out missions and goals, guiding principles and priorities, performance measures, and monitoring mechanisms is also needed. Without such structure ERS operations are prone to a higher risk of inefficiency in the form of confusing and overlapping lines of authority and accountability for key decisions. Without the vision and order provided by a formal strategic plan, decisionmakers do not have the information they need to ensure that ERS resources and operations are focused on the right goals and outcomes. Without a system for ongoing monitoring of key aspects of E RS operations, decisionmaker do not. have the real time, readily available information needed to quickly identify and correct problems. performance, and assigned responsibilities is crucial to achieving program success. According to officials from the Office of the Secretary of Defense, some strategic guidance for the ERS is expressed through the DOD budget process. DOD indicated in its written comments that it generally even several areas does not constitute a coherent and coordinated overall management structure. Our recommendation is intended to assign responsibility for overarching issues to one organization to help provide a clear, coordinated, and comprehensive management structure for all ERS operations. It should be noted that during our review this recommendation received strong support from officials at organizations currently involved in E RS operations. We agree that some elements of ERS operations are individually managed by various organizations and processes. Some elements, such as base level operations, fuels projects and readiness reporting, may be managed quite intensively. However, “robust” management in one or even several areas does not constitute a coherent and coordinated ERS. We remain convinced that the ERS needs a better management structure. But we agreed to consider whether one organization should be designated as responsible for some matters. We in fact describe examples of many of these Organizations and processes and their responsibilities for parts of E RS operations in our report. its proposed projects represent the best solutions. Despite concerns about aging and deteriorating facilities and equipment, the ERS has no centralized oversight system to provide data on deterioration and failure rates. DOD does not include information on ERS shortfalls in its reports on the performance of the overall ERS. Congress may wish to consider directing the Secretary of Defense to implement the recommendations, and periodically report on DOD’s progress to ensure that these prudent improvements to ERS management are carried out, the authors say. The ERS has no centralized oversight system to provide readily available, up-to-date data on the condition and readiness of the airfields. Transportation Command officials also told us that they could not provide data on deterioration and failure rates. Sound strategic planning that clearly lays out missions and goals, needed resources, priorities, strategies, measures of performance, and assigned responsibilities is crucial to achieving program success.justified in the military construction budgeting process. The ERS is a joint venture between the U.S. Air Force and the Air National Guard. to correct them, we reviewed the processes DOD used to identify deficiencies and corrective actions. We obtained lists of construction projects at each ERS airfield and analyzed them from a number of different perspectives. The total costs by base, by region, and systemwide; the cost of each project; and the total cost of the entire ERS system. We reviewed deficiencies, corrective actions identified in DOD Joint Monthly Readiness Review Reports, Air Mobility Command reports, and other documents produced by the European and Pacific Steering committees and the Inspector General. strategic plan and monitoring system. It stated that the recent Mobility Requirements Study 2005 already includes a strategic plan for the ERS. DOD said it would nevertheless try to improve the integration, presentation, and documentation of the plan to help outside organizations understand its provisions. We disagree. The document cited by DOD in the January 2001 Mobility Requirements. Study 2005 is identified as the E RS “Infrastructure Analysis,” not as a. strategic plan. It is simply an analysis of current shortfalls in capacity and. whether planned construction projects will remedy those shortfalls by 2005. DOD reports annually on its performance in managing strategic mobility capabilities. It does not include data on ERS shortfalls in the report, despite the major effect such shortfalls have on airlift capacity. We concluded that reducing unneeded infrastructure could free up the funding needed to ensure that critical assets such as the ERS airfields are adequately funded. Omitting data from DOD’s plan and reports on strategic mobility presents an incomplete picture of DOD capability and tends to obscure ERS problems and resources needed to resolve them. on schedule. The analysis does not include many of the elements needed for sound strategic plans, which need to lay out missions and goals, necessary resources, assigned responsibilities for accomplishing goals, priorities and strategies to be followed, and performance measures for gauging progress toward identified goals. In addition, the analysisdoes not identify the expected cost to remedy the capacity shortfalls, or the organizational or procedural responsibilities for achieving ERS goals. Similarly, it does not identify priorities between regions, bases, or projects to help identify strategies in case of funding or other problems. in case of funding or other problems. The analysis also does not identify any system of performance measures and monitoring mechanisms to help decisionmakers gauge progress and problems. For example, it simply assumes that projects will be completed on schedule without any measures of actual progress. In fact, during our review Transportation and Air Mobility Command officials could not tell us how many projects were behind their original schedule because there is no centralized monitoring system. The Department also disagreed with our recommendation for an overall cost-benefit study to document the rationales for plans. DOD needs to develop an overall cost-benefit study of its construction plans for the ERS. DOD believes the guidance it provides through the planning and budgeting process is sufficient to optimize the list of construction projects to be funded. We disagree. We understand that developing a formal cost- benefit analysis of the overall ERS infrastructure is difficult. But relying exclusively on the budget process to document funding rationales often results only in inferences as to why decisions were made.not be delayed. This study would also serve as a useful review of ERS construction plans and projects. the En Route System” and funding began to increase. Officials told us that it still takes many years to move projects through the budget process, obtain funding, and begin construction. Despite the strategic importance of the ERS, critical information on ERS plans and operations is not available, and the system is not managed as a coherent whole. Despite increased cost estimates and other uncertainties surrounding ERS construction projects, DOD has not developed overall cost-benefit studies or other prudent assurances to demonstrate either the rationale for its decisions or the planned $2 billion in projects. to difficulties in assessing performance in a variety of areas. As a result, we have classified DOD strategic planning as a major management challenge. DOD has reduced force structure since the end of the Cold War, but it has not achieved similar reductions in infrastructure costs. We concluded that reducing unneeded infrastructure could free up money for other priorities. The report was published by the Center for Strategic and International Studies at the University of California, Los Angeles. It is published by arrangement with the Institute for Defense Studies and the RAND Corporation. conducted our review from July 2000 through April 2001 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. In addition to those named above, Katherine Chenault, Lawrence E. Dixon, Richard G. Payne, Stefano Petrucci, and Gregory J. Symons, made key contributions to this report. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch, or see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. The model DOD uses to simulate ERS operations could overestimate the size of the shortfall. Air Mobility Command officials acknowledge that the Airlift Flow Model does not necessarily identify the best or optimal solution to mobilization requirements. The model repeatedly simulates cargo movements until it reaches a solution to the identified mission, but the solution may or may not be the optimal one. There are other types of models, called optimization models, that officials ERS in the Mobility Requirements Study 2005 are looking at in 2005. Airlift Flow Model would schedule an aircraft to pick up the 10-ton cargo immediately since it is focused on current conditions. An optimization model would likely wait a few hours until an aircraft was loaded with all 50 tons before sending it off. In 1997 DOD sponsored an ERS capacity analysis that compared the results of an optimization model with those of the Airlift Flow model. The optimization analysis agreed with the basic AirliftFlow Model conclusion that there would be a capacity shortfall. However, the analysis also concluded that a better distribution of ERS resources could significantly increase the flow of cargo.  optimization models are designed to seek the best or optimal solutions to mission requirements. For example, in analyzing the movement of cargo aircraft through the ERS the Airlift Flow Model would only be aware of what cargo is available for pickup at the moment. An optimization model would be aware. of all cargo available forpick throughout the mission being modeled. As a result, in a situation where 10 tons of cargo are being transported, an optimization model can identify the best allocation of cargo to aircraft, aircraft to routes, and ground resources to airfields. The $2 billion will fund repairs and improvements to fuel systems, runways, ramp space, and other base elements. Transportation Command officials told us that most ERS airfields were built during or immediately after World War II. Officials stated that they attempted to make cost-effective decisions by, for example, choosing to repair or improve existing bases rather than building new ones. Because of the age of the facilities, many of the planned projects had already been identified and justified in the military construction budgeting process. by an estimated 12 to 13 percent. A second DOD- sponsored study used an optimization model to analyze the impact of proposed construction projects designed to increase the fuel handling capacity at ERS bases. The study concluded that the increase in throughput capacity provided by the projects would be small and that using existing resources more effectively may be the best way to increase fuel deliveries. Although DOD officials believe that optimization models have promise, they also believe that they have drawbacks and did not use them to analyzed the ERS in the Mobility Requirements Study 2005. The standard fuel systems at current ERS bases were designed and built during the early 1950s and had an estimated life span of 30 to 40 years. At some bases refueling must be carried out by trucks, rather than by more modern pipeline and hydrant systems. At other bases, hydrants are antiquated or have deteriorating lines that slow and sometimes interrupt fueling operations altogether. Bases in the Pacific are the worst off. As shown in figure 6, repairs and improvements at bases in thePacific region total about $1.14 billion. Omitting ERS information from the key annual performance report gives an incomplete and misleading view of strategic mobility capabilities. DOD stated that the different cost estimates we were provided are not directly comparable because they were produced several years apart and were premised on different sets of bases and analytical methodologies. Whether DOD was aware of the reasons “unexplained” cost growth was not the primary point we were trying to make. Our primary point is that DOD did not know how much it would cost to bring ERS capacity up to requirements. in 2005 is unclear. Most (58 percent) of the costs are associated with bases in the Pacific region. DOD officials attribute the shortfall in ERS capacity to the shrinkage in the U.S. overseas presence since the end of the Cold War and to increased reliance on the 13 remaining old and deteriorating ERS bases. DOD’s latest estimate of ERS construction to eliminate the shortfall consists of 516 projects and costs about $2 billion. The $1.2-billion estimate was simply carried forward from an estimate developed in the mid-1990s. Cold War, many U.S. military locations overseas have been closed and their personnel relocated to bases in the continental United States. Transportation Command officials state that with this drawdown in the 1990s, the ERS lost many of its facilities and much of its flexibility. Today, ERS has access to only 13 locations, compared with 45 in the early 1990s. As a result, the remaining bases have become much more important as the only airfield options available for en- route mobilization support. systems and that no analysis can provide solutions that are 100-percent accurate. DOD believes that it has applied the best tools available and that it will continue to refine its capabilities, as new modeling tools become available. Our report does not attempt to endorse one modeling approach over the other. We point out the uncertainties of both approaches so that the reader can clearly understand the degree of precision in DOD’s estimate. It is important to fully consider all options in such analyses to ensure that, should an optimal solution be available, it is identified. In event of overlapping major theater wars in Korea and Southwest Asia, the 13 ERS airfields would not currently have enough capacity to move the required amounts of personnel and equipment to the war zones. DOD expects the shortfall to be largely eliminated by 2005. But the assumptions and modeling approach DOD uses in its calculations raise some uncertainty about the precise size of the shortfall. Some of the study’s assumptions tend to underestimate the size of this shortfall, authors say. The study at least partially offsets these assumptions. The capacity requirements of the ERS are defined in the recent Mobility Requirements Study 2005. Some study assumptions tend to underestimate the shortfall, while the modeling approach used could overestimate it. Capacity requirements could be raised even higher if other ongoing missions (such as peacekeeping) were added, further increasing the shortfall. Officials were unsure when this issue would be tackled.. We did not independently verify DOD’s estimate of system capacity. We reviewed the processes DOD used to identify the causes of any shortfalls and its plans to correct them.