The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) provides emergency response activities through more than 40 planning and response teams (PRTs) USACE social media platforms include Facebook, Twitter, Google+, Youtube, and Pinterest among others. The National Guard Bureau does not use disaster specific web pages and does not respond to individual requests for assistance. In general, the Emergency Operations Center and the Joint Field Office for each incident have external affairs personnel with the National Guard to help with the response. At the start of FY2015, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers began collecting Facebook usage data. USACE does not use incident-specific web pages or respond to individual requests. The text box at right provides composite data and results for FY2015. It is not specific to disaster or emergency related posts. The NWS is a component of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration within the Department of Commerce. It provides weather, water, and climate data, along with forecasts and warnings for the protection of life and property. The National Guard Bureau (NGB) is a joint activity of the Department of Defense. NGB operates its social media efforts out of its public affairs office to educate and inform the public about National Guard preparedness and response efforts. Guard personnel who are activated under Title 32 remain under state control, but pay and benefits are provided by the federal government. The NGB uses a variety of social media platforms including Facebook, Twitter, Google+, Instagram, and YouTube. It also uses social media through internal pages to conduct internal communications. For example, uploaded images of damages posted by social media users are circulated internally. The National Guard is both a state and federal organization. It is simultaneously the organized militia of a state or territory and a reserve component of the Army and the Air Force. Due to its size (over 450,000 individuals), trained personnel, and available equipment, it is frequently used for emergency response. Normally, the National Guard does not use social media during an emergency. During an emergency, social media information is coordinated through CDC's Joint Information Center (JIC) to ensure all platforms provide consistent information. The National Guard operates in a state status, under the control of state and territorial governors. In this state capacity, National Guard personnel are not subject to the restrictions of the Posse Comitatus Act. Under certain conditions, the National Guard can also be activated to respond to emergencies and disasters under Title 32 of the U.S. Code. Guard personnel who are activated under Title. 32 can perform law enforcement functions. The National Guard is frequently used for emergency response, and has a wide range of equipment. HHS uses a variety of social media platforms including Facebook and Twitter. Social media plays an integral role in HHS's National Health and Security Strategy. Each subentity of HHS contains working groups with separate social media efforts that focus on their particular organizational mission and goals. The working group monitors social media to dispel rumors, obtain situational awareness, and answer questions about preparedness and public health issues. HHS also provides health information through social media during incidents and directs people to health resources through web links and hashtags. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) works with states and localities to detect, investigate, and prevent disease and injury. CDC responds and supports state and local efforts to save lives and reduce suffering when a disaster occurs. HHS does not respond to immediate requests for assistance. The working group also coordinates information with other organizations with preparedness and response responsibilities. CDC also helps to monitor the effect of environmental conditions on health, and to study illness and injury in the workplace. The group also helps with public health issues. Emergency alerts used at the federal level include the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) Personal Localized Alerting Network known as "PLAN" Implemented in 2011, PLAN expands the emergency alert system notifications sent over TV and radio to include mobile and smart phones. PLAN sends geographically targeted alerts through cell towers in the form of text-like messages to the cell phones of people who have requested to be notified in the event of an emergency. It also includes searchable hashtags and links to more information on the agency's website. Wireless Emergency Alerts or WEA), radio and television (using the Emergency Alert System), and National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) weather radios. In addition, the NWS can send weather alerts, and the National Center for Missing and Exploited Children can send AMBER alerts over IPAWS. For example an estimated 3.5 million tweets with the hashtag #sandy were generated in 24 hours during Hurricane Sandy and roughly ten pictures per second were uploaded using Instagram. As previously mentioned, many citizens expect help within three hours of posting a request on social media. Each of the Weather Service's 122 weather forecast offices, along with other specialized field offices, national centers, and regional and national headquarters utilize social media. This approach allows the NWS to serve both local and national communities. The NWS mainly uses social media as a tool to provide information about weather events to users, including important safety information on a variety of hazards. Following significant meteorological or hydrological events, NWS conducts Service Assessments to evaluate NWS products and services. within three hours of posting a request on social media. Some jurisdictions may not yet have the capacity or resources to meet this expectation. Congress could explore the feasibility of using social media to make requests and investigate potential polices to help state, local, and federal jurisdictions develop their capacity to receive and effectively respond to the requests. The use of social media as a tool to request assistance (similar to a call to 911) may be of potential interest to Congress. The program could then be used as a pilot program. According to a study by the American Red Cross, younger people generally use social media more frequently than older segments of society. They are also more likely to request help through social media, believe agencies should monitor their postings, and have high expectations that agencies will respond quickly to their requests. There are also indications that older adults are increasingly using social media. Some may argue that emergency managers and officials may need to adapt their social media policies to accommodate older adults who may have similar expectations to those of younger people. CDC uses Twitter, Facebook, Pinterest, and YouTube among other social media platforms. In an emergency, CDC coordinates with other federal entities, state and local agencies, and partners through the emergency operations center. CDC's primary social media focus is disseminating public health and preparedness information, but it also uses social media to answer questions and obtain situational awareness through listening. During the 2014 Ebola response, the social media team surged to meet the round-the-clock needs of the response and interest of the public. Social media is being increasingly used to provide "real-time" updates as an event unfolds. Orlando authorities used social media to inform the public on the shootings in the Pulse nightclub. The Boston Police Department also used Twitter to address and correct instances of misinformation. The U.S. Geological Survey launched a pair of Twitter feeds to give out automated, real-time river levels and rainfall amounts during heavy rains in Texas. The platform automatically Tweets out river gauge levels and flow rates when they hit the flood stage. using uploaded images to create damage estimates; and using social media to conduct investigations and post-incident analysis. The federal government does not use a single platform for emergency and disasters. Rather, federal entities use different social media for different purposes. Some have platforms dedicated to emergencies and disasters while others have emergency and disaster information comingled with other agency information. This section highlights just some of the ways in which social media are being used by the federal government. It is important to note that social media is subject the other challenges described in this report. In the last 10 years social media has played an increasing role in emergencies and disasters in both the public and private sectors. Facebook hosts numerous emergency-related organizations, including Information Systems for Crisis Response and Management (ISCRAM), and the Humanitarian Free and Open Source Software (FOSS) Project. At the federal level, social media is commonly used to provide information concerning what types of assistance is available to individuals and households, valuable disaster information. Some examples of using social media as an emergency management tool include using the medium to conduct emergency communications and issue real time warnings. moments before the attack took place. Forensic analysis of the information was used to construct incident timelines and retrieve first-hand accounts of the event as it unfolded. Obtaining real-time information as an incident unfolds can help officials determine where people are located; assess victim needs; and alert citizens and first responders to changing conditions and new threats. Emergency managers can also use the information to direct certain resources to reduce damages, loss of life, or both. In some cases it might be possible to obtain this information before first responders reach the disaster area. Social media can also be used by users to let family and friends know they are safe if they are near an incident or natural disaster. Malicious use of social media during an incident could range from mischievous pranks to acts of terrorism. One tactic that has been used by terrorists involves the use of a secondary attack after an initial attack to kill and injure first responders. Social media could be used as a tool for such purposes by issuing calls for assistance to an area, or notifying officials of a false hazard or threat that requires a response. Social media are often used by emergency management organizations to coordinate and send out notifications of upcoming training events and exercises. Notifications can also be sent to mobilize first responders to respond to an incident. Using social media for mobilization purposes can be particularly useful when traditional call systems fail. For instance, during Hurricane Gustav, a Community Emergency Response Team (CERT) used social media to send mass email notifications to team members through Facebook. The CERT group also updated status messages to notify first responders and citizens of developments as the incident unfolded. response groups, and raising funds for disaster relief and recovery efforts. The use of social media for emergencies and disasters can provides the public with another method to communicate with the government. Social media are increasingly seen by some as a supplement or replacement to "911" emergency system lines. For example, when power or landline service is interrupted, people generally continue to have access to information through social media platforms with SMS and Global Positioning Satellite (GPS) frameworks, such as Twitter, says author. The term "social media" refers to Internet-based applications that enable people to communicate and share resources and information. Social media can be accessed by computers, tablets, smart and cellular telephones, and mobile telephone text messaging (SMS) The use of social media is an evolving phenomenon. Rapid changes in communication technologies in the past decade have enabled people to interact and share information through media that were non-existent or widely unavailable as recently as 15 years ago. In the last 10 years, social media has become more popular than ever. agencies to complete PIAs prior to: (1) developing or procuring information technologies that collect, maintain, or disseminate personally identifiable information (PII); or (2) initiating, consistent with the Paperwork Reduction Act, a new collection of PII from ten or more individuals in the public. In March 2011, the Department of Homeland Security issued a Privacy Impact Assessment for the Use of Unidirectional Social Media Applications Communications and Outreach. The PIA uses the Fair Information Privacy Principles (FIPPs) to assess and mitigate any impact on an individual's privacy. The E-Government Act of 2002 mandates that federal agencies conduct an assessment of the privacy impact of any substantially revised or new Information Technology System. The document that results from these mandated assessments is called a Privacy Impact Assessment (PIA) Section 208 of the E-government Act requires federal agencies to complete PIAs prior to: (1) developing or procuring a new information technology system; or (2) developing, procuring, or developing a new IT system that could be used to monitor individuals. Act of 2002 to direct the Secretary of Homeland Security to establish a social media working group. The law requires the social media group to submit an annual report to Congress. The report includes a review of current and emerging social media technologies being used to support preparedness and response activities related to terrorist attacks and other emergencies. It also includes recommendations to improve DHS's use of social media for emergency management purposes, to improve public awareness of the type of information being disseminated through social media and how to access such information during a terrorist attack. with the private sector to discuss and resolve legal, operational, technical, privacy, and security concerns. H.R. 3517 requires the DHS Secretary to conduct a one-year pilot program with the American Red Cross. The bill was referred to the Subcommittee on Emergency Preparedness, Response, and Communications. The following section describes how some federal entities use social media for emergencies and disasters. This list is not exhaustive—there are many federal entities that useSocial media for emergency preparedness and response. information about an incident including road closures, damage reports, and weather conditions. H.R. 623 , which was enacted on November 5, 2015 ( P.L. 114-80 , the DHS Social Media Improvement Act of 2015) amended the Homeland Security Act of 2002 to direct the Secretary of Homeland Security to use social media to communicate with the public and private sectors. The legislation was introduced in the 113 th Congress ( H.r. 4263 ) and later in the 114 th Congress. Inaccurate information could complicate situational awareness of an incident and hinder or slow response efforts. The extent to which inaccurate information poses a problem to the emergency management community is not clear and claims of inaccuracy are debatable. Too much information can also pose a problem. Congress could investigate the accuracy of emergency and disaster information and examine strategies and best practices that could increase organizational capacity to handle a large influx of information. Similarly, Congress could examine methods that could help prevent or reduce the spread of misinformation. Crisis maps combine information scattered across the Internet along with other information and places them on a single map. Information posted at the time of an event could be valuable later for investigative and research purposes. For example, viewers at the 2012 theater shooting in Aurora, CO, tweeted and posted messages moments before the attack took place. Users can use the crisis map to ascertain storm paths and flood zones, as well as identify evacuation routes, shelter locations, and power outage areas.10,000 reports each. Crowdsourcing consists of obtaining needed services, ideas, or content by soliciting contributions from the online community. An example of a federal government crowdsourcing tool is a U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) "Did You Feel It?" project which creates automatic intensity maps based on "felt" reports submitted online. More than 2 million reports have been filed on this website, with 40 earthquakes receiving more than 10,000 reports each. Another useful source of information during an emergency is media. sectors might be applied at the federal level. Crowdsourcing information can be geotagged with longitude and latitude coordinates. According to Mathew Stepka, Vice President, Technology for Social Impact for Google, during some disasters, authoritative sources may not have as expansive information as individuals who are experiencing the incident first-hand. Stepka provided an example of crowdsourcing in his testimony to the Subcommittee. He related that it was unclear during Hurricane Sandy which filling stations had gasoline. He said that crowdsourcing can be used to enhance the quality and timeliness of critical information. Student volunteers called stations in New Jersey to check whether they were open and had gas available. Within a few days they had data for more than 1,000 different stations, which was fed into our Sandy crisis map automatically. Study findings reported at the hearings also underscored the growing use of social media during emergencies and disasters. According to Suzanne DeFrancis, Chief Public Affairs Officer of the American Red Cross, 20% of Americans received a social media message during a disaster. The Department of Energy's call center ended up referencing this information.  unofficial sources are often trusted and used as information sources by the general public. Some reports have indicated that information from unofficial sources can be just as, and even more, desirable than information from official social media websites. This is because citizens may think official sources are too slow, general, or inaccurate to be useful. In a June 4, 2013, hearing, Jorge Cardenas, vice president of asset management and centralized services for Public Service Electric and Gas Company (New Jersey) stated that official sources were too slow and general. by its Web 2.0 policy which describes how to sign up for third party outlets, how to moderate discussions (including which comments can be deleted), and what information needs to be retained in accordance with records management. FEMA's Office of External Affairs has a growing digital engagement section. Their responsibility includes designing and developing social media items. SBA has been a major source of assistance for the restoration of commerce and households in areas stricken by natural disasters. The social listening section can also be activated to assist with social listening in the event of an emergency or major disaster. will often provide links to information on their website for more technical information and may link and share posts from FEMA and other agencies. SBA comingles emergency and disaster information with other information about small business programs on their social media platforms. HHS directs and coordinates preparedness activities and oversees public health agencies within the Department with responsibilities for emergency preparedness and response. These include the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) SBA often issue web pages dedicated to each declaration. what types of assistance is available to individuals and households, how to apply for assistance, announce application deadlines. Other agencies and organizations that provide recovery assistance such as the American Red Cross, or the Small Business Administration's Disaster Loan Program (SBA) Social media could be used to raise funds in such cases through private contributions. However, it would not likely be capable of supplanting federal assistance altogether. Recovery from large-scale disasters can cost billions of dollars (the federal government). In some cases, individuals and Households do not qualify for FEMA Individual Assistance grants. SBA offers low-interest, long-term loans for physical and economic damages to businesses, individuals, and households. SBA utilizes social media on several different platforms including Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, and blogs. Each SBA region has its own Twitter account to provide users with specific local information. Using social media SBA will often provide links to information on their website for those who want to learn more about SBA's services. The SBA provides loans to help repair, rebuild, and recover from economic losses after a declared disaster. FEMA began using Youtube in 2006, Twitter in 2008, and Facebook in 2009. FEMA also uses social media to inform people where and how to apply for federal and nongovernmental assistance. FEMA can use social media as an emergency management tool by integrating various social media platforms through the use of tools referred to as "social media management system" The social media management systems include software that allows the agency to better handle information overload by eliminating non-critical information. Doing so helps FEMA focus or "listen" to. FEMA's app also allows users to take a photograph in a disaster area and submit it, along with a short text description, to the "Disaster Reporter" FEMA's social medial policies are guided by its Web 2.0 policy which describes how to sign up. FEMA has staff responsible for day-to-day social media operations but has the capacity to deploy people from Regional Offices for surge support. For example, 10 people were deployed to the National Response Center during Hurricane Sandy to assist social media efforts. Many terms of service agreements are incompatible with federal law, policies, and regulations. To address this challenge, federal agencies have negotiated federal-compatible terms ofService agreements with social media vendors. These agreements modify or remove problematic language or clauses in standard Terms of Service agreements. Negotiated terms of Service can be developed individually by the federal entity, or through the assistance of the federal agency. The terms can be changed to reflect changes in technology or language in the agreement. The agreement can also be updated to reflect the changes in social media technology. A key issue of interest with respect to social media and emergencies and disasters is the diffusion of technology developed in the private sector to the public sector. One potential method that could be used to accelerate diffusion is through public-private partnerships (PPPs) FEMA provides a number of tools and models to help organizations start emergency management PPPs. The program could then be evaluated to determine the effectiveness of the PPP. The U.S. Congress could consider providing grants to private sector or investigate other methods that would help foster partnerships. Large-scale disasters can cost billions of dollars. Social media has the capacity to accelerate the damage estimate process. In Kansas, a smart phone application has been used to help the Army Corps of Engineers identify and report breeches, seepage, overtoppings, and other areas of structural weakness in levees. Within the past decade, reports on successful use of social media during emergencies and disasters have spurred congressional interest and policy discussions concerning how to better incorporate social media at the federal level. Congress determine how the money has been spent and what resources have been provided to the nation. Financial information can also potentially help Congress identify cost saving opportunities. Privacy concerns exist about the potential for the collection, retention, and data mining of personal information by the federal government with respect to its use of social media for disaster recovery purposes. Specifically, the use of status alerts and the creation of personal pages to establish status alerts is a potential privacy concern for the public. The information is also useful for congressional oversight of the entities that have received the funds and to evaluate the overall effectiveness. Some have argued that privacy laws can hamper the use of information obtained from social media during disasters. Efforts are being made to develop software that could remove personal information from social social media messages without loss of vital disaster information. Congress could consider amending existing laws to make theUse of PII less restrictive during disasters, or investigate methods that could help the federal government develop software to remove PII while retaining valuable disaster information in the event of a disaster. Social media has made tremendous inroads into.and other similar operations. It is unclear how much the federal government is paying for its various social media efforts with respect to emergencies and disasters. The number of personnel required to monitor multiple social media sources, verify the accuracy of incoming information, and respond to and redirect incoming messages is also uncertain. Congress could examine whether parts of the United States might experience similar problems with Internet traffic and then, if needed, help develop methods to address the issue. The federal government may experience a large volume of incoming messages from the public during a disaster. responding to each message in a timely manner could be difficult. The federal government uses social media as an output to disseminate information. A different approach would be to reorient the focus with an emphasis on inputs. Some might argue that the decentralized nature of social media makes the medium too unwieldy for large, centralized organizations to control in a manner similar to the government's social media efforts. The reorientation, however, could be a complicated matter. It could prevent the federal government from fully realizing social media's potential as an effective emergency management tool. In some incidents residents may be without power for 48 hours or longer. Many smartphones and tablets have battery lives lasting twelve hours or less depending on their use. Congress could also consider other methods that would help residents recharge their devices during power outages. Some may argue that traditional forms of communications still need to be used in conjunction with social media. They may further argue that emergency managers and officials consider alternative or backup options during extendedPower outages, or other occurrences that could prevent the use of social media in declared disasters. Congress could require FEMA to develop and deploy 3G and 4G mobile networks in presidentially declared disasters. Congress could also investigate the use of social media at the federal level to help inform decisionmaking and policymaking. This could include determining hardware and software costs, personnel costs, surge capacity during large-scale disasters, and the federal government's ability to keep pace with advances in and the social media and changing patterns of public usage. Some starting points would include pilot programs and public private partnerships. FEMA Administrator Craig Fugate met with representatives from Apple, Craigslist, Facebook, Google, Microsoft, and Twitter to discuss how to harness the "capabilities of the digital world" Subsequent hearings were held by the Subcommittee on Emergency Preparedness, Response, and Communications Committee on Homeland Security on June 4, 2013, and July 9, 2013. The hearings also explored how social media was transforming preparedness, response, and recovery efforts in the private sector and how lessons learned might be applied at the federal level.