CRS analysis of SIPP data for April 2013 indicates that among an estimated 73.0 million children under age 18, an estimated 8.5 million (11.6%) lived in families in which one or more family members received Social Security. Most, but not all, of these 3.2 million children from the SIPP are probably child beneficiaries. An additional 1.9 million (22%) live in families where a parent or guardian reported receiving Social Security benefits, though not directly on behalf of a child. It is not possible to precisely identify the Social Security beneficiary status of children on the SIPP. In April 2013, about 8.5 million children under age 18 were identified as living in families in which Social Security benefits were reported. Some adults may include the child's portion of their Social Security benefit as their own, without explicitly indicating that they received Social Security on behalf of a child. Some parents or guardians may contain an allowance for beneficiary children that is not separately identified. In such cases, potentially some, but not all, children of the parent may be beneficiaries in their own right. Social Security benefits may have been received by an extended family member (e.g., grandparent, aunt or uncle, cousin, niece or nephew) For this latter group, children may incidently be affected by Social Security, but not directly as a matter of policy aimed at them. After-the-fact comparison of poverty status by family Social Security receipt doesn't take into account the effect that Social Security itself has in reducing poverty. For such purposes, poverty status of children must be estimated both before and after counting families' income from Social Security. Social Security lifted nearly 2.0 million children (1.952 million) above the poverty line in April 2013. In families where Social Security benefits are received on behalf of children or by parents or guardians, Social Security reduces their poverty rate from 54.2% to 27.2%. Among children in families that receive Social Security, 34.4% have family income below 125% of the povertyline, compared to 29.8% of children that don't receive benefits. The relative effect of Social Security on the poverty status of all 73.0m children in the U.S., overall, is much more modest. Social Security by living with other family members who receive benefits. Children may qualify for Social Security benefits by being a child of a retired or disabled worker receiving Social Security or a survivor of a deceased worker who met the program's insured status requirements. In December 2012, 3.3 million Social Security beneficiaries (5.7% of all beneficiaries) were children under the age of 18. The average monthly benefit among child beneficiaries in December 2012 was $525. Average monthly benefits of children of disabled workers were lowest, about $323. of the parent's primary insurance amount (PIA) before adjustments. A maximum family benefit applies, varying from 150% to 188% of the PIA of the retired, disabled, or deceased parent. The family maximum cannot be exceeded regardless of the number of recipients entitled to benefits under the deceased or retired worker's earnings record. Child benefits generally apply to all biological children of a worker (assuming that paternity/maternity has been established) and to the deceased worker's widow or husband. Stepchildren may be eligible in some cases, as may some legally adopted grandchildren, with their benefits being determined on the basis of their grandparents' earnings record. Children may receive benefits until they reach age 18, and if in high school, through age 19. Disabled children can receive benefits indefinitely as long as the disability was incurred before age 22. In addition to receiving Social Security benefits in their own right, children may economically benefit from Social Security by living with other family members who receive Social Security. December 2012 amounted to about $1.712 billion, or about $20.5 billion on an annualized basis, based on SSA administrative data. In FY2013, combined federal and state TANF expenditures, in the form of cash aid to families, amounted to an estimated $8.7 billion, of which approximately $4.3 billion (49%) was from federal funds. The estimates presented in this report are based on survey data and are subject to respondent misreporting. Children may be eligible for Social Security benefits when a parent who is a covered worker dies, becomes disabled, or retires. This report examines the effects of Social Security on child poverty. The estimates presented in this report are based on a CRS analysis of U.S. Census Bureau Survey of Income and Program Participation of April 2013. The pre-transfer poverty estimates should not be confused with the full effects on poverty of eliminating the Social Security program, as some individuals would alter their behavior in absence of the program. SIPP is designed to interview a representative sample of families every four months over a 64-month period. The SIPP collects detailed information on family composition, labor force participation, income, and program participation among families and their members. The analysis presented in this report relies on SIPP data for April 2013, the latest month in common from data released for the full SIPP sample. The most recent SIPPData are from the 2008 panel, and the most recent data are from September 2008 through December 2013.