Despite association of IRA ownership to individuals with higher incomes, data show that lower- and middle-income individuals also own IRAs. A study by the Congressional Budget Office found that in 2003, 4 percent of workers earning $20,000 to $40,000 (in 1997 dollars) contributed to traditional IRAs and 3 percent of these workers contributed to Roth IRas. More households with Roth IRAs or employer-sponsored IRAs contribute to their accounts than households with traditional IRas, according to the Investment Company Institute. Since 1998, IRA assets have comprised the largest portion of the retirement market. More households own traditional IRAs, which were the first IRAs established, than Roth IRAs or employer-sponsored IRAs. Ownership of traditional and Roth IRas is associated with higher education and income levels. In 2004, 59 percent of IRA households were their accounts than households with traditional IRas. The median contribution to SIMPLE and. Salary Reduction Simplified Employee Pension IRA (SAR-SEP IRA) in 2004 was $2,300 compared to $3,000. In 2004, 59 percent of IRA households were headed by an individual with a college degree. Over one- third of these IRA households earned $100,000 or more. Research shows that higher levels of education and household income correlate with a greater propensity to save. However, despite the association of IRA ownership to saving, IRA ownership is not linked to saving more money, according to a recent study by the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants (AICPA) The AICPA also found that IRA ownership increases as education and income levels increase. Mr. Chairman and Members of the subcommittee, this completes my prepared statement and I would be happy to respond to any questions the subcommittee may have at this time. For further information regarding this testimony, please contact Barbara D. Bovbjerg, Director, Education, Workforce, and Income Security Issues at (202) 512-7215. Contact points for our Offices of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of this statement. Individuals making key contributions to this testimony can be contacted at (800) 515-8255 or bovbj Bergb@gao.gov. GAO is not subject to copyright protection in the United States. The published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from GAO. However, because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material, permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material.page of this statement. Individuals making key contributions to this testimony include Tamara Cross (Assistant Director), Matt Barranca, Susan Pachikara, Raun Lazier, Joseph Applebaum, Susan Aschoff, Doreen Feldman. may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-TALK (8255). For confidential help in the UK, call the helpline on 0800 555 111 or visit the National Suicide  Prevention Line on the Samaritans. SIMPLE IRAs, available only to employers with 100 or fewer employees, allow eligible employees to direct a portion of their salary, within limits, to a SIMPLE IRA. SEP IRAs allow employers to make tax-deductible contributions to their own and IRAs if they are to encourage employees to save for retirement. Several bills have been introduced in Congress to expand worker access to payroll-deduction IRAs. Experts suggested tax credits should be made available to defray start-up costs for small employers of payroll- deduction IRas, particularly for those without electronic or automatic payroll systems. Costs of managing SIMPLE and SEP IRAs may be prohibitive for small employers. Certain contribution requirements for these plans may, in some cases, limit employer sponsorship of these plans. Small business revenues are inconsistent and may fluctuate greatly from year to year, making required contributions difficult for some firms. For example, employers offering SIMPLE IRAs must determine before the beginning of the calendar year whether they will match employee contributions or make nonelective contributions to all employees’ accounts. Two experts said small firms may be discouraged from offering these plans because of the requirement that employers must set up a SEP IRA. The median contribution to SIMPLE and SAR-SEP IRAs was $5,000. The study noted that this difference may be related to higher contribution limits for employer-sponsored IRAs than for traditional and Roth IRAs. Few employers appear to offer their employees the opportunity to contribute to IRAs through payroll deductions, but data are insufficient to make this determination. Many small business groups said many small employers are unaware that payroll-deduction IRAs are available or that employer contributions are not required. Payroll-deduction IRA programs could provide a retirement savings opportunity at work for the millions of workers without an employer- sponsored retirement plan. Payroll- deduction IRAs have fewer requirements for employee communication than SIMPLE and SEP IRAs, and employers are not subject to ERISA fiduciary responsibilities as long as they meet the conditions in Labor’s regulation and guidance for managing these plans. For example, the higher contribution limits for SIMPLE. and SEp IRAs offer greater retirement savings. Experts: Most employers would incur little or no costs since they already make payroll deductions for Social Security and Medicare, as well as federal, state, and local taxes. Labor: Costs to employers also are significantly influenced by the number of IRA providers to which an employer must remit contributions on behalf of employees. Some employers are hesitant to offer a payroll-deduction IRA program because they find Labor’s guidance limits their ability to effectively publicize the program to employees, IRA providers say. Millions of U.S. workers have no retirement savings plan through their employer. Employer-sponsored and payroll-deduction IRAs afford an easier way for workers to save for retirement. Yet, barriers exist, such as administrative costs, that may discourage employers. Encouraging employers to offer IRAs to their employees can be much more difficult, authors say. IRAs play a major role in preserving retirement assets, but a very small role in creating them, they say. Since the early 1980s, roughly half of the private-sector work force has participated in either a defined benefit (DB) retirement plan, commonly known as a pension. Congress created IRAs, in part, to help those individuals not covered by a DB or DC plan save for retirement. Almost half of all U.S. private sector workers in 2006 were employed by firms with fewer than 100 employees, and only 1 in 4 of these workers worked for an employer sponsoring a retirement plan. To address the issue of low retirement plan sponsorship among small employers, Congress created SIMPLE and SEP employer-sponsored IRAs with less burdensome reporting requirements. Payroll deductions are a key feature in 401(k) and other DC plans. Labor’s guidance on payroll-deduction IRAs says individuals are more likely to save in IRAs through payroll deductions than they are without these automatic deposits. Payroll deductions allow workers to contribute to retirement savings automatically before wages are spent, relieving them of making ongoing decisions to save. Such a commitment device helps some workers overcome a common tendency to procrastinate or not take action to save based on the choices associated with investing. Experts say expanding the scope of the Retirement Savings Contribution Credit could encourage IRA participation among workers who are not covered by an employer-sponsored retirement plan. An expanded and refundable tax credit would have revenue implications for the federal government. Other experts told us that automatically enrolling workers into payroll-deduction and SIMPLE IRAs could increase employee participation. However, small business groups and IRA providers said that mandatory automatic enrollment could be burdensome to small employers. In addition, given the lack of available income for some, several experts said that low- income workers may opt out of automatic enrollment programs or be more inclined to make early withdrawals. IRS does not produce IRA reports on a consistent basis. IRS officials told us they are currently facing several challenges that affect their ability to publish IRA information more regularly. IRS relies, in part, on information returns to collect data on IRAs. Since IRS is the only agency that has data on all IRA participants, experts say it's important to have consistent reporting of IRA information by IRS.. Labor officials and retirement and savings experts told us that without the consistent reporting. of IRA info by IRS, they use studies by financial institutions IRA information. by IRS,. they use Studies by financial Institutions and industry associations for research purposes. numerous errors, making it difficult and time-consuming for IRS to edit them for statistical analysis. They also said that the IRA rules, and changes to those rules, are difficult for some taxpayers, employers, and trustees to understand. Also, in the past, one particular IRS employee, who has recently retired, took the lead in developing a statistical analysis on IRAs. Since IRS does not have a process in place to train another employee to take over this role, a knowledge gap was created that IRS is trying to fill. Regulators lack information about employer- sponsored and payroll-deduction IRAs. IRS collects information on employer-sponsored IRAs but does not share the information collected. The limited reporting requirements were put in place to try to encourage small employers to offer their employees retirement plan coverage by reducing their administrative and financial burdens. Experts also said increasing public awareness of the importance of saving for retirement and educating individuals about how to do so could increase IRA participation. IRAs can be much more productive if Congress and regulators ensure that there is adequate information. Retirement plans are reported annually by employers and others to IRS on its Form W-2. IRS cannot share the information it receives on employer-sponsored IRAs with Labor because it is confidential tax information. Labor also does not receive relevant information from employers, such as annual financial reports, as it does from private pension plan sponsors. The Bureau of Labor Statistics National Compensation Survey surveys employee benefit plans in private establishments, receiving information on access, participation, and take- up rates for DB and DC plans. Bureau of Labor Statistics: 8 percent of private sector workers in firms with fewer than 100 employees participated in a SIMPLE IRA in 2005. IRS evaluation of employer-filed W-2 forms estimated that 190,000 employers sponsored SIMPLE IRAs in 2004. IRS did not provide an estimate of the number of employers sponsoring SEP IRAs, and we were unable to reach them. The number of people who have a SEP IRA is estimated to be in the hundreds of thousands. A minimum level of oversight is important to ensure that employers are acting in accordance with the law and within Labor’s guidance on payroll-deduction IRAs. Labor officials said that they do not have a process for actively seeking out and determining whether employer- sponsored IRAs are engaging in prohibited transactions or not abiding by their fiduciary responsibilities. The only agency that has data on all IRA participants, consistent reporting of these data could give policymakers and others a more comprehensive view of the IRA landscape. on employer-sponsored IRAs but does not share the information collected with Labor, which has oversight responsibility. Labor has no process in place to monitor employer- sponsored IRAs, and has no jurisdiction over payroll-deduction IRAs. Without direct oversight, employees may lack confidence oversight is needed, the panel says. The panel is continuing its work on IRAs and are beginning to examine the fees that are charged IRA participants, it says. the subcommittee is pleased that the Committee on Ways and Means and this subcommittee are interested in retirement savings. rolling assets into IRAs or converting assets from a traditional IRA into a Roth IRA. Labor and IRS work together to oversee IRA prohibited transactions. IRS has responsibility for imposing an excise tax on parties that engage in a prohibited transaction. ERISA and the Internal Revenue Code contain various statutory exemptions from the prohibited transaction rules, and Labor has authority to grant administrative exemptions and establish exemption procedures. (See fig. 1 for a description of IRS and Labor responsibilities regarding IRAs.) Most assets flowing into IRas come not from direct contributions, but from transfers, or rollovers, of retirement assets from other retirement plans, including 401(k) plans. access to SIMPLE and SEP IRAs appears limited. Payroll-deduction IRA programs are not subject to ERISA requirements for employer-sponsored retirement plans and have no reporting requirements. Under ERISA Title I, there is no reporting requirement for SIMPLE IRAs, and there is an alternative method available for reporting of employer- sponsored SEPIRAs. The IRS receives information reports for all traditional and Roth IRAs but those data do not show how many were for employees using payroll-deductions. IRS and Labor share oversight responsibilities for IRAs. IRS enforces Title II of ERISA for all types of IRAs, which details participant eligibility, vesting, and funding requirements. IRS oversees the rules associated with the traditional and Roth IRAs that payroll-deduction programs may fund through employee contributions. But IRS does not have oversight over employer management of these programs. The IRS also has responsibility over tax rules for establishing and maintaining traditional and. Roth IRas that may be funded by employee contributions from payroll.