may have a significant effect on the long-termdirection of investment. Allocating allowances according to output and not differentiatingaccording to the carbon intensity of the project would provide an incentive to developlow carbon alternatives. New entrant reserves should be basedon output or capacity, and avoid differentiating according to the CO 2 -intensity of thenew investment. The proposed treatment of coal-fired powerplants by the German Government shows how difficult it will be to direct future investment toward low-carbon projects. regulatory,climatic, and economic events over the first trading period. Climaticevents influencing prices include cold weather, which increased energy usage, anddry conditions, which decreased the availability of hydroelectric power. The primary economic influence on the ETS revolved around fuel prices. Point Carbon analysis indicates 79% of the variance (R 2 ) inallowance prices was explained by changes in fuel prices (particularly for electricpower) (22) Figure 2. CO2 Market: Large Price Changes in Very Short Amount of Time Source: Margus Kaasik, Eesti Energia, Carbon Market: EUETS (May 9, 2006) in theshort-term. Assuming natural gas-fired and coal-fired generation are the marginalcost suppliers of power, allowance prices will respond positively to increasingnatural gas prices or decreasing coal prices. Likewise, allowance Prices willrespond negatively to decreasing natural gas Prices or increasing coal Prices. Thiscreates a correlation over time between allowance prices and electricity price byinfluencing the marginal price of electricity. How this has evolved during the firsttrading period is illustrated by Figure 3 . Figure 3. There is a Very Long-Term Correlation Between CO2 and Electricity Price: Link Via Marginal Producer. According to Point Carbon's proprietary databases, the EU-ETS traded 362million metric tons of CO 2 in 2005, valued at 7.218 billion euro. Brokers wereresponsible for 57% of the volume, exchange markets did 15%, and bilateraltransactions accounted for 28%. Of the exchange market volume, the EuropeanClimate Exchange (ECX) had the largest share at 63%. Inparticular, allowance prices dropped from almost 30 euro to about 9-11 euro inApril and May, sparked by a series of reported over-allocation of allowances. The EU-ETS is a maturing but still narrow market. Monthly volumes areincreasing, but have never exceeded a 1.6% share of phase 1 allocations. Even after several years of operation, SO 2 allowances prices can changeunpredictably and inexplicably. Some reasons for ETS allowance price derivatives are explicable. The ETS market responded to a variety of regulatory,climatic, and economic events over the first trading period. The market is maturing, but it is still a very small market. the emissions market and creating uncertainty for companies. The EU is not attempting to meet the Kyoto Protocolbut to get experience with emissions trading with some modest emissions targets. For the first trading period, the 21 countries have allocated an annual average of 1.8295 billion allowances and set aside 73.4million allowances for allocation. The 44.2 million allowances allocated in excess of actual 2005 emissions have been characterized as an "over-allocation" of allowances. The 2005 emissions totalreflects emissions from 8,980 sources representing more than 99% of the allowances allocated. 21 countries had not surrendered sufficient allowances. Noncomplying sources are subject to a 40-euro penalty for each tonof emissions in excess of surrendered allowances under the ETS. The EC will determine whether the insufficiency is the result of technical difficulties in national registries,tardiness, or noncompliance. No data are available for those Member States without an active registry. a. The figures in this column indicate the number of installations with active registry accounts on 30 April 2006. They differ from figurescommunicated in earlier reports. Figures are updated for installations that opted-out for the first trading period, opted-in, andinstallations without open accounts. The figures in this column are allowances allocated to existing installations at the start of the scheme. Due to technical problems in the national registries of the Czech Republic, France, the Slovak Republic, and Ireland, the figures for Denmark, Hungary, Ireland, and Lithuania are not included in the figures in the first section of the second section of this article. Norway's "Quota Commission" (created in 1998) suggested that the system could include close to 90% of the country's greenhouse gas emissions. The Commission's recommendation that "regulation by quotas be imposed inpart on the producer, in part on the end-user" (50) The Commission argued in favor of regulating CO 2 emissions at theproducer (upstream) level from mobile sources and some stationary sources. For process emissions stemming from a series of small sources, e.g. N 2 O from commercial fertilizers, regulation by quotas should beimposed on retailers, or importers. familiarity in operating such a system. Economic analysis conducted by the European Commission confirms the potentialcost-saving available from a comprehensive trading scheme. A comprehensive trading program is estimated by the EC to reduce Kyoto compliance costs to EU countries by 3billion euro, or one-third over a compliance scenario that does not include trading among Member countries. For a variety of reasons, the EC chose a trading system with limited coverage rather than acomprehensive one. The wider the scope of the system, the greater will bethe variation in the costs of compliance. the EC in explaining its decision to create a less comprehensive trading scheme at this time. There areconsiderable uncertainties surrounding the emissions of the fluorinated gases [HFC, PFC, SF 6 ] and the absorption of carbon dioxide by sinks. Allocating allowances, monitoring emissions and enforcing compliance of small mobile emitters, such as private cars, raise complex technical andadministrative issues. For determining the size of the trading program, the EC looked at five criteria: (1)environmental effectiveness, (2) chose a trading system with limited coverage rather than acomprehensive system covering all sources and gases. Some European analysts have noted that EUpolitics played an important role in preventing serious consideration of a comprehensive program. A significantly wider coverage could have beenprovided only by an upstream system, which had been excluded by the [European] Commission at the beginning of the process. The reason was again political: an upstream scheme would have toomuch looked like a tax. Not surprisingly, this reason was not employed by the EC in explaining its decision to create a less comprehensive system. The 1997 Kyoto Protocol now in force. Countries that ratified the protocol are developing appropriate implementation strategies to begin reducing theiremissions of greenhouse gases. The European Union (EU) has decided to use anemissions trading scheme (called a "cap-and-trade" program) to help it achieve compliance at least cost. The decision to use emissiontrading to implement the Kyoto Protocol is at least partly based on the successful emissions tradingprogram used by the U.S. The EU has also used other market-orientedmechanisms permitted under the Protocol. nordeveloping the trading market. In addition, this "over-allocation" does not includethe 73.4 million metric tons of allowances held in reserve by the various countries. The Kyoto targets requireambitious caps with absolute reductions for the phase 2008-2012. (16) In general, the EC has seen the over-allocated issue as part of the"learning-by-doing" process. The Climate Action Network (CAN), a network of 365non-governmental organizations, stated the following: Emissions limits set by MemberStates were a major disappointment. EC has seen the over-allocation issue as part of the"learning-by-doing" process that should help the EU in implementing the secondtrading period beginning in 2008. In general, the originalEU-15 countries have to reduce their emissions caps the most to meet their share of the EU's requirements under the Kyoto Protocol. As indicated, EU-15 states, on average, have toreduce their emissions Caps 6.8% (119 million metric tons) from their current level. the national registries of the Czech Republic, France, the Slovak Republic, and Spain, the CITL did not receivewholly reliable information on the installation level surrenders from these Member States. Some commentators have suggested that annual average 2005-2007 allocations that are actually 44.1 million metric tons higher than the reported 2005emissions are neither putting the EU on the path to the Kyoto requirements nordeveloping the trading market. In addition, this "over-allocation" does not. Figures do not account for changes to the number of installations. The deficit between the second trading period for the original 15 MemberStates can be covered by trading with the newer Member States that anticipate asurplus. The EU would have little difficulty meeting its Kyoto Protocol requirements during the second Trading Period. The Kyoto Protocol is a treaty that aims to reduce greenhouse gas emissions from cars and other vehicles. It is intended to reduce the emissions of carbon dioxide (CO2) and other greenhouse gases (C02) from vehicles and vehicles. likely to be included beforethe third trading period. Transport controls are based on voluntaryagreements with automobile manufacturers to improve fuel economy, fuel-economylabelling of cars, and promoting fuel efficiency by fiscal measures. The objective of the EU Council of Environmental Ministers and European Parliament was to achieve a new car fleet average CO 2 emissions rate of 120 grams per kilometer (g CO 2 /km) by 2005, or by 2010 at the latest. This objective was not met in 2005 and is unlikely to be met by 2010. The EU's Emissions Trading System (ETS) is a cornerstone of the EU's efforts to meet itsobligation under the Kyoto Protocol. The ETS covers more than 11,500 energy intensive facilities acrossthe 25 EU Member countries. Covered entities emit about 45% of the European Union's program. Whether the ETS shouldcontinue to cover the roughly 3,500 facilities under 10,000 metric tons annuallyremains a hotly debated issue. In choosing a gradual, incremental approach to emissions trading, the EU is relying on other programs to control greenhouse gas emissions in other sectors. Under the Kyoto Protocol, the then-existing 15 nations of the EU agreed to reduce theiremissions by 8% from 1990 levels under a collective arrangement called a "bubble" By 2001,collective greenhouse gas emissions in the EU were 2.3% below 1990 levels. The first trading period began January 1,2005. A second trading period is scheduled to begin in 2008, covering the period of the KyotoProtocol, with a third one planned for 2013. The trading program does not cover emissions of non-CO 2 greenhouse gases. economic terms, but are notinterchangeable. "Certified Emissions Reductions" (CERs) under the CDM mustbe issued by the Clean Development Mechanism Executive Board. Emissions Reduction Units (ERUs) under JI are transferred from one country toanother -- an exchange that cannot begin until the second trading period. Neither CERs nor ERUs are converted into EU-ETS allowances; rather, they are entered directly into the surrendered allowance table. Several EU countries have established carbon funds topursue JI and CDM opportunities. are in the range of 8-12 euro. In contrast, for CERsalready issued, or where the sellers take the risk, prices are in therange of 13-15euro. The real impact of CDM and JI on theEU-ETS system will not be fully known until the second trading period. It is unclear when the ETS will become as comprehensive as the European Commission would like. The anticipateddeficit between the second and third trading period for the original 15 Member States can becovered by trading with the newer Member States that anticipate a surplus. The EU-ETS has provisions for linking its trading scheme to the JointImplementation (JI) and Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) components of the Kyoto Protocol for countries that have ratified it. The availability of surplus credits created via JI and CDM is restricted by the EC linking directive that requires that such credits be "supplemental" to a country's domestic efforts. Each country is to spell out what "supplementsal" means in its NAP for the second trading period. commitment to Kyoto and any subsequent agreements rests on such aredirection with respect to new entrants and long-term investment. Concernsrevolve around ambiguity in the current definition of a combustion installation and the number of small installations covered under the ETS. The ETS applies to energyactivities for all sectors with combustion installations above 20 MW of thermal rated input, oil refineries, coke ovens, and, subject to size criteria, iron and steel, cement,lime, glass, ceramics, and pulp and paper facilities. glass, ceramics, and pulp and paper facilities. Finland and Swedenopted to include small district heating installations with a rated thermal input below20 MW. Germany is attempting to have some planned coal-fired powerplants, which will be large producers of CO 2 , able to opt-out of the ETS for 14 years. In addition to the consistency issue, small installations (between 20MW and50MW) account for 30% (about 3,000) of the total facilities covered under ETS. of the Kyoto Protocol. ETS only covers a percentage of the overall greenhouse gasemissions in the various Member States of the EU. Some sectors not covered by the ETS may grow faster than sectors covered by ETS, creating difficulties for compliance. In particular, the transportation area has become a major source of concern. It is too early to tell whether ETS market signal and individualcountries' NAPs will move investment in the appropriate direction. The focus is currently on the chemical, aviation, and aluminum industries. companies, governments, industryassociations, market intermediaries, and non-governmental organizations (NGOs) asked which of 12 topics they felt were most important to them. Table 3 indicates thetop five topics according to governments surveyed, along with their correspondingranking by other stakeholders. The five issues are discussed below. Source: European Commission, Review of EU Emissions Trading Scheme (November 2005), p. p. 1. The European Commission's review of the ETS was published in November 2005. evident than indiscussions of new entrants. Germany is proposing to permitnew coal-fired powerplants built between 2008-2012 to opt-out of the ETS for thefirst 14 years of operation. In its survey of ETSstakeholders, the EC found that 85% of all respondents favor a harmonized approach to new entrants and closures. Nearly 75% believed that those allowances should beprovided free (40) Likewise, an EU questionnaire conducted by theEuropean Environmental Agency's Topic Centre on Air and Climate Change indicated that most Member States would welcome harmonization of the treatment of new arrivals and closures across the EU. have to be covered by the non-ETS sectors --commercial, residential, and transportation. An assessment done for GreenpeaceInternational states that the German NAP II places "a disproportionate burden foremissions reductions on the non theETS sectors" in terms of meeting its commitmentsunder the EU Burden Sharing agreement. Policies to fill in the gap reportedly include oneplan to reduce emissions by 3 million tons by training German drivers to drive moreeconomically. The EU-ETS system involves an interplay between definitions and proceduresthat are EU-wide. system involves an interplay between definitions and proceduresthat are EU-wide and those that are nationwide. The groundwork for the system is theKyoto Protocol, which (1) defines the pollutants and sets the countries' emissionstargets. Within this framework, the EU defines the elementsthat make the EU-ETS work, including industry participants, the unit of trade, trading periods, settling and national inventory and compliance requirements. The EU also defines the scope of participation: Annex 1 countries may implementemissions trading programs and non-Annex 1 countries can participate through theCDM. improvements in emissions rates,CO 2 emissions in the EU continue to rise because of increased miles driven,increased size and weight of cars, and falling car occupancy rates. Attempts to balance the burden between ETS and non-ETS sectors have already created tension in Germany with respect to the second trading period. Germany is proposing to permitevery new power station built between 2008 and 2012 to opt out from CO 2 caps andthe ETS for 14 years. These emissions increases will have to be covered by the non-ATS sectors --commercial, residential, and business. the 2005-2008 NAPs producing anover-allocation of allowances, and one major Member State, Germany, attempting to direct its second NAP toward carbon-intensive, coal-fired electric generating facilities. Reluctance by countries to redirecttheir NAP's and an inconsistent price from the ETS make the long-term effect of theETS uncertain. Norway, a non-EU country, also has an emissions trading system that beganoperating on January 1, 2005. Norway's system covers 51 facilities in the energy andprocess sectors such as oil refining and iron and steel processing. only 20% ofFrance's greenhouse gas emissions are covered, compared with 69% of Estonia's emissions. National Allocation Plans (NAPs) are central to the EU's effort to achieve its Kyotoobligations. Each Member of the EU must submit a NAP that lays out its allocation scheme under the ETS. NAPs are assessed by the EC to determinecompliance with 11 criteria (12 for the second period) delineated in an annex to the emissionstrading directive. The EC harmonizes the NAPswith respect to penalties, allocation method (e.g., grandfathering), monitoring, andregistries with the goal of achieving the Kyoto targets. The EC does not have the authority to scrutinizeallocations at the facility level, so any allocation harmonization would be on avoluntary basis ("soft harmonization") One issue of particular interest is the effort to increase the use of "benchmarking" standards in setting allocations. Table 5 illustrates the scope of potentialharmonization issues facing the EU-ETS. EC'ssurvey of ETS stakeholders revealed that more than two-thirds of therespondents from the cement, aluminum, and chemical industries thoughtbenchmarking was an "interesting alternative" Less than a third of the respondentsfrom the pulp and paper industry and refineries thought so. In many ways, diversity between Member countries with respect to the ETSis inevitable. The final way in which the EU ETSdiffers from many other trading systems is in the devolution of allocation responsibilities, in this case to its 25 Member States. States. This was an essential part of thedeal that enabled the adoption of the Directive. Member States would have neverceded to the European Commission the power to distribute valuable assets to theirindustries. Nor is the EU ETS unique in devolving powers of allocation: it is typicalin a number of US systems. Moreover, there are different degrees of harmonization,applicable to different aspects of theEU ETS. The economic value of allowances is nowhere more evident than indiscussions of new entrants. of the treatmentof new entrants and closures across the EU. Analogous to the U.S. acid rain program, EU states have set up reserves toprovide allowances to new entrants. In general, these allowances are provided free,as that is widely seen as helping boost new investment. Most states have yet to dip intotheir reserves for new entrants; however, the importance of the reserve will increase as the ETS enters its second, and eventually third, trading period. The manner inwhich new entrants receive allowances may have a significant effect on the long-termdirection of investment.