Previously, the federal-aid highway program had focused on completing and preserving the Interstate Highway system. New programs, planning processes, and management systems are intended to help ensure that the states’ transportation plans are intermodal, environmentally sound, and energy efficient. The Congestion Mitigation and Air Quality Improvement Program directs funds to transportation projects in clean air nonattainment areas. ISTEA also provides for increased emphasis on mobility for the elderly, disabled, and economically disadvantaged. It also embodied quality-of-life objectives, stating that the nation’s transportation system should be economically efficient. Section 1098 of ISTEA tasked us with reviewing the process for distributing highway funds to the states. A review of the program’s objectives could be structured to recognize differences among highways and the federal role associated with important highways, such as those included in the NHS. Regardless of the factors chosen, some states will experience disadvantages that the construction of a formula may not be able to compensate for. Which states are negatively affected changes with the factors choosing and the percentage weights assigned to various factors. percent of a state’s apportionment for the Interstate Maintenance and NHS programs can be transferred to the state's surface transportation program. The flexible funding provisions have allowed decisionmakers at the state and regional level to decide for themselves whether to allocate transportation funds to highway or transit projects. In fiscal year 1995, $2,160.6 million in highway funds had been transferred to transit projects and $2.2 million in transit funds had gone applicable, any modifications to that funding realized through equity adjustments. funding for the four programs is fixed over the 6-year authorization period for ISTEA. The data underlying the distribution of highway funds to the states are generally outdated, unresponsive to changing conditions, and often not reflective of the nation’s highway system or its usage. Addressing the states’ highway needs, such as the miles of highway in need of repair and the deterioration of the highway associated with traffic loads, is a key goal of the ISTEA program. The first two objectives translate into formula components that are at the core of the distribution process. Federal highway funds are provided to the states through the Federal Highway Administration. The money is distributed through various formula calculations and, to a lesser extent, through congressionally designated projects. Funds from these sources are collected from users and credited to the Highway Trust Fund for highway and mass transit projects or related activities. The fund is divided into a highway account and a mass transit account. DOT forecasts that the income to the highway account will total $20.5 billion in fiscal year 1996. The federal-aid systems—designated routes on which federal funds may be used—were at the core of the federal- aid highway program. Interstate. fuel consumption reflects travel on all roads, not just on the federal-aid system or on roads under a state’s jurisdiction. Fuel consumption patterns may differ across states because of the urban-rural population mix, the amount of travel done under congested conditions, differences in physical conditions. These data are reported by states monthly and adjusted at year's end. Annual data are generally available within 6 to 9 months of the close of the calendar year. It would not be a precise measure for apportioning funds to specific groups of roads. of a federal-aid system does not mean the road is owned, operated, or maintained by the federal government. The designation is simply the first step in establishing the eligibility of selected state and local roads for federal assistance. Previously, federal aid was apportioned to Interstate, primary, secondary, and urban highways. The NHS is the centerpiece of ISTEA, and the system is expected to be the major focus for theFederal-aid highway program into the 21st century. The Interstate System is a component of the NHS. well as the private sector, proposed to the Congress in December 1993 an NHS network of about 159,000 miles. This network is about 17 percent of the approximately 950,000-mile federal-aid network. For other roads eligible for federal assistance, a program with the characteristics of a block grant, the Surface Transportation Program (STP), provides financial assistance. In addition, ISTEA continued authorizations for a separate STP program that would provide financial assistance for roads that are not eligible for block grants. estimation of this measure, thus invalidating comparisons with data from previous years. Until the reliability of these data is improved, their use as an indicator for distributing federal highway funds would be suspect and arbitrary. An alternative measure, the International Roughness Index, is a more objective measure of pavement condition (roughness), and FHWA expects this data source to play a more prominent role in the future. In 1993, the most recent year for which data are available on pavement condition, 37 states used the Internationalroughness Index to measure pavement condition on Interstate highways. improvements in the percentage of the state’s pavement condition rated as “good” under FHWA’S classification system. One concern with providing incentives for improvements in highway conditions is that the data from the states on the condition and performance of their roadways are not always reliable, making it more difficult to equitably distribute such incentive payments. To emphasize the condition of the nation's most heavily traveled highways, such rewards could be further refined to focus on improvements in the Condition of the NHS. The AASHTO Policy Review Committee observed that data on vehicle miles traveled have been statistically designed for a high level of measurable accuracy. A state with a high number of vehicle miles travel would also likely have high needs for repair of the Interstate. Another proxy of system use is motor fuel consumption. Also, in the Faucett study, vehicle miles travelers garnered one of the highest correlation values, 0.913, of all the factors related to Interstate repair needs. The AAS HTO Policy that they tend to be quite reliable. performance measures geared to preserving the existing infrastructure would help FHWA ensure that the states do not neglect needed preservation and maintenance. A well-maintained system is the necessary foundation for pursuing the myriad goals for the system, which include economic development, enhanced mobility, and improved air quality. Without such a foundation, system enhancements such as alleviating congestion and improving the efficient movement of goods may not be possible, the authors say. They say performance expectations need to be established for preservation and Maintenance and other important goals. Lane miles are a good measure of the extent of the highway system. Using lane miles as a factor for apportioning highway funds was endorsed by a Policy Review Committee of the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) In fiscal year 1991, the committee noted that a measure of lane miles is probably the simplest and most efficient potential apportionment factor on which to obtain accurate information. The committee further noted that annual data are generally available within 6 to 9 months of the close of the calendar year. 1986 and discussed in chapter 2. This study indicated a strong correlation, particularly for repairs of the Interstate, between highway needs and lane miles and vehicle miles traveled. Some states believe that center-line miles, not lane miles, are a more appropriate factor for distributing highway funds. However, this measure does not capture any information on the various widths of highways, because a measure of lane miles does not include vehicle miles. The following sections discuss the advantages and disadvantages of certain proxies in more detail. New components could be added to recognize the states’ capacity to fund highway needs from state resources, the states' level of effort in meeting their own needs, and geographic differences in the cost of maintaining existing highway networks. Although similar factors have been applied in other programs, they have not been applied to highway programs in the past. FHWA did provide a report to the Congress in 1994 that addresses measures for assessing how much of their available resources the states or local areas devote to surface transportation. FHWA interviewed officials from 34 states and the District of Columbia. We also held meetings with state transportation officials in our Washington, D.C., offices. In addition, we met with representatives from various transportation organizations. While we were interviewing, FHWA also conducted research on the current formula and on future apportionment issues in the U.S. and abroad. The results of the research were published in a book, "The State of the Interstate Highway System," published by the University of Wisconsin-Madison. The existing federal-aid highway formula is the vehicle for distributing billions of dollars annually for highway construction and repair and related activities to the 50 states, the District of Columbia, and Puerto Rico. Since the mid-1980s, a number of organizations (including GAO) have suggested fundamental changes in the formula for apportioning these funds. Chapter 2 of this report evaluates the current apportionment formula. Chapter 3 discusses a process by which the Congress may reconsider the formula during the next reauthorization. The task of revising the formula for distributing highway funds will be difficult because needs vary across the country and objectives conflict among themselves. The analysis presented in this report is intended to provide the Congress with formula alternatives that reflect the key objectives governing the current federal-aid highway formula. Many individual factors making up a formula are capable of supporting the principle of distributing funds. For example, relief of congestion is more pressing in urban areas of the country, whereas connecting rural areas is more important in sparsely populated areas. In 1986, Jack Faucett Associates issued a report evaluating alternative apportionment formulas for highway funds. Using this tool, the report showed, for example, that a state with a large number of vehicle miles traveled on the Interstate would also have a high requirement for repairs to the Interstate. Similarly, the states that contributed large amounts of revenue to the Highway Trust Fund, reflecting substantial use of motor fuels, were also also included in the formula. However, the Congress elected not to change the basic formula structure. The factors used to apportion certain highway funds were not closely related to the highway system. A state’s land area was originally included as a factor in the distribution formula in 1916. Postal mileage was added as a formula factor in 1916 to provide a constitutional justification for federal involvement in highways (the power to establish post offices and post roads). By 1919, changes to the formula had been made and land area no longer bears a close relationship to future highway needs, namely the need for new construction. post offices and post roads). By 1919, changes to the highway legislation had ended the need for this justification. Since postal mileage is computed on the basis of the distance traveled both on and off the federal-aid highway system, it is unrelated to either the extent of the highway network or its use. Population figures for formula use were derived every 10 years from the census. As a result, changes in the states’ populations were accounted for only at 10-year intervals. This problem has been exacerbated under ISTEA. The link between population and the states’ highway needs is questionable. The approach does not recognize that goods produced in sparsely populated areas ultimately must be transported to dense areas. Officials from these states maintain that the promotion of interstate commerce should be a principal objective of with highway needs. However, the return-to-origin approach would not be universally attractive, as a number of states would lose funds. For instance, those states whose fuel usage is low relative to their land area and extent of highway network would be financially hurt. Federal funds should target the highways that tend to carry national, not local, traffic. Factors reflecting a system’s extent and use in isolation do not provide a complete picture on the states’ needs. Introducing neutral factors, such as population, into the formula further diversifies the mix of factors and alters the amounts the states receive. The analysis that follows focuses on two of these factors: interstate commerce and the state of the highway system in the state where the funds are to be spent. of 64 percent in Massachusetts. The disadvantages of basing a formula on actual needs can be remedied through the use of proxies of need, such as those reflecting the extent or usage of a highway system. Such proxies have the advantage of being relatively objective and neutral. A host of other factors—such as population, climatic conditions (daily mean temperature, annual snowfall, and annual precipitation) could also be used to determine how highway funds are distributed. Yet, as the Faucett study demonstrated, a low correlation exists between highway needs as reported by FHWA and climatic variables and per capita income. Population and population density would be preferable alternatives as proxies. These proxies were recommended because they were perceived as avoiding the perverse effects tied to a system’s extent and usage. Population data, however, also have limitations. As noted by the Executive Director of AASHTO, the link between highway funding and traffic congestion is not as clear-cut as it first appears. The formula uses factors such as vehicle miles traveled, lane miles, and fuel consumption, it encourages behavior that runs counter to the objectives of reducing congestion and improving air quality. amount of travel done under congested conditions, differences in physical terrain, and fuel purchases by transients in those states with lower fuel taxes, among other things. While vehicle miles traveled and motor fuel consumption correlate well with system usage, they do have some drawbacks. New Jersey transportation officials, for instance, noted that such factors reward energy consumption and air pollution and penalize those who successfully enact measures to reduce the use of single-occupant vehicles. As in the case of the factors related to the system's extent, the disadvantages associated with measures of the system’s usage could be at least partially counteracted by. those states are often insufficient to construct, maintain, and operate such networks. Second, state officials have questioned the wisdom of selecting a formula factor that is geared predominantly to fuel use. They argue that such an approach rewards greater use of motor fuel and as such contradicts federal goals of improving air quality and conserving energy. Legislation could still specify that the returned funds be used in certain proportions for certain programs, such as the NHS. The return could function as (1) a simple return of funds, in which states would be exempt. One possibility would be to use factors that relate to the states’ actual needs. In this approach, the states with the poorest highway conditions would be granted a larger share of the funds. But a formula based on direct measures of need could prove problematic. The use of actual needs can foster a perverse incentive by potentially encouraging the states to permit their highway infrastructure to worsen in order to capture a greater share of federal highway funds. The disadvantages of basing a formula on actual needs include that the condition of highways and bridges varies considerably among the states. 10 percent of funds could be set aside before the remaining funds were distributed to the states. Payments drawn from this set-aside could be used to provide bonuses to advance quality-of-life objectives. These and similar objectives are all laudable; however, constraint in selecting the objectives may be warranted to prevent the dilution of funds that could result from attempting to meet numerous objectives. One approach to distributing the set-Aside moneys would be to direct the funds to specific objectives.  questions have been raised about the wisdom of essentially rewarding states for their nonattainment status. A second approach to directing set-aside funding towards specific goals is to treat the funds as incentive payments. Incentive payments, as the name implies, do not redress shortcomings, but instead reward desired behaviors or accomplishments. For example, shared set-Aside funding could be used to reward states that make notable and measurable improvements in the percentage of the state’s pavement condition rated high. Alaska and Hawaii could lose 50 percent or more of their highway funds under any of the scenarios. Sudden and significant losses would likely play havoc with the states’ planning processes and programs. To help temper the effects of changes in the formula, any new formula might include a component designed to place a cap on the maximum percentage of loss that any individual state would be expected to bear as a result of the changes. For example, a maximum-loss cap of 20 percent might be established. found that vehicle miles traveled and motor fuel consumption reflected the extent of highway use. We recognized that changing the factors used in certain highway apportionment formulas would result in some states’ receiving more or less funds than they did under the then-current formulas. We suggested that to lessen these impacts, a transition period could be provided during which the full effect of the formulas would be gradually introduced. the use of mileage for apportioning future highway funds because such usage could reward expansion of the system. Money will be invested in transportation, state and local governments need to have greater authority and flexibility to decide which projects are most important. DOT has stated that it will provide an authorization proposal for such changes at an appropriate time. For some programs the dollar amount apportioned by formula has little practical meaning because the states have substantial flexibility to transfer funds from one program category to another. For example, with the Secretary of Transportation’s approval, up to 100 percent of a state’S apportionment for the Interstate Maintenance and percentage weights assigned to various factors. Congress will have to reach a consensus on the national objective(s) that are critical for the highway program to address. If an alternative formula is adopted, Congress will need to decide whether a formula is the appropriate vehicle for addressing these objectives. The Congress will also need to determine the most representative factors and corresponding weight to be assigned to those factors. The U.S. Department of Transportation has proposed changes in the system for delivering grants, as noted in chapter 2. Trust Fund, reflecting substantial use of motor fuels, were also shown to require more repairs of the Interstate. Equity adjustments were designed to address the concerns of the states that contribute a greater share of highway user taxes than they receive in federal-aid highway funds. In addition, another adjustment provides each state with each state’s own share of federal highway funds, as well as an equal share from the federal government. The correlation analysis was reported in terms of values between zero and one. The closer the value is to 1, the closer the correlation between the factor and the need for repairs. The Donor State Bonus compares each state’s projected contributions to the Highway Trust Fund in the fiscal year with the apportionments that the state will receive in that fiscal year. A portion of formula funding could be states’ returns on these contributions, which have also been considered a key measure of equity. If the formula were restructured to encompass a pure return-to-origin approach, each state's contribution to the Trust Fund would simply be returned to that state. Some state transportation officials could be expected to support this approach because it would guarantee that a substantial amount of revenues collected in their states would be returned. Federal-aid highway funds are apportioned among the states in 13 funding categories. Four programs account for 70 percent of the funds apportioning in fiscal year 1995. Factors that influenced the historical targets for funding are not closely related to the highway system’s needs, says FHWA report. Alternative factors, such as lane miles and annual contributions to the Highway Trust Fund, are more closely aligned with highway needs, FHwa report says.. Were available at the time of our analysis. We conducted our review from January 1994 through October 1995. On the basis of the formula, funding is provided for eight programs, including the NHS and STP. Funding for the other program categories is also based on separate calculations. A portion of formula funding could be devoted to social goals by, for example, directing a portion of funding to selected purposes such as improving air quality and conserving energy. Finally, a share of funds could be set aside and used to protect the states’ historical funding shares. The formula objectives may be used singly or in combination and may further be targeted to specific program categories. The Congress has used funding adjustments to improve equity among the states. These equity adjustments occur towards the end of the 13-step apportionment process. In fiscal year 1995, the equity funding categories increased the amount of federal highway funds apportioned to 41 states and the District of Columbia. The amount of funding that the majority of states received through the highway formula process was ultimately increased by these equity adjustments. The changes, proposed in DOT’s fiscal year 1996 budget justification, were preceded by the statement that if less federal money will be invested in transportation, state and local governments highway funds. Connecticut, Hawaii, Maryland, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, South Carolina, Virginia, and Washington—and Puerto Rico did not receive funding through equity adjustments in fiscal year 1995. For the other 41 states and the District of Columbia, the total amount of federal highway funding apportioned in fiscalyear 1995 was ultimately increased by equity adjustments. Funding for demonstration projects is distinct from apportionments to the states in that the authorized funding for such projects is not distributed by can also yield a low payoff for a variety of reasons. for Interstate Construction. These funds were excluded since the Interstate Construction program’s final apportionment was made at the beginning of fiscal year 1995. Under the second alternative, the total amount of funds ($18.1 billion) apportioned to the states would be returned. Under this alternative, 24 states would gain an average of $86 million, while 26 would gain on average $67 million. For these recipients, the average loss would be $73 million.Under the third alternative, all funds would be return to theStates, including funds for Interstate Construction and demonstration projects. Under a return-to-origin approach, $17.8 billion of the total $19.1 billion would be returned to the source. This amount would represent all the funds distributed to the states in fiscal year 1995. Under a distribution of funds, FHWA would oversee the programs for which the funds were returned. These funds were excluded since the Interstate Construction funds were not part of the original plan. Under the distribution, states would be exempt from any or most federal oversight, or (2) a return of funds. $79 million; the greatest loss would be $359 million (Pennsylvania), and the smallest loss is $1.6 million (Alabama) The scenario resulting in the greatest adverse impact on the states produced a combined loss of $2.4 billion. Alternatively, other categories of funding, such as those supporting highway demonstration projects (currently commanding about $1 billion per year), could be redirected to provide safeguards against sudden losses. Reauthorization of the federal-aid highway program presents the Congress with the opportunity to review the objectives associated with providing federal highway funds. Table 3.1 provides an outline of the factors to be considered in the two alternatives. The analysis focuses on two possible blends of proxies for need. The first alternative assumes that 100 percent of total highway funds are distributed to the states based equally on total lane miles and total vehicle miles traveled. Under the first alternative, 33 states would receive an average of $64 million more than they were apportioned in fiscal year 1995. 17 states, along with the District of Columbia and Puerto Rico, would lose $111 million on average. dollar gain would be $102 million; $643 million would be the high end of the range (California) Twenty-seven states and the District of Columbia would receive less funding. In total, about 9 percent of the highway funds would be redistributed. While many social objectives are probably best addressed through means other than the highway apportionment formula, a portion of highway funds might nonetheless be retained to advance specific objectives and/or to counterbalance some of the potential disadvantages of the principal formula factors. states would gain an average of $86 million, while 26 states along with the District of Columbia and Puerto Rico would lose anAverage of $74 million. The current funding level for the STP represents about 40 percent of the total funds authorized for these programs. The two alternatives outlined in table 3.3 and described below maintain this distribution of funds. The proposed distribution would be based on needs-based and return-to-origin approaches along the existing split between STP and two other primary highway programs. In fiscal year 1995, 70 percent of the funding under the formula went to the four largest programs. Separate calculations determine each state’s share of funds for the Interstate Maintenance Program, Bridge Program, and NHS. These program-specific calculations are essentially meaningless because each state's ultimate share of funding for all four programs is fixed. Not only is the total funding for the four major programs fixed over the life of ISTEA, but the funding for two largest programs, the NHS and STP, together accounting for 40 percent, are also fixed. NHS must be offset by a corresponding, reciprocal change in the STP funds the state receives for that same year. Figure 2.2 illustrates this zero-sum game through a hypothetical example involving 2 years and two states. In the example, both State A and State B experience shifts in their apportioned funding between fiscal years 1993 and 1994. State A loses funds for the Interstate Maintenance and Bridge programs, while State B gains funds in both of these categories. However, for both states these shifts are rendered irrelevant because they are offset by the states’ STP funding. having the lowest return (apportionments compared with contributions), each state is brought up to the level of return for those states with the next highest levels of return. This process is repeated successively for each state until the funds authorized for this funding category in that fiscal year are exhausted. Finally, a fourth adjustment category, referred to as Hold Harmless, addresses a different objective—preserving the states’ historical funding share, recognizing the legislative compromises embedded in ISTEA. For example, this legislatively prescribed funding percentage is state’s funding was to be based on the historical share of funds the state received from major programs. In fiscal year 1995, equity adjustments accounted for $2.8 billion (16 percent) of the approximately $18 billion distributed to the states. Only nine states—Colorado, Connecticut, Hawaii, Maryland, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, South Carolina, Virginia, and Massachusetts receive annually. These funding percentage shares can result in a state’s receiving an addition to the regular apportionments. For example, this legislatively prescribed funding percentage is 1.74 for Alabama, 0.41 for Delaware and 0.69 for Idaho. for the state in question would be reinstated to 80 percent of what the state would otherwise have received. The cap could be either permanent or established for a set period of time during the transition to a new funding amount. If the existing, intricate equity adjustments were replaced with a single, simple cap, the funds devoted to these equity adjustments in fiscal year 1995—$2.8 billion—would more than offset the states’ combined losses in that year under all of the existing arrangements. The funds devoted. to these Equity Adjustment Cap could be used to shield the states from severe losses. A prime example is the existing Congestion Mitigation and Air Quality Improvement (CMAQ) program, which directs funds to states with particularly severe problems in air quality. The advantage of such a program is that it focuses funding on precisely those areas with the greatest needs. The disadvantage is that, as occurs with the needs-based formula factors discussed earlier in this chapter, directing funding toStates with specific needs can foster a perverse incentive. In the case of the CMAQ program, questions have been raised. adjustments. The Congress can further adjust the federal highway funds a state receives by authorizing specific projects, commonly referred to as demonstration projects. Funding for these demonstration projects is not distributed by formula. Rather, the Congress requires that particular projects receive a specified amount of funding. The amount of federal funds authorized for demonstration projects has grown since 1982. While some demonstration projects address critical transportation problems and can be considered nationally significant, authorizing a large number of such projects could prove troublesome. The formula for apportioning federal-aid highway funds established in ISTEA is a complex arithmetic tool used by FHWA. authorizing a large number of such projects could prove troublesome. Demonstration projects often cost more than expected. Future finances could be drained if extra federal funds are needed to cover the cost of completing the projects. The federal funding and state matching funds together accounted for only 37 percent of the projects’ total anticipated costs, according to a 1991 report by the House Committee on Appropriations. The report was based on testimony in 1993 and 1995 before the Subcommittee on Transportation, House committee on Appropriations, and the House Transportation Committee.