In fiscal year 2012, the Reserve Officers’ Training Corps (ROTC) program produced over 9,000 active duty, guard, and reserve officers. Table 6 provides a listing of the number of officers produced by unit, school location, and service. Table 7 presents the Army’s enrollment information as of November 2012, table 8 presents the Navy’S enrollment information in November 2012 and table 9 presents the Air Force's enrollment information. The enrollment information is alphabetized by state or U.S. territory and then by unit. about 53,000 students enrolled across all years of study in 2012. The Army had over 33,000Students enrolled, the Navy had over 6,000 enrolled, and the Air Force had over 14,000 Students enrolled. GAO: Data on Officers’ Commissioning Programs is Insufficiently Reliable and Needs to be Corrected. Military Personnel: Strategic Plan Needed to be Strengthened to Meet the Needs of Military Personnel. Military personnel: Strategic plan needed to meet the needs of military personnel. D.C.: March 8, 2007. Military Personnel: Strategic Plan Needed to Address Army’s Emerging Officer Accession and Retention Challenges. GAO-07-224. Reserve Officers’ Training Corps: Questions Related to Organizational Restructuring.GAO/NSIAD-96-56. Officer Commissioning Programs: More Oversight and Coordination Needed. GAo/NSiAD-93-37. Reserve officers’ training corps: Less Need for Officers Provides Opportunity for Significant Savings. Army Cadet Command, Fort Knox, Kentucky Deputy Chief of Naval Operations, Manpower Personnel Education and Training, Arlington, Virginia Naval Service Training Command, Great Lakes, Illinois Department of the Air Force, Jeanne M. Holm Center for Officer Accessions and Citizen Development, Montgomery, Alabama Marine Corps Recruiting Command, Quantico, Virginia We conducted this performance audit from February 2013 to November 2013 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our conclusions. ROTC is the largest of the three major officer commissioning programs for DOD. ROTC programs prepare college and university students to serve as officers in the military services. Most states have a unit from each service located within the state. Each unit may support students at more than one school. The military services typically operate ROTc programs using a 5-year production cycle, beginning the year prior to school entry and culminating in the graduation year. The services’ headquarters determine the number of newly commissioned officers needed annually. In fiscal years 2008 through 2012, each service came within a few percentage points of meeting or exceeding its overall ROTC officer production goals. The services generally met these overall production goals for newly commissioned officers. In the event that an over- or underproduction of officers is anticipated, eachService correspondingly adjusts the number of people they plan to produce. The Army and the Air Force each exceeded theirProduction goals for 3 of the 5 years we studied. The Navy’s goal, which includes officers for the Marine Corps, ranged from 1,163 to 1,387. programs met goals and minimum requirements for producing officers over a 5-year period. We obtained and analyzed ROTC unit production data from each of the military services for fiscal years 2008 through 2012. We compared overall officer production with other major commissioning sources. We also reviewed fiscal year 2012 staff data of military personnel located at each unit and DOD’s fiscal year2012 composite rates to determine the cost ofMilitary personnel per each ROTc unit in fiscal year 2013. In addition, we reviewed the fiscal year 2014 budget for each service. The military services’ ROTC programs each came within a few percentage points of meeting or exceeding the annual officer production goals that they established to meet their respective authorized end strengths. Each service reported that various factors may affect their ability to meet these goals, and that they have faced challenges commissioning officers for certain occupational specialties. In addition, half of all RotC units did not produce the minimum average annual production of officers over a 5-year period required by DOD to justify investment in an ROTc unit. DOD's production requirement does not take into account a service's investment in a particular ROTC unit. It does not account for cost-related factors, such as the differences in the cost of tuition for public and private colleges. The tuition cost difference is not insignificant, with some schools costing six times more than the annual average in-state tuition of about $7,100 for a 4-year college or university. Despite the significant variance in tuition, all RotC units are subject to the same numerical production requirement regardless of the actual cost. The report says DOD stopped enforcing a requirement for annual reports from the services identifying the cost time without justification. DOD concurred with each of the report's five recommendations and estimated actions would be completed by July 2015. We are sending copies of this report to the Secretary of Defense, the Under Secretary of defense for Personnel and Readiness, the Secretaries of the Army, the Navy, and the Air Force, and appropriate congressional committees. We encourage DOD to begin taking actions now to facilitate implementation of these recommendations as soon as possible. told us that they do not review and approve the services’ methodologies for proposed unit closures because they see it as encroaching on their authority. Given that DOD Instruction 1215.08 requires this approval, which is to occur when a military department proposes closure of a particular unit, it is difficult to understand how this methodology approval function, in connection with a proposed decision of a military service, could be viewed as an encroachment. DOD officials did not further elaborate on or provide additional support for their position. Navy officials pointed out that the U.S. News and World report ranking correlates to the quality of applicants to the Navy Nuclear Propulsion Program. It is not clear specifically how the Navy made that correlation, nor why the Navy added this ranking for its 2012 review. We recognize that the services need some flexibility to prioritize factors on the basis as one of twelve factors included in its unit closure consideration process. We also clarified that because the services are required to subjectively determine how factors should be applied, these factors can change over time. used by each service to identify units for potential closure. In fiscal year 2012, the Navy included the U.S. News and World Report ranking of the schools associated with the units as 1 of 12 factors in its closure considerations. The Air Force included “strategic partnerships” as an important consideration. Neither service identified specifically how these factors correlate to the factors in DOD’s instruction, defined how they contribute, and incorporated them into the closure consideration process, the report says. number and location of units in an area or state where the unit being considered for closure resides. However, several of these factors, which officials told us are the measures they currently use to assess the programs, are not clearly defined. DOD’s instruction directs the the same numerical production requirement regardless of the actual cost each service incurs at a particular college or university. Because such cost data are not consistently accounted for, it is not clear how the production requirement can be used to justify DOD's investment. We reviewed the fiscal year 2014 budget documentation to identify the average operation and maintenance cost (excluding scholarships) per ROTC unit in fiscal year 2012. We determined that these data were sufficiently reliable for determining the extent to which the military services are meeting RotC production goals and unit level requirements as well as the cost per unit. We followed up with service officials to attempt to reconcile these differences. We reviewed relevant legislation, specifically sections 2101- 2111b of Title 2101. We used these data to determine the cost of ROTCs that did not meet DOD minimum production requirements. requirement for annual reports from the services identifying the cost and budget for their respective ROTC programs. OSD removed reporting requirements related to internally generated oversight reports. To regain some of the information on program visibility that it no longer obtains through the reports, OSD officials told us that they instead use data from service budget submissions to estimate cost data that is less specific than the data that were previously obtained through the services’ automatic submission of these reports. Also, the department says it is using data from the service budget to estimate ROTc program cost data. the Navy conducted 4 evaluations over 3 years; and the Air Force conducted 4. evaluations over 8 years. These evaluations provided information about individual ROTC unit performance, with a focus on officer production. However, the evaluations did not assess the overall ROTc program against strategic goals and objectives. Without routine evaluations that measure progress toward strategic goals, decision makers cannot determine the cost-effectiveness or efficiency of RotC programs over time, the authors say. The authors conclude that results-oriented management is critical to the increased use of performance information. routine and systematic and have not yielded closures that service officials believe are needed. The military services’ ROTC programs have, over the past decade, conducted a total of 11 evaluations. These practices indicate that a body of evidence is more valuable to decision makers than a single study, the authors say. In addition, their past work has shown that key elements of a results-oriented oversight framework include communicating results and using performance information to make decisions for improvement. The authors say this is best facilitated when organizations reach out early to gain buy-in and engage in regular communication. The military services have evaluated aspects of their respective ROTC programs. However, the evaluations are not routine and systematic and have not yielded closures that service a total of 11. The services have not established a systematic process to routinely evaluate ROTc program performance using comprehensive performance measures. Until these measures are established, the services will have limited information available about their RotsC programs’ overall progress toward their goals. The Secretary of Defense should direct the Under Secretary of defense for Personnel and Readiness to establish a systematic program to evaluate RotC program performance. The services have conducted a total of 11 evaluations to identify units for consolidation or closure. The evaluations have largely occurred on an ad hoc basis and are narrowly focused on assessing the productivity of individual ROTC units, rather than the overall performance of the program. DOD’s management of RotC programs is hampered by not having performance measures that provide a comprehensive understanding of the overall cost-effectiveness and efficiency of R OTC programs. The Army and the Air Force did not consider any ROTc costs, and the Navy considered only the cost of tuition. by each service in recent assessments of unit productivity. Although the services’ evaluations of ROTC units yielded recommendations for consolidation or closures, no closures have occurred as a result. The military services have been unsuccessful in completing any of these politically sensitive consolidations or closures in part because and prior the services do not proactively and periodically engage congressional stakeholders on RotC program performance. DOD Instruction 1215.08 does not require congressional notification about ROTc program performance and that the decision to close units is the prerogative of the Secretary. DOD’s instruction gives service Secretaries discretion on which units to close. Until the services conduct routine evaluations of ROTC programs that are based on a comprehensive set of performance measures, the programs risk having more units than needed or units that are not most effectively located. Clearly defined and comprehensive performance measures and routine evaluations using these measures against strategic goals and objectives would give OSD and the services tools to identify, collect, and evaluate a range of relevant performance information. This information, particularly when available over a period of time, would allow OSD to recognize the programs’ accomplishments and balance competing priorities. OSD and the military services are generally assigned responsibility for conducting oversight of ROTC programs. Although the Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness conducts some oversight functions such as setting policy, DOD’s Instruction 1215.08 does not specify department-level review of performance measures. Further, services do not consistently communicate with key stakeholders, such as members of Congress and schools, about performance. This has contributed to difficulty gaining political support for such closures, the authors say. The authors recommend that the secretary of Defense direct the under secretary to take the following three actions. The military services have had difficulty gaining buy-in for recommendations to close dozens of underproductive ROTC units. The military services do not have an effective strategy for communicating with stakeholders such as Congress or school administrators. Stakeholder involvement is best facilitated when organizations reach out early to and address the retention or disestablishment of under productive units. Clear lines of responsibility when combined with performance measures provide leadership and decision makers with the transparency and authority required to make difficult decisions about the program, the authors say. Military services' reporting to DOD and Congress inadequate to make necessary judgments on ROTC program effectiveness, authors say. Army and Navy officials told us that they currently do not regularly communicate with school administrators about the level of officer production at their respective college or university. Air Force officials tell us they provide written notification annually to participating colleges and universities on their level of officers production. Until the military services establish a formal strategy to communicate with key stakeholders on RotC program performance, the services will find it difficult to obtain the support that is needed to make the necessary changes, they say. Navy, and the Air Force, and appropriate congressional committees. GAO staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix V. To assess the extent to which the military services’ ROTC programs met goals and minimum requirements for producing officers over the age of 25. To see the full report, visit the GAO website at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staff have any questions regarding this report, please contact me at (202) 512-3604.