check or money order made out to the Superintendent of Documents, when necessary. VISA and MasterCard credit cards are accepted, also. Orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent. U.S. General Accounting Office P.O. Box 6015 Gaithersburg, MD 20884-6015 Room 1100 700 4th St. NW (corner of 4th and G Sts. NW) Orders may also be placed by calling (202) 512-6000 or by using fax number (301) 258-4066. issues a list of newly available reports and testimony. To receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list from the past 30 days, please call (202) 512-6000 using a touchtone phone. A recorded menu will provide information on how to obtain these lists. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. In the U.S. call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255. This is because buyouts usually result in the separation of employees with higher salaries and benefits than those who are separated through RIFs. Because of the rights of higher graded employees to “bump” or “retreat” to lower-graded positions during a RIF, employees separated are frequently not those who were in the positions originally targeted for elimination. We found that buyouts could generate up to 50 percent more in net savings than Rifs over the 5-year period following separation. such situations, buyouts or RIFs may be necessary. In comparing the costs and savings of buyouts and Rifs, our analysis showed that buyouts offered greater savings than RIF's, except when RIFed employees do not bump and retreat and are eligible to retire. This concludes my prepared statement. I would be pleased to answer any questions you or Members of the Subcommittee may have. The first copy of each GAO report and testimony is free. Additional copies are $2 each. non-Department of Defense (DOD) executive branch agencies to pay buyouts to employees who agreed to resign, retire, or take voluntary early retirement by March 31, 1995. DOD, though subject to the act’s governmentwide FTE ceilings, has the authority, under earlier legislation, to offer buyouts through September 30, 1999. For both DOD and non-DOD agencies, the buyout payment was the lesser of $25,000 or an employee's severance pay entitlement. According to OPM data, more than 112,500 buyouts had been paid governmentwide. buyout legislation, the buyouts appeared to have helped agencies downsize without adversely affecting workforce diversity. Of the nearly 83,000 employees who were paid buyouts from fiscal year 1993 through March 31, 1995, 52 percent were white males. The percentage of women in the workforce increased from 43.4 percent at the end of fiscal year 1992 to 44.6 percent by March 1, 1995. Likewise, during that same time period, the percentage of minorities went from 27.9 percent to 28. 9 percent of the workforce. The federal workforce is being reduced at a faster pace than was called for by the Workforce Restructuring Act. The act mandated a ceiling of 2,043,300 FTE positions for fiscal year 1995. By the end of fiscal year 1997, the administration’s budget calls for the federal workforce to be nearly 53,000 positions below the ceiling. DOD absorbed nearly three-quarters of the FTE reductions in fiscal year 1994 and over half of the governmentwide reductions in Fiscal Year 1995. Some agencies may need to pare down their workforces more than others as budgets are reduced, programs are dropped, and/or missions are changed. In such circumstances, some agencies may not be able to meet workforce reduction goals through attrition. Other downsizing strategies, such as buyouts or RIFs, may be necessary. do so 3 years earlier. If it were to reduce at this pace, NASA has said that it not be refilled by government or contractor personnel. Projected savings would be reduced by reducing management control positions. The Federal Workforce Restructuring Act of 1994 (P.L. 103-226) placed annual ceilings on executive branch full-time equivalent (FTE) positions from fiscal years 1994 through 1999. The act allowed non-Department of Defense (DOD) executive branch agencies to pay buyouts in fiscal year 1995. In fiscal year 1997, DOD is expected to absorb all of the FTE reductions made that year while the non-DOD workforce is expectedto increase by a net total of 0.2 percent. The subcommittee discussed the progress being made in downsizing the federal workforce and agencies’ use of buyouts. It also looked at the cost and savings implications of buyout versus reductions-in-force (RIF) The panel also looked into the demographic results of the buyouts and the extent to which the mandated workforce reduction goals could be met through attrition. The panel concluded by looking at the results to date of federal downsizing efforts and the costs and savings associated with the buyout program. NASA has said that it would anticipate that RIFs would be necessary. Study finds that, over a 5-year period, buyouts would generally result in more savings to taxpayers. This is because buyouts usually result in the separation of employees. The study was published in the journal of the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, which is published by the Association for Aeronautical and Space Studies (AAS). AAS is a nonprofit that promotes aerospace and space exploration in the United States. The percentage of supervisors at DOD agencies dipped from 12.7 percent of the workforce to 11.9 percent. All but one of the other designated management control positions increased somewhat. Acquisition positions showed no change. Non-DOD agencies came only slightly closer to meeting the NPR goals. Some employees delayed their separations so that they could receive a buyout. Although it was not an explicit goal of the buyout legislation, the buyouts appeared to have helped agencies downsize. Some positions showed a proportional reduction or slight increases. specific “management control” positions that the administration said added little value to serving taxpayers. Such positions included those held by (1) managers and supervisors and (2) employees in headquarters, personnel, budget, procurement, and accounting occupations. By fiscal year 1999, the administration called on agencies to increase managers’ and supervisors’ span of control over other employees from a ratio of 1:7 to 1:15. In our draft report on agencies’ use of buyouts that we are preparing for this Subcommittee, we present preliminary data showing that, as a proportion of the workforce as a whole, management control positions have been cut by half.