banks in the first two states have had a relatively greater share of CRE-related nonperforming loans. The latter two states a relatively smaller share of such loans (as measured by the percentage of CRE loans past due or in nonaccrual). We also wanted to include states from different regions of the country. We reviewed SNL data reliability and determined that it was sufficient for the purposes of selecting states for our sample. We further refined the sample and arrived at our four states in relation to these measures and total assets in CRE loan categories.  CRE loans in which the primary source of repayment is not the property itself are called owner-occupied loans. In ADC loans, also called construction and land development (CLD) loans, generally are considered to be the riskiest class of CRE. ADC loans can include properties (such as housing developments or retail space in a shopping mall) that are built before having firm commitments from buyers or lessees. In recent years, this type of loan also has tended to have a much higher loss.  CRE encompasses many different property types that present different risks. Table 4 describes the key CRE property types. CRE loans in which loan also has a much higher loss volatility than loans secured by properties such as multifamily housing and other nonfarm, nonresidential commercial properties. Banks report on four broad categories of CRE in their quarterly call reports: CLD, CRE, CRE-related loans and CRE-non- CRE loans, which include loans to finance CRE that are not secured by CRE, and loans for multifamily property. properties, as well as properties such as hotels, churches, hospitals, schools, and charitable organizations. This category includes offices, retail, and warehouse space. Loans to finance CRE, construction, and land development (not secured by CRE). Interagency guidance issued in 2006 on concentrations in CRE and sound risk-management practices define CRE loans within these categories to include those in which repayment is dependent on the cash flow generated from the real estate itself. When evaluating concentrations inCRE, examiners are instructed not to include owner-occupied properties in which the income or value of the property is not the primary source of repayment. $1.7 trillion in CRE mortgages will mature between 2011 and 2015, with about half of that held at banks. Trepp estimates that approximately 60 percent of CRE debt maturing in 2011 is “underwater’ Due to price declines and stricter bank underwriting standards, those mortgages will be difficult to refinance. To understand how the condition of the CRE market has affected community banks, we analyzed data on CRE loan volume by maturity schedule and underlying collateral value provided by Trepp, a commercial mortgage analysis firm. We analyzed monthly data from Moody’s/REAL Commercial Property Price Index from January 2002 through December 2010. We assessed their reliability for the purposes of providing a picture of the trends in CRE prices. We determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purpose of determining price trends. To determine when CRE loans would be repaid, we looked at when the CRE market was at its peak. We also looked at the implications for community banks of CRE loans being repaid at the end of the cycle. Small businesses that are looking to refinance a loan against a property that has lost a significant amount of market value may have to put up more equity. Alternatively, such borrowers might default on the loan, or the bank could work with the borrower to restructure the loan and avoid default. Trepp LLC, a commercial mortgage analysis firm, offers advice on how to get the most out of a loan. For more information, visit www.trepp.com or go to www.mortgageonline.com. 2010, overall CRE market values were down more than 42 percent from their peak in 2007. By January 2011, the delinquency rate on loans included in CMBS was at a record high, above 9 percent. After peaking in 2007, the CMBS market came to a complete halt by the end of 2008. High-value properties in markets such as New York, Washington, San Francisco, and Boston have performed well more recently. But low rental rates and high vacancies indicate that demand for office, retail, multifamily housing, and warehouse space remains relatively weak.  CRE is prone to volatility and cyclical behavior, as illustrated in the current CRE market downturn. As of December 2010, overall CRE market values were down more than 42%. The weakness in the ADC sector during this crisis was primarily due to residential housing construction, and that weakness affected the performance of other areas of CRE. The recent downturn in the CRE markets can be seen in the market values for commercial property and the condition of the commercial mortgage- backed securities (CMBS) market. Market values for all major commercial property types have declined significantly. copies of this report to FDIC, the Federal Reserve, OCC, and other interested parties. The report also is available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staffs have any questions about this report, please contact A. Nicole Clowers at (202) 512-8678 or clowersa@gao,gov. GAO staff who made major contributions to this report are listed in appendix VI. To assess the condition of the commercial real estate (CRE) market and the implications for GAO. Opinion Survey have suggested that new CRE borrowers have faced tighter credit conditions. Banks tightening their underwriting standards in response to the downturn. Trend of tighter credit standards suggests that borrowers who previously were considered creditworthy might not meet banks’ higher standards. The regulators have been aware for some time of the risk-management challenges related to growing CRE banks. The January 2011 survey found that 10.6 percent of respondents reported easing credit standards over the previous 3 months, compared to 10.5 percent who reported tightening them. toughness and its impact on bank lending. The data provided what the authors call modest support for all three hypotheses that: (1) toughness increased during the credit crunch from 1989 through 1992, (2) it declined during the boom from 1993 through 1998, and (3) differences in toughness affected bank lending, they say. During the creditCrunch they studied, the data show no more than 1 percent additional loans receiving classification or worsening of classification status. The authors also reviewed the economic significance of changes in regulatory “toughnesses” negatively affected by losses in their CRE portfolios. Those trying to improve their capital ratios or ALLL to guard against potential losses may need to reduce lending to maintain an adequate capital-to-assets ratio on their balance sheets. A study found that banks with high CRE concentrations before the recent financial crisis made loans to other sectors of the economy during this crisis at a “significantly slower rate” than banks that did not have high CRE exposure. In addition, the researchers found that the higher the bank’s CRE concentration prior to the crisis, the more its non-CRE lending slowed during the crisis. Review of existing studies and interviews with bank officials found that market factors tend to drive CRE downturns. Authors also cite the possibility that high-CRE banks may have failed at a greater rate than banks without that level of CRE exposure. There is limited research on the effect of examiner actions on credit cycles; however, the studies that exist suggest the effects are minimal, they say. The authors cite one study that examines the role of CRE and its effect on bank lending in the current financial crisis.  decline in CRE values has contributed to more noncurrent CRE loans, charge-offs, and bank failures. Nearly a third of community banks are exposing three times their total capital to risks related to their CRE loans. declining property prices increase the proportion of nonperforming loans, lead to a deterioration in banks’ balance sheets, and weaken banks' capital bases. The average from 2000 through 2010 is 1.94 percent; the data show that the volume of noncurrentCRE loans has begun to level off (see fig. 3). Some market observers argue that community banks’ focus on CRE lending came about because community banks generally know their local CRE markets better than larger banks. Increased exposure to CRE has made community banks vulnerable to the decline of this market. Nearly 30 percent of community banks have concentrations of CRE to total capital above 300 percent, the concentration threshold established in the 2006 interagency guidance on CRE. This means that nearly a third of community Banks are exposing themselves to CRE risks. The average CRE concentration at community banks as a percentage of total risk-based capital increased from about 168 percent in 1996–2000 to about 289 percent in 2005–2010 (see fig. 2). Charge-offs and expected losses that may arise from increases in noncurrent CRE loans have put stress on banks’ capital and ALLL. In 2009 and 2010, 102 of 106 of the MLRs issued by the IGs of the banking regulators cited high CRE concentrations. 92 of 106 specifically cited ADC loans in particular as a contributing factor in bank failures. In the 106 MLRs, 76 of the banks reviewed were community banks. The reports we reviewed were culled from research and literature reviews from academic journals and the Congressional Research Service. declines could reduce overall small business lending by community banks. Community banks tend to have a larger portion of small-business related loans compared with larger banks. Falling property prices can generate a cycle of declining CRE values because they can accompany reduced credit. The problem of CRE loan refinancing may exacerbate the negative CRE trends and limit lending to small businesses. The Bank for International Settlements notes that falling CRE prices decrease the value of collateral held by banks and, therefore, can give rise to significant losses by these banks. guidance is important to avoid unduly hampering credit provision throughout the economy. CRE portfolios continue to have a significant effect on community bank balance sheets as loan delinquencies and charge-offs remain historically high. Community banks continue to seek ways to work with their borrowers and shore up capital to remain solvent. But the current economic environment and the expectation that refinancing of CRE loans will bring a new round of market stress suggest many community banks may face these challenges for some time. The availability of credit to small businesses could be constrained. Although CRE markets nationally have experienced a downturn, some regions have experienced more distress than others. Community banks increasingly have moved toward providing CRE loans more than other kinds of loan products. During the last decade, large banks and other financial institutions increased their market share for consumer consumer loans.and warehouse space remains relatively weak. For example, the CRE markets in the South, Midwest, and West have experienced greater stress and deterioration than the East. These areas have also experienced more bank failures, according to FDIC data. increase in capital requirements or the allowance for loan and lease loss (ALLL) can affect a bank’s ability to lend. Figure 6 illustrates relationships between loan losses, bank balance sheets, and capital requirements under certain assumptions. If the bank decides to—or is required to—meet a 10 percent capital ratio after adding to its ALLL to cover estimated future losses, it would need to raise capital by seeking it from the bank's owners or from investors. The bank cannot raise additional capital because it is in poor financial condition. Regulators in the U.S. and abroad have been attempting to address the procyclical effects of their actions. Regulators may not adequately discourage overly risky behavior during economic upswings or may inhibit bank lending during downturns. If regulators increase capital requirements at the same time that losses from an economic downturn decrease banks’ capital, banks may be less able to lend while they seek to rapidly raise additional capital. This can exacerbate downswings in credit cycles. Consistent and balanced application of policy guidance in strong and weak economic times is important. holding more capital against each loan means less equity is available to return to shareholders or back new loans. Empirical literature generally supports this basic understanding of the impact of bank capital requirements on lending. Banks with capital bases that have been negatively affected by losses in their CRE portfolios—or those trying to make up for losses in other areas—may not be able to lend as much as banks with higher capital bases. The “capital crunch hypothesis” suggests that institutions with lower capital ratios had slower loan growth (or loans shrank more rapidly) to satisfy capital requirements.  FDIC cited a study by the Bank for International Settlements that concluded the social benefits of higher bank capital requirements outweigh the large reductions in economic activity from a banking collapse. As our report notes, additional capital provides an important cushion against losses, though this comes at a cost. From our review of the literature, there is disagreement on the magnitude of such costs on lending. We added information to the report to clarify this issue, which includes information on the study cited by FDIC. We are sending copies of this report to FDIC, the Federal Reserve, OCC, raise additional capital because it is in poor financial condition, or chooses not to because the cost of capital is prohibitive. Reducing assets is often referred to as “shrinking the balance sheet” However, banks in better financial condition may be able to respond differently in the face of loan losses. They may be can continue lending without raising additional capital or can rely on their stronger financial position. It could also reduce its assets (perhaps by selling assets such as other real estate owned) to decrease liabilities or by paying off borrowings. Federal banking regulators use a number of tools to achieve these goals. Capital provides an important cushion against losses for banks. Examinations and ratings serve to evaluate a bank’s overall risk exposure and its returns on equity to shareholders. When regulators require banks to hold capital above regulatory minimums, these requirements may result from an enforcement action through an agreement between the regulator and the bank. However, requiring banks to holding more capital may reduce the availability of bank credit and reduce returns on Equity to Shareholders. The discussions have been seeking to address the procyclical effects of capital requirements by having banks raise additional capital, commensurate with risks, during times of economic growth. The Basel Committee has developed standards that will be implemented gradually so that banks make the shift to higher capital and liquidity standards while “supporting lending to the economy.” Federal bank regulators also have acknowledged the importance of addressing pro cyclicality in regulatory requirements and have made efforts in this regard. For example, the Chairman of the Federal Reserve has stated the importance. of regulators acknowledging the significance of procyclicalsity. both the Basel Committee and the Financial Stability Forum have worked to address this as it relates to capital requirements. In addition, FASB has issued accounting guidance aimed at changes to mark-to-market accounting for assessing asset values in inactive markets. More recently, in May 2010, FasB released a proposed Accounting Standards Update, which encompassed proposals on the impairment of financial assets and suggested implementing a more forward-looking impairment model. Based on exposure draft comments, in January 2011 F ASB proposed with the International Accounting Standards Board a common solution on how to account for the impairment. As of December 31, 2010, there were 6,364 community banks (commercial banks with total assets of $1 billion or less) This represents about 92 percent of all commercial banks, although only about 10 percent of commercial bank assets nationwide. Banks in the U.S. are supervised by one of the following three federal regulators: FDIC, Federal Reserve or OCC. The Federal Reserve supervises commercial banks that are state-chartered and members of the Federal Reserve System. OCC supervises federally chartered national banks. The purpose of federal banking supervision is to help ensure that banks throughout the financial system are operating in a safe and sound manner. Financial regulation more broadly has sought to achieve four goals: to ensure adequate consumer protections, ensure the integrity and fairness of markets, monitor the safety and soundness of institutions, and act to ensure the stability of the overall financial system. Table 1 summarizes the regulators’ oversight responsibilities for community banks. Banks are required to comply with banking laws and regulations in the provision of financial services. before the financial crisis began but did not always take forceful actions to address them. The Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission report notes areas in which regulators could have been more proactive in using regulatory tools to address certain risks in the financial system. A number of nonmanagement regulatory staff in the field offices we visited acknowledged they could have better followed up on outstanding issues. In response to lessons learned, regulatory officials stated that they have been following up more often on matters requiring attention (MRA) and refocusing their supervisory efforts. their supervisory efforts. OCC’s Midsize and Community Banks Division issued an MRA Reference Guide that provides examiners with OCC policy guidance. FDIC in June 2009 also implemented its “Forward Looking Supervision’ program. The program focuses on helping ensure that CAMELS ratings reflect consideration of bank management practices without relying solely on a bank’S financial condition. The goal is to ensure that appropriate capital is maintained; and that the bank is well-capitalized. learned from the financial crisis, including findings from the agencies’ IGs. The IGs of the banking regulators completed 106 MLRs in 2009 and 2010 for banks that failed during the recent financial crisis. FDIC determined based on the MLRs that earlier supervisory action was needed to address banks with high risk profiles or weak risk-management practices. We also found in past work that regulators identified a number of weaknesses in institutions’ risk- management systems before the crisis began but did not always take action. Bank officials tend to first approach the examination team. Bank officials also can contact the ombudsman offices at the regulators to seek confidential assistance. In addition to these avenues, banks formally can appeal regulatory decisions. Interviews with officials from 43 banks in different parts of the country identified multiple concerns with examiner treatment of CRE loans and related issues. Many bank officials raised concerns about the time and expense of pursuing formal appeals. In raising issues because of potential repercussions from regulatory officials, other bank officials stated that they do contact regulatory officials when warranted. To determine how the banking regulators responded to trends in the CRE market, we interviewed regulatory and bank officials and reviewed reports of examination (ROE) from a sample of banks. The resulting sample from this process is outlined below, broken down by regulator (table 5), state (table 6), and CAMELS ratings (table 7) OCC- supervised banks represent the greatest number of banks in our sample, in part because a number of the examinations for the sample for the study were conducted by the OCC. The regulators’ examination drafting and review process is iterative, with multiple levels of internal review. According to regulatory staff, this design helps ensure consistent application of guidance and treatment of banks. The process and the staff involved vary slightly for each regulator and based on a bank’s CAMELS rating. For all examinations, a team of examiners will conduct on-site work, led by an examiner-in-charge (EIC). Other staff and management also discuss findings with the examination team and review the examination report. Case managers review draft ROEs for consistency and adequate support of findings for a portfolio of banks. The analyst function at OCC serves a similar role: reviewing many ROEs, although not assigned to a specific portfolio. While case managers and senior management generally do not review loan classification details, they Review loan classification writeups inROEs for accuracy and support for CAMELS ratings in a broad range of ROEs. According to Federal Reserve officials, case managers hold discussions with the examination.team and review the examination report. additional capital or can rely on their stronger financial position to secure new capital. Kay Kuhlman, Assistant Director, and Robert Lee, Analyst-in-Charge, managed this review. Emily Biskup and Jason Wildhagen also led portions of the research and made significant contributions throughout the report. Anna Maria Ortiz and Rudy Chatlos provided methodological assistance related to our nonprobability sample. Bill Cordrey, Jay Thomas, and Gary Chupka provided accounting assistance. Paul Thompson provided legal assistance. accounting assistance. Paul Thompson provided legal assistance. Marc Molino developed the report’s graphics. Barbara Roesmann provided editorial assistance. Jan Bauer, Kimberly Cutright, Andrea Dawson, Nathan Gottfried, Elizabeth Jimenez, Angela Messenger, Lauren Nunnally, Michael Pahr, Ellen Ramachandran, Maria Soriano, Winnie Tsen, Gavin Ugale, and Carrie Watkins held various roles in verifying our findings. The report was written with the help of a team of experts. We reviewed and summarized academic studies that included analysis of various factors on bank lending. We also discussed with Federal Reserve staff whether other similar studies existed. With assistance from a research librarian, we conducted searches of research databases and report sources. We sought and reviewed studies cited by the American Bankers Association (ABA) and the Social Science Search (SSS) database. We concluded that the study's findings were consistent with those of other studies on the impact of bank lending on the economy. studies cited by the American Bankers Association (ABA) and the Independent Community Bankers of America (ICBA) All studies included published papers released between 1991 and 2010. Based on our selection criteria, we determined that six studies were sufficient for our purposes. Nonetheless, the research conducted in this area is not exhaustive and focuses primarily on what occurred during the previous economic downturn of the late 1980s and early 1990s. We analyzed the methodologies underlying these studies and determined that they were the most relevant to our study. affiliated with 43 community banks in a number of states. Most of the bank officials with whom we spoke were located in California, Georgia, and Texas. We initiated contact with 62 banks drawn from this sample and interviewed all of the 21 bank officials who responded to us. We gained additional bank views by supplementing this sample. We interviewed officials from 22 additional banks that either testified before Congress on the issue of CRE, were identified to us through bank associations, or had learned of our work and wanted to talk. or had learned of our work and wanted to talk to us. We interviewed more than 230 regulatory field staff. We do not provide specific numbers in the body of the report to avoid overstating the precision of the results from the nonprobability sample we used to select bank interviewees. We use the term “a few” to refer to 3–10 of 43 banks making the statement; “some’ to referring to 11–25 of 43 Banks making a statement. for interviews and ROE reviews, based on the state in which they were located, their CAMELS composite rating, and their regulator. We wanted to increase the likelihood that banks we sampled were relevant to our study; therefore, we selected banks with elevated CRE and ADC concentrations and those that had a recent bank examination. From that subset, we placed banks into four “pools” with the goal of speaking with officials from, and reviewing ROEs for, a breadth of community banks. with good CAMELS composite ratings and high CRE concentrations. Pool 2 consisted of banks that generally were in good condition but also had ADC concentrations. pool 3 banks were intended to represent banks that were struggling and that had a higher number of loans classified as loss at the most recent examination. pool 4 was the most distressed pool of banks and had a 300 percent or greater concentration in overall CRE in the 75th percentile or greater for the banks in our sample, and a loss ratio of 75 percent or above. At each full-scope examination, examiners review the bank’s risk exposure on a number of components using what is known as the CAMELS rating system. The component rating and the composite ratings are scored on a scale of 1 (best) to 5 (worst) Regulatory actions typically correspond to the composite CAMELS ratings, with the actions generally increasing in severity as the ratings become worse. The composite is not an average of the component ratings, but rather a combination of them. Changes in CAMEL ratings were not found to have a “consistent” impact on future lending behavior. When there was an impact, the data show that it was minimal. During the 1985–1993 credit crunch, the authors found some evidence that changes in CAMel ratings had a significant impact on loan growth for commercial and industrial loans but a smaller effect on consumer loans and real estate loans. The authors found minimal evidence that adjustments in CAM EL ratings had any systematic effect on loan grow during what they define as an economic recovery period (1994– 2004) Bank officials said increased supervisory scrutiny was being reflected in CAMELS ratings and additional capital requirements. Researchers noted that banks may respond ‘asymmetrically’ to changes in CAMEL ratings. Study suggests examiners’ actions can affect lending, albeit minimally. However, research suggests that regulators were more stringent during the past credit crunch, even holding financial conditions constant. Therefore, regulators should be aware of how their actions can Affect broader credit markets, and help ensure that their actions are effective. In the current economic downturn examiners have been focusing more closely on analysis and documentation of borrowers’ and guarantors’ global cash flows. The purpose of such analysis is to determine whether they have sufficient income and liquid assets to support loan payments. In some cases, such analysis shows that a borrower is unable to pay the loan, even if the borrower is currently paying. The renewed focus on global cash flow analysis led many bank officials to conclude that examiners were classifying loans based on collateral value or because the bank lacked updated financial statements. The San Francisco Federal Reserve Bank implemented a “look back’ process in June 2010. The move was in response to criticism that examiners were being too harsh and curtailing credit. Of 11 CRE loan downgrades reviewed in the third and fourth quarter of 2010, nine were downgraded to “adequate’ or “not adequate” The process resulted in internal clarifications of the appraisal review process, ALLL assessment guidance, examiner training sessions on the use of interest reserves and TDRs. loan downgrades reviewed in the third and fourth quarter of 2010, this official stated that 2 should not have been downgraded. In these two cases, the loan downgrades were reviewed and changed before the ROEs were finalized and were consistent with the bank’s internal loan ratings. According to this official, the findings from this quality process will be used to improve the quality of the bank's loans. The bank has not commented on this report. It is not known if this report will be made public. review a sample of banks’ internal ratings of loans to determine the adequacy of credit risk administration and identify loans that show undue risk and may be uncollectible. As part of this review, examiners determine which loans are considered “pass,” with no concerns noted, as well as those that are special mentioned or “classified” There are three classification categories used by the federal banking regulators: substandard, doubtful, and loss. These loan classifications are incorporated into how each bank calculates its allowance for loan and lease loss (ALLL) According to some bank officials we interviewed, examiners have been more critical of recent appraisals. Classifications are a major concern for banks primarily because they can result in reduced earnings. As more loans are classified, more is generally reserved in ALLL to anticipate future losses from nonperforming loans. In our interviews with bank officials, some stated that examiners had been requiring additional ALLL and criticizing the ALLL methodology. In addition, a few bankers noted that some bankers relied on values established in appraisal. In October 2009, after the start of the financial crisis and the widespread deterioration in CRE loan performance, regulators issued interagency guidance on CRE loan workouts. While the 2009 guidance was similar to that issued in 1991 and 1993, regulatory officials noted that it includes updates for changes in accounting (for example, related to ALLL) The examples provide scenarios for different CRE loan classification outcomes and whether loans should be considered troubled debt restructurings (TDR), among other issues. Examiners told us that the examples have 97 percent of respondents stated that the 2009 CRE loan workout guidance has been helpful. Examiners told us that the examples have helped to resolve differences of opinion with bankers on how to treat certain CRE- related loans. Such processes reflect federal internal control obtaining input from banks. The regulators’ examination drafting and review process is iterative, with the ROE review process being a key part of the process. The federal government standards for internal control state that managers should have controls in place to compare actual performance to planned or expected results over time throughout the organization and analyze significant differences. case managers and senior management hold discussions with the examination teams as examination findings are being finalized. Regulators also provide training on new guidance to help ensure consistent application. All regulators hosted conference calls with examiners to better ensure that the field examiners were implementing it as intended. Some field offices also included these CRE topics in their own training and team meetings. The interviews were conducted at headquarters offices in Washington, D.C., and by telephone, video teleconference, and in person at district, regional, and field offices in California, Colorado, Georgia, Massachusetts and Texas. concentrations and wholesale funding sources; (3) appropriate capital is maintained; and (4) examiners follow up on progress related to MRAs and enforcement actions. Based on our analysis of a nonprobability sample of 55 ROEs, examiners’ findings were generally consistent with policy guidance, with some exceptions. Examiners made statements in ROEs related to the quality of banks’ loan workouts that were consistent with the 2009 guidance on CRE loan workouts. In our sample, most ROEs raise concerns about CRE concentrations and how they are managed. if there were different views or practices related to CRE loan treatment among regulatory roles or between those in headquarters and the field offices. The staff with whom we spoke in field locations included field examiners, their supervisors, case managers, analysts (at OCC), and senior management. Of the field staff we interviewed, about 200 were directly involved in drafting or reviewing ROEs, and about 50 of the 200 were in senior management positions. We analyzed 55 ROEs based on our nonprobability sample of banks in California, Georgia, Massachusetts, and Texas. All OCC districts instituted a real-time review process in which experienced staff reviewed the accuracy of CRE loan classifications. Regulators also use surveys to gather information on how to improve the examination process. For example, the regulators issued an interagency survey for examinations conducted between May 31 and July 9, 2010. According to an FDIC analysis of the resulting data, more than 97 percent of respondents stated that the 2009 CRE loan was a good deal for the bank. The OCC’s central district reported that 95 percent of examiners’ ratings decisions on CRE loans, and 99 percent of their accrual decisions were determined to be accurate. Many bank officials’ overarching concern was that examiners have been applying guidance more stringently than before the financial crisis. Some bank officials we interviewed expressed concerns with examiner- required loan classifications. Two bankers with whom we spoke stated that it was their experience that examiner were particularly stringent in 2008 when the financial Crisis was escalating. We interviewed bank and regulatory officials and analyzed ROEs to understand banks’ concerns about examiners’ treatment of their CRE loans and how examiners supported findings. Bankers say examiners told them they exceeded the 300 percent concentration threshold for CRE, but according to the calculations in the guidance they actually were under the threshold. A number of examiners admitted that during strong economic times they could have been more assertive in asking banks to implement risk-management changes related to CRE concentrations. When asked whether limits on CRE concentrations should be considered, some examiners did not think that limits were the answer, but others thought that there might be some level of concentration. More details about risk- management practices would help both examiners and bankers better understand how to assess and manage such concentrations. Bank officials are concerned that examiners have been misapplying the 2006 guidance. A few bankers noted that some examiners want ALLL increased based on their peers’ ALLL rather than the bank’s individual situation. The 2006 guidance states that the CRE and ADC concentration levels are not limits, but some bank officials have been interpreting them that way. Some examiners were including owner-occupied CRE and owner- occupied ADC in their calculations of CRE concentration levels, bank officials said. concentrations. Some ROEs appear to include owner-occupied CRE as part of the CRE concentration calculation. The effect of calculating these concentrations differently can be to increase the total CRE concentration number. This increases the scrutiny placed on the banks’ risk- management systems, the authors say. It could send an unclear message to bank officials about why they need to reduce CRE concentrations if overall they are complying with the guidance, they say. The FDIC clarified to its examiners in April 2010 how to calculate CRE concentrations. Other regulators have not done so. during the prior 36 months, and (3) 100 percent of CLD (or ADC) loans to total capital. In determining the concentration ratio, owner-occupied CRE is removed. The guidance also states that the concentration numbers are not limits, but rather indicate when banks will receive closer scrutiny of risk-management systems and capital adequacy. Such thresholds are not intended to be a “safe harbor”—that is, banks with lower concentrations may still receive scrutiny of their CRE loans in examinations. Bank officials could be unclear on what the trigger is for compliance with CRE risk-management requirements. The ROE requires a bank with a CRE concentration of about 600 percent of tier 1 capital to address a matter requiring immediate attention to improve stress testing for its CRE portfolio. However, the ROE states that the bank was in compliance with the 2006 CRE guidance—which requires robust stress testing when banks reach certain levels of CRE. The bank must reduce its CRE concentrations, but also states that it is complying with the2006 CRE guidance. In 7 instances (of 44), the ROE includes statements that the bank must reduce its CRE concentrations. The basis for this requirement was unclear or appeared inconsistent with the 2006 CRE concentration guidance. The enforcement actions for these banks did not require reduced CRE concentrations and emphasized improvements to risk management. Differences in message between an ROE and an enforcement action could be confusing to bank boards and management as they seek to comply with regulatory requirements for risk management related to CRE concentrations, the authors say. They say bank officials could misunderstand whether they should focus on improving their risk-management systems or just reduce their total CRE concentration numbers. application of examiner guidance and our review of ROEs identified some inconsistencies. Monitoring and revising existing controls, such as guidance, is a key component of a strong internal control system. Regulators have mixed views about the adequacy of the 2006 guidance. Revising or supplementing the guidance to provide more details about risk- management practices and examples of when to use guidance is something regulators consider in their supervision of banks, the authors say. The recent financial crisis underscored how important it is for regulators to evenly apply guidance during strong economic periods. Regulators have been incorporating lessons CRE guidance, among other issues. A number of bankers remain concerned that regulators have become more stringent in reviewing CRE loans since the crisis. Based on our review of a nonprobability sample of 55 bank examinations, examiners’ findings were consistent with CRE loan workout guidance, although in some instances examiners did not clearly support requirements for reduced CRE concentrations. The reports concluded that the guidance could have clarified expectations for how examiners should review banks’ compliance with CRE-related risk-management practices. Some bank officials with whom we spoke stated that examiners have been more aggressive about requiring additional capital. A few bankers thought the additional scrutiny was appropriate, but should not necessarily be focused on all banks. Discussions about the procyclicality of regulation have been a central feature of recent deliberations on revised capital requirements among U.S. banking regulators and the Basel Committee for Banking Supervision. Examiners exercise significant judgment during examinations, and different perceptions about the 2006 guidance among regulators could send mixed signals to examiners. Regulators began to address CRE concerns before the financial crisis. OCC has been reviewing whether particular capital requirements should be set for banks that have higher CRE concentrations. The Federal Reserve stated that it intends to work with its counterparts at the OCC and FDIC to develop and implement enhancements to CRE concentrations guidance. The OCC noted that community banks’ increased CRE concentrations exposes them to CRE market declines, which may require more explicit regulatory expectations for the robustness of risk- management systems, stress testing, capital planning and capital levels. draft guidance elicited considerable feedback from bank representatives, many of whom stated it would curtail their CRE lending. The regulators revised the guidance based on the feedback received. In 7 instances (of 44), the ROE for Banking Supervision discussions on capital requirements. The recent severe cycle of credit upswings followed by the downturn serves as a useful reminder of the supervisory balance needed to help ensure the safety and soundness of the banking system and support economic recovery. The report recommends that the Chairman of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Chairman. of the Board of Governors, and the Comptroller of the Currency re-issue or supplement interagency CRE concentration guidance. a number of the examinations in our sample for the Federal Reserve and FDIC were led by the state regulator and were out of the scope of our review. We randomly removed some OCC-led bank examinations for which we had a sufficient number of cases: banks rated 2 in Texas. For FDIC, we reviewed reports conducted by FDIC’s Internal Control and Review Section for the Atlanta, Dallas, New York, and San Francisco regions. We reviewed reports from all four of its districts related to the quality assurance process that focused on reviewing the classifications of CRE loans. inconsistencies or other needed improvements related to examiner treatment of CRE loans. For certain FDIC regions, reviews found that examiners could have better documented findings on CRE concentrations or could have provided earlier or harsher criticism of CRE concentrations. Certain districts of the Federal Reserve System reviewed implementation of the 2006 CRE concentration guidance and found instances of inconsistency. The Federal Reserve welcomed our recommendations to improve CRE concentrations guidance to help banks and examiners comply with it, and to ensure consistent implementation of such guidance. Senior officials and field examiners have differing views on whether the 2006 CRE guidance is sufficient in addressing CRE concentration risks. Two of the FDIC ROEs in our sample that use only tier 1 capital in the calculation were issued after the April 2010 clarification. Some thought that a focus on additional capital would be sensible given the severe capital shortfalls some banks with CRE concentrations faced during the financial crisis. In written comments, FDIC stated that it has already supplemented the 2006CRE concentrations and risk-management guidance.