The FCC was required, within 180 days of enactment, to establish a voluntary code of "Subscriber Protection Practices" The code would govern changes in a subscriber's telephone exchange and/or toll services. Failure to comply with or withdrawal from the voluntary code would result in a carrier being subject to FCC regulation. H.R. 3888 also detailed specific, more stringent, minimum requirements to be incorporated into the code. The code was required to review the code every two years to ensure that its requirements "adequately protect consumers" FCC rules currently require a long distance company to obtain a subscriber's authorization before a switch can occur. Authorization can be obtained in writing or can be confirmed orally. Primary enforcement responsibility has been given to the states with the FCC assuming responsibility in those states unwilling or unable to undertake this role or if a complainant expressly indicates it wishes the FCC to resolve the matter. According to the FCC, 37 states, the District of Columbia, and Puerto Rico, have chosen to take on this responsibility. The authorized carrier is allowed to keep an amount equal to 100 percent of the consumer's bill with the remaining 50% returned to the consumer. The FCC's requirement that the telecommunications carrier verify that the actual subscriber, and not just the person answering the line and claiming to have authority to authorize a carrier switch, exceeded the FCC's statutory authority. The court stated that the statue does not require actual authorization but only requires that the carrier get verification. Furthermore the court said that the requirement for the carrier to obtain "actual authorization" gives carriers "a free pass" to switch providers without the carrier's knowledge. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. Verification procedures used to confirm carrier switches are strengthened and extended to include a number of circumstances. These verification methods are applied to both inbound calls (that is, calls initiated by consumers) as well as telemarketing calls. These methods include a consumer signature on an authorization paper form (i.e., a Letter of Agency; LOA), an electronic authorization (usually a customer initiated call to a toll-free number), a verification by an independent third party, and the more recently approved use of an Internet-based LOA. The FCC has also applied verification procedures to the practice of implementing carrier freeze requests. The rules require that solicitations for such freezes be clear and that the consumer be informed as to how such a freeze may be lifted. Verification rules are also applied to changes in local as well as long distance carriers, but wireless carriers are exempt. The FCC also noted that these verification procedures do not preempt state law. These verification methods are to be used as a state minimum, the FCC said in a statement. Section 258(a) prohibited telecommunications carriers from changing a subscriber's selection of both telephone exchange (local) and toll (long distance) service. The section expanded the FCC's authority over such activity to include local as well as long distance service. State utility commissions are also permitted to enforce the procedures with respect to services within their state boundaries. Section 258(b) created a new penalty, in addition to already existing penalties contained in law, for those who violate FCC verification procedures. The long distance company or reseller was required to send a.subscriber's designated telecommunications carrier. long distance company or reseller was required to send a written confirmation of the switch that includes the name of the new carrier. The use of negative option marketing, whereby a consumer must take some action to prevent a switch from occurring, was banned. The bill also strengthened the complaint procedure by requiring a company charged with slamming to resolve the complaint within 120 days; absent resolution of the complaint, the company would be required to give the consumer the information within 15 days of the change of service. It was signed into law by President Barack Obama on Tuesday. a notice of proposed rulemaking to examine primary interexchange (long distance) carrier (PIC) change charges, and in a February 10, 2005 action modified the rate structure that was set in 1984. The effectiveness of the new rules and their implementation is receiving continuing attention from Members of Congress, regulators, providers, and consumers. Since the development of competition in the provision of long distance telecommunications services, consumers have been able to select the carrier of their choice. A second further notice of proposal, issued on March 17, 2003, imposing additional requirements on third-party verification services became effective on July 21, 2003. and unfair billing practices." A number of issues not addressed in the April 13, 2000 reconsideration order were addressed in a subsequent FCC order adopted on July 21, 2000. These rules went into effect on April 2, 2001. These include permitting the use of Internet LOAs in compliance with provisions contained in the E-Sign Act ( P.L. 106-229 ), thereby allowing carrier changes to be made by consumers via the Internet. retaining the three-way call as a verification method but requiring the carrier's sales representative to drop off the call once the connection has been established. to protect consumers form the unauthorized switching of their long distance service. Introduced May 19, 1999; referred to Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation. Introduced to protect consumers from the unauthorized switch of long distance services. Referred to the Committee on commerce, science, and transportation. Introduced in May 1999; Referred to House of Representatives Committee on Transportation and Commerce. Introduced on May 20, 1999, referred to House Committee on transportation and commerce, and passed on May 21, 1999. Back to Mail Online home. back to the page you came from. PIC change charges are borne by the customer, but are commonly picked up by the newly designated interexchange carrier. The FCC established safe harbors of $1.25 for electronically-processed PIC changes and $5.50 for manually processed PIC change. Local exchange carriers can charge more if they can document higher costs and less than the safe harbor rate if they choose. If a consumer switches intrastate long distance providers and interstate providers at the same time, the PIC charge for changing the interstate carrier is decreased by half, to 63 cents. The Competitive Telecommunications Association felt that the $5 PIC change charge safe harbor, that was established in 1984, exceeded the actual cost and hampers competition. The FCC concluded that "significant industry and market changes have occurred since the implementation of the $ 5.00 safe harbor in 1984" and sought comment on FCC policies for regulating PICchange charges. In May 2004 the FCC initiated a probe of PICChange charges and issued a notice of proposed rulemaking (CC Docket No. 02-53) The PIC freeze is implemented by the local exchange carrier at the request of the customer. The freeze prohibits the switch of a customer's designated long distance carrier without his/her express approval. Some see the expanded use of the PIC Freeze option as unnecessary and feel that it is being misused to protect local exchange carriers market share in the face of growing competition. Some support the elimination of local freeze will become greater, and favor the establishment of an independent third party to administer and execute such changes. taken to curb this practice. One concern has focused on the necessity for, or concern over specific provisions contained in, legislative proposals. Two other concerns addressed in legislation have also generated controversy. The methodology used by the FCC to develop slamming statistics has also been brought under question. Many local exchange carriers claim that they do not actively market the PIC freeze option but only offer it in response to customers who complain about slamming or who specifically inquire about it. They also state that the manner in which the program is implemented varies from carrier to carrier. S. 58 was referred to the Senate Commerce, Science, and Transportation Committee where no further action was taken. S. 1084 required the FCC, the Federal Trade Commission, and telecommunications carrier representatives to develop a code of practices to protect consumers from slamming. Some see the potential for the PIC freeze to inhibit competition, if the means required to lift the freeze are perceived by the consumer as too burdensome or the charges to implement the change are excessive.on " PIC Freeze Programs and Charges ", below.) because resellers are not required to, and generally do not, report their revenue to the FCC unless the revenue exceeds $109 million. LCI International Inc., a long distance carrier in the United States, has also expressed concern over the manner in which the FCC calculates yearly slamming rates to determine top offenders. Unlike the GAO, LCI claims that the FCC's current practice of dividing the number of slamming complaints by a company's annual telecommunications revenue favors larger carriers. This occurs,LCI states, because the larger a company’s revenue the more consumers it can slam without appearing to be a major offender. The GAO criticized the methodology used by the FCC to determine the list of top slamming offenders. The FCC compares slamming offenders by citing the ratio of the number of complaints per million dollars of company revenue. That methodology, according to the GAO, is flawed because it can lead to a severe understatement of the revenue-to-complaint ratio for the smaller companies, or resellers. This occurs because resellers are not required to, and generally do not, report their revenue to the FCC. The bill would increase consumer protections and strengthen enforcement at both the federal and state level. It would require extensive and written notification and verification requirements when a subscriber switches long distance carriers. Carriers found in violation of the voluntary code or found willfully and repeatedly slamming were subject to a fine of up to $1 million. The bill also advocated uniformity in state and federal slamming requirements, to lessen consumer confusion, and called for the levying of fines, but solely in cases where it has be proven that the carrier "has engaged in willful and intentional slamming...." FCC: 36,220 inquiries and 1,932 complaints filed in 2005. The potential for slamming is expected to increase as competition in the provision of intrastate long distance and local telecommunications services becomes more widespread. Since many consumers who are the victims of slamming may not file complaints, and over 50 million carrier selection changes are recorded each year, it is assumed that filed complaints represent a subset of the actual problem. The FCC's slamming team in 2004 resolved approximately 3,500 slamming complaints involving over 300 telephone carriers, resulting in consumer refunds totaling $800,000. to date. The industry is attempting to self-regulate and has put forth proposals to stop this activity. Some states have taken significant action to protect consumers from slamming, but others have taken little action or have no antislamming regulations. Information provided by all long distance carriers in compliance with FCC-required tariff filing procedures, is not reviewed and is no deterrent to a slammer. Consumers and the industry itself are becoming increasingly vulnerable as targets for large scale fraud, according to the report. Consumers have the right to choose the carrier of their choice from among approximately 500 companies. Unauthorized switching, known as "slamming," has a negative impact on both the consumers and suppliers of telecommunications services. Consumers often do not realize they have been slammed until they find unfamiliar names or charges on their telephone bills. The practice distorts the marketplace by increasing the customer base and revenues of the carrier that has illegally switched the consumer at the expense of the consumer. It can go undetected for months or even longer. Concern has been voiced by some that the consumer protections that were proposed were too extensive and may be overly burdensome. Mandatory third party verification is cited as an example of a proposal that would be costly for small carriers to implement. Proposals to require switchless resellers to post a "surety bond" with the FCC to pay for possible fines or penalties also came under criticism. The Telecommunications Resellers Association claims that such a provision not only discriminates against small businesses, but would also cause an "anticompetitive effect" in the marketplace. AT&T: Proposals to require slammers to pay fines to consumers they harm could result in the creation of the "wrong incentive structure..." Some have expressed concerns that fines and punishments not be levied against the long distance carrier in all cases, since in some instances unwanted switches can be attributed to the local exchange carrier responsible for executing the switch. On the other hand, local exchange carriers have expressed some concerns that they should not be charged for long distance calls.charges for long-distance calls. The rules absolve slammed consumers of liability for charges incurred for the first 30-day period after an unauthorized switch. In cases where payment was made by the consumer, the unauthorized carrier must refund 150% of the charges to the authorized verification methods. AT&T v. FCC found that the FCC exceeded its statutory authority in enforcing certain of its slamming rules relating to customer verification. While not remanding the FCC's rules the court did vacate fines totaling $80,000 imposed onAT&T. charges are set at 150 percent, split between the authorized carrier (100%) and the subscriber (50%). Carriers proven to be in violation of FCC rules are subject to fines and penalties. From April 1994 to the end of 1999, the FCC imposed final forfeitures against 8 companies for $10.3 million. FCC action in 2004 by the Consumer and Governmental Affairs Bureau, on behalf of individual consumers, resolved about 3500 slamming complaints involving more than 300 carriers resulting in $800,000 in consumer refunds. In its first joint federal/state effort, FCC filed on June 20, 2002, a $1.2 million fine against WebNet Communications Inc. of McLean, Va. The bill extended FCC authority over violators beyond telecommunications carriers to include others such as billing agents. First time "willful violators" would have faced up to a year in prison for a first offense with repeat offenders up to five years. The bill also allowed consumers to get refunds from unauthorized carriers; and protected consumer's rights to use the PIC freeze option. (See section on " PIC Freeze Programs and Charges ", below.) S.C. House passed the bill on Tuesday. most severe penalty for slamming to date. For the first time, it revoked the operating authority of a telecommunications provider for slamming violations and levied a multi-million dollar fine. According to the FCC, it received more than 1,400 complaints against the Fletcher Companies, the majority of them filed from mid-1996 through 1997. Although these companies stopped providing services in 1997, during the FCC's investigation, this action was taken to ensure that none of these companies can resume operation and "engage in slamming or other conduct ... harmful to consumers" S. 1618 did not preclude or preempt state law or actions against slammers. Switchless resellers were required to post a bond with the FCC before they were able to offer long distance services. Those convicted of intentional slamming ("willful" slammers) would have been subject to criminal penalties. The FCC was given the authority to prosecute those who refuse to pay their fines. and slamming victims were given the option of pursuing slamming complaints through the courts, instead of the FCC, through a court. S. 1618 established both a complaint process at the FCC and minimum monetary penalties for offenders. Any company that ignored a consumer's complaint was to be subject to a penalty for slamming. The FCC was given the authority to award both compensatory and punitive damages and to issue a decision on slamming complaints within 150 days of filing. The company was required to give the consumer a copy of the retained verification, information about how to pursue the complaint with the FCC, and all other available remedies. It was also required to establish streamlined complaint resolution procedures. The GAO report, Telephone Slamming and Its Harmful Effects, was released in conjunction with testimony given at Subcommittee hearings on April 23, 1998. The most effective action that consumers can take to eliminate the chance of intentional slamming is to have their local exchange carrier freeze their choice of long distance providers. Some subcommittee members expressed concern over the GAO's findings to FCC Chairman Kennard, who was called to testify at the hearings. The conclusions reached in the report regarding FCC efforts to deter slamming, were discussed during hearings held, on April23, 1998, by the Senate Permanent Investigations Subcommittee. FCC Chairman Kennard was called to testify at the hearing. Kennard defended the FCC's actions stating that the tariff filing procedure was not developed as a deterrent to slamming. He also pointed to the severe punishment taken against Fletcher Companies to defend FCC actions. At the request of Senator Collins, the GAO undertook a second study examining the scope of and state and federal actions taken by the FCC. The GAO concluded that the FCC had taken the appropriate steps to combat slamming and that it was investigating the matter further. once the connection has been established between the subscriber and the third party verifier. New complaint reporting requirements for carriers which require carriers to submit semiannual reports to the FCC's Enforcement Bureau. Carrier registration requirements that prevent slammers from evading detection simply by changing their names. The Government Accountability Office (GAO), (known at that time as the General Accounting Office), at the request of Senator Collins, then Chairman of the Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations, Committee on Government Affairs, undertook an investigation into the practice. Slamming is the practice of placing unauthorized charges for services and products on a consumer's telephone bill. Cramming is placing unauthorized, misleading, or deceptive charges on consumer's phone bills. Senator Susan Collins introduced the "Telephone Services Fraud Prevention and Enforcement Act of 1999" ( S. 58 ), on January 19, 1999. The report, State and Federal Actions to Curb Slamming and Crammed , contains information on the number of complaints filed, state and federal regulations taken to protect consumers. The Telecommunications Act of 1996, which was signed into law on February 8, 1996 ( P.L. 104-104 ), resulted in a major rewrite of the 1934 Communications Act. Section 258(a) prohibited telecommunications carriers from filed, state and federal regulations taken to protect consumers from such abuses. The 105 th Congress actively examined this issue, with each chamber passing its version of legislation. However, adjournment occurred before a final measure could be passed. The FCC, in a December 17, 1998 order and subsequent reconsiderations, expanded upon and adopted more stringent rules to combat slamming. Senator McCain introduced the "Telecommunications Competition and Consumer Protection Act of 1999" ( S. 1084 ) on May 19, 1999, one day after the court stay of FCC slamming liability rules. Citing the failure of the 105 th Congress to pass slamming legislation, court action to stay FCC liability rules, and his objection to the industry-proposed third party administrator, Senator McCain offered a comprehensive measure "to better protect consumers" S. 58 attempted to further deter the practice of slamming by increasing consumer protections. requirement that the carrier obtain "actual authorization" gives carriers "a virtually impossible task" New initiatives are established to ease the filing of consumer complaints and speed their resolution. The establishment of a toll-free number at the FCC to enable consumers to file complaints over the telephone. The FCC, in conjunction with CC docket 98-170, has also adopted rules that establish truth-in-billing and billing format principles to enhance a consumer's ability to detect slamming. The rules establish requirements that are "intended to protect consumers against inaccurate and unfair billing practices" S. 1084 was referred to the Senate Commerce, Science, and Transportation Committee and received no further action. Carriers were required to give subscribers who are victims of slamming credits for unauthorized charges and damages of $500. The 105 th Congress held several hearings and introduced 11 complaints through the courts, instead of the FCC, through a state class action suit. The bill required the FCC to compile and publish a report, every six months, listing slamming violations by carrier. of unfair and deceptive practices. The FCC was also required to compile and publish a report, on a semiannual basis, ranking carriers by the percentage of verified complaints, excluding those generated by the carrier's unaffiliated resellers. Carriers listed among the five worst performers in the semiann annual reports for three consecutive times were to be subject to FCC investigation. The FCC also required carriers not operating under the voluntary code to meet specific, more stringent, minimum requirements to be incorporated into FCC-developed regulations for carriers not under the code. S. 1051 (Campbell) A measure to amend the Communications Act of 1934 to enhance protections against unauthorized changes of telephone service subscribers from one telecommunications carrier to another, and for other purposes. S. 1410 (Reed) a measure to enhance the protections against. unauthorized changes in subscriber selections of telephone. service providers. H.R. 4176 (Markey) A. measure to protect consumers against 'spamming', 'slamming', and 'cramming' S. 1618 (McCain) A bill to improve protection of consumers against slamming by telecommunications carriers. H.R. 3050 (Dingell) A measure to establish procedures and remedies for the prevention of fraudulent and deceptive practices in the solicitation of telephone service subscribers. H. R. 3888 (Tauzin) a measure to amend the Communications Act of 1934 to improve the protection of consumers against slamming by telecommunications carriers, and for other purposes. Introduced April 29, 1998; referred to Committee on Commerce. Referred to Subcommittee on Telecommunications, Trade and Consumer Protection May 8, 1998. May 8, 1998. H.R. 3888 (Tauzin) A measure to amend the Communications Act of 1934 to improve the protection of consumers against slamming by telecommunications carriers, and for other purposes. Introduced May 14, 1998; referred to Committee on Commerce. Passed Telecommunications Subcommittee, as amended, by voice vote, August 6,1998. An amendment in the nature of a substitute offered by Representative Tauzin was adopted by voiceVote by the Commerce Committee, on September 24, 1998 ( H.Rept. 105-801 ). Passed House by voice Vote, with amendment, October 12, 1998, Received in the Senate. Supporters of legislation cite the trend of the rise in slamming complaints as proof that additional legislative action is needed. Those supporting legislative action are not necessarily united in the approach such legislation should take. Some have expressed concern over the breadth of the proposed regulations contained in the measures that were considered in the 105 th and 106 th Congresses and/or individual provisions contained within them. The May 18, 1999 U.S. Appeals Court stay of the liability provisions of the FCC's slamming rules is cited as further proof in support of the need for legislation. The 105 th Congress held several hearings and introduced many bills to address this issue, but adjourned without passing legislation. No legislation addressing slamming was introduced in either the 107 th or 108 th Congresses and none has been introduced in the 109 th Congress, to date. The industry is attempting to self-regulate and has adjournment occurred before a final measure could be passed. The FCC has revised its rules with an eye to strengthening its regulations and increasing penalties for violators. Whether the FCC's strengthened slamming rules will be a sufficient deterrent to stop the practice of slamming remains unclear. the 107 th or 108 th Congress and none has been introduced in the 109 th Congress, to date. The FCC continues to take actions to enforce and further strengthen its slamming rules. The last of these new rules went into effect on November 28, 2000. Under these revised rules, states have the option of processing slamming complaints, and numerous states have opted to do so. On March 14, 2002, the FCC initiated a notice of proposed rulemaking to examine primary interexchange (long range communications) The 105 th Congress held several hearings and introduced 11 bills to address this issue. S. 1618, the "Consumer Anti-Slamming Act," passed the Senate (99-0) with amendment, on May 12, 1998. H.R. 3888 passed the House, as amended, by voice vote, on October 12,1998. Despite intense negotiations to resolve differences between the bills, the Congress adjourned before the bill could be brought to the Senate floor for consideration. The "Telecommunications Competition and Consumer Protection Act of 1998" passed the House by voice vote, with amendment, on October 12, 1998. H.R. 3888 called for the establishment of a voluntary code of conduct as an alternative to FCC regulation to address the issue. The House-passed measure contained a different approach from its Senate counterpart to combat slamming. Failure to comply with or comply with the bill would result in a fine of up to $1,000,000 for each violation. on "the feasibility and desirability" of establishing a neutral third party to administer a system to prevent slamming. The version of H.R. 3888 passed by the House Commerce Committee, and ultimately the full House, was significantly different from the Senate-passed measure. Negotiations between the House and Senate to reconcile differences between the two measures continued through the waning days of the session. Despite such efforts, however, H.r.3888 was not passed by Congress. H.R. 3888 was not brought to the Senate floor and legislation to address slamming was not enacted prior to the adjournment of the 105 th Congress. The telecommunications industry has acknowledged the existence of a slamming problem but is not necessarily in agreement with an approach to solve it. The Competitive Telecommunications Association (CompTel), a telecommunications trade association that represents competitive telecommunications service providers, issued a statement that called for "zero tolerance" of intentional slamming. CompTel urged carriers to agree to investigate all slamming allegations, repay consumers who were slammed.