VA reports that it has improved the accuracy of decisions on rating related compensation claims. VA also continues to face questions about its ability to ensure that veterans receive consistent decisions across regional offices. VA’s Inspector General has studied one indicator of possible inconsistency, the wide variations in average payments per veteran from state to state. We have identified the need for VA to systematically address this issue to achieve acceptable levels of variation, the report says. The report says VA still needs to strengthen its system for reviewing the quality of its decisions. evaluate the claim. Such evidence includes veterans’ military service records, medical examinations, and treatment records from VA medical facilities and private medical service providers. If the veteran is eligible for disability compensation, the rating specialist assigns a percentage rating based on degree of disability. A veteran who disagrees with the regional office's decision can appeal to VA’s Board of Veterans’ Appeals and then to U.S. federal courts.If the Board finds that a case needs additional work, it can be appealed. VA plans to pilot paperless Benefits Delivery at Discharge, where service members’ disability claim applications, service medical records, and other evidence would be captured electronically prior to discharge. VA attributes some of the increase in the number of claims pending and the average days pending to a September 2003 court decision that required over 62,000 claims to be deferred. Despite these efforts, VA may be limited in its ability to make and sustain significant claims processing performance improvements, according to the report by the VA. VA expects additional claims receipts based on the enactment of legislation allowing certain military retirees to receive both military retirement pay and VA disability compensation. VA cautions that ongoing hostilities in Iraq and Afghanistan, and the Global War on Terrorism in general, may increase the workload beyond current levels. VA has also noted that claims have increased in part because older veterans are filing disability claims for the first time. Also, VA notes that they are receiving more disability claims, such as those related to mental health issues including post-traumatic stress disorder. VA pays monthly disability compensation benefits to veterans with service-connected disabilities. VA also pays compensation to some spouses, children, and parents of deceased veterans and service members. VA’s pension program pays monthly benefits based on financial need to certain wartime veterans or their survivors. When a veteran submits a claim to any of the Veterans Benefits Administration's 57 regional offices, a veterans service representative is responsible for obtaining the relevant evidence to evaluate the claim. Such evidence includes veterans’ military service records. The Veterans’ Claims Adjudication Commission noted that most disability compensation claims are repeat claims. Most repeat claims were from veterans with less severe disabilities. About 65 percent of veterans who began receiving disability compensation in fiscal year 2003 had disabilities rated 30 percent or less. The commission questioned whether concentrating claims processing resources on these claims, rather than on claims by more severely disabled veterans, was consistent with program intent. Would identify any legislative actions needed to initiate and fund such changes. The lump sum option could have a number of benefits for VA as well as veterans. In December 2000, we reported that about one-third of newly compensated veterans could be interested in a lump sum option. VA’s regional office claims processing structure may be disadvantageous to efficient operations. VBA and others who have studied claims processing have suggested that consolidating claims processing into fewer regional offices could help improve claims processing efficiency, save overhead costs, and improve decisional accuracy and consistency. VA has not changed its basic field structure for processing compensation and pension claims at 57 regional offices, which experience large performance variations. VA made progress in fiscal years 2002 and 2003 reducing the size and age of its pending claims inventory, but has lost ground since then. This is due in part to increased filing of claims, including those filed by veterans of the Iraq and Afghanistan conflicts. Questions remain about consistency of VA’s decisions across regional offices and at the Board of Veterans’ Appeals. The average time to resolve an appeal rose from 529 days in fiscal year 2004 to 657 days in Fiscal Year 2006. Meanwhile, the time required to resolve appeals remains too long. VA has recently taken several steps to improve service delivery, but their potential to lead to significant improvements may be limited by several factors. VA still lacked a systematic method for ensuring the consistency of decision making within VA as a whole. According to VA, with a workforce that is sufficiently large and correctly balanced, it can successfully meet the veterans’ needs while ensuring good stewardship of taxpayer funds. In its fiscal year 2008 budget justification, VA identified an increase in claims processing staff as essential to reducing the pending claims inventory and improving timeliness. cites near-term initiatives to increase the number of claims completed, such as using retired VA employees to provide training. VA expects a temporary decline in productivity as new staff are trained and become more experienced, but expects productivity to increase in the longer term. VA’s budget justification provides information on actual and planned productivity, in terms of claims decided per full-time equivalent employee. Also, VA has identified additional initiatives to help improve productivity. For example, the use of overtime is being increased. VA has established joint training and information sharing between field staff and the Board. VA reports that it has reduced the percentage of decisions remanded from about 57 percent in fiscal year 2004 to about 32 percent in Fiscal Year 2006. Also, VA says it has improved the productivity of the Board’s judges from an average of 604 appeals decided in fiscal 2013 to 698 in fiscal 2006. The Board attributes this improvement to training and mentoring programs and expects productivity to improve to more.errors. In. 2006, we recommended that VBA assess whether it could systematically utilize an electronic library of historical military records. VBA agreed to determine the feasibility of regional offices using an alternative resource prior to sending some requests to the JSRRC. While VA is taking actions to address its claims processing challenges, there are opportunities for more fundamental reform that could dramatically improve decision making and processing. These include reexamining program design, as well as the structure and division of labor. Incomplete and inaccurate reports could affect decisional accuracy. Claims processing timeliness and decisional accuracy can be hampered if VA cannot obtain the evidence it needs in a timely manner. For example, to obtain information needed to fully develop some post- traumatic stress disorder claims, VBA must obtain records from the U.S. Army and Joint Services Records Research Center. This can significantly increase the time it takes to decide a claim. In December 2006, we recommended that VBA assess whether it could systematically track and evaluate claims for post-traumatic stress disorder. This report is a work of the U.S. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the United States. It may be reproduced and distributed in entirety without further permission from the GAO. Because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material, it may be necessary to reproduce this material separately. For further information, please contact Daniel Bertoni at (202) 512-7215 or Bertonid@gao.gov. The report was compiled by Shelia Drake, Martin Scire, Greg Whitney, and Charles Willson. After more than a decade of research, we have determined that federal disability programs are in urgent need of attention and transformation. VA and SSA’s disability programs remain mired in concepts from the past. These programs are poorly positioned to provide meaningful and timely support for Americans with disabilities. In August 2002, we recommended that VA use its.design, as well as the structure and division of labor among field offices. In January 2003, we placed modernizing federal disability Programs on our high-risk list. In November 2003, the Congress established the Veterans’ Disability Benefits Commission to study the appropriateness of VA disability benefits, including disability criteria and benefit levels. The commission is scheduled to report to the Congress by October 1, 2007. While reexamining claims processing challenges may be daunting, there are mechanisms for undertaking such an effort, including the congressionally chartered commission currently studying veterans’ disability benefits. We have recommended that the VA undertake a comprehensive review of its field structure for processing disability compensation and pension claims. training and mentoring programs and expects productivity to improve to 752 decisions in fiscal year 2008. VA has contracted for a study of the major influences on compensation payments, to develop baseline data for monitoring and managing decision variances. VA is in the process of testing templates for compensation and pension medical examinations for specific types of disabilities to ensure that medical evidence from these examinations will enable consistent evaluations of disabilities. VA formed a workgroup to study variances in the rates of benefit grants and denials, and in assigned disability evaluations.