HUD’s Assisted Living Conversion Program provides private nonprofit owners of eligible properties with grants to convert some or all of their units into assisted living facilities for the frail elderly. The facilities must provide supportive services such as personal care, transportation, meals, housekeeping, and laundry. The reconfigured facilities must include enough community space to accommodate a central kitchen or dining area, lounges, and recreation and other multiple-use areas.in the community where new construction is proposed. HUD's Section 232 Mortgage Insurance Program provides mortgage insurance for the construction or substantial rehabilitation of nursing homes. The Congregate Housing subprogram funds the development of assisted, group living environments. USDA’s Section 515 Program provides loans to construct or to purchase and substantially rehabilitate multifamily rental or cooperative housing and recreational facilities. Tenants eligible to live in program properties may also receive rental assistance through HUD or USDA programs.Generally, HUD and USDA do not provide funding for the services required under these housing programs. The property owners typically obtain other funds, either from federal for the elderly or offer funding specifically for services. The Section 515 program’s Congregate Housing subprogram requires properties to provide supportive services. Before fiscal year 1992, the Section 202 program also supported the development of housing for the disabled. The Section 221(d)(3) Below-Market Interest Rate (inactive) Section 236 Mortgage Insurance and Interest Reduction Payments (in active) The Section 207/223(f) Mortgage Insurance for Existing Multifamily Properties is inactive. The section 213 mortgage insurance for Cooperatives is also inactive, as is the Section 236 mortgage insurance and interest reduction payments. Property owners may establish relationships that give the elderly access to meals, transportation, and housekeeping and personal care services. GAO did not obtain data on the extent to which such services are made available at all public and federally subsidized multifamily housing. In Greensboro, North Carolina, Dolan Manor has established a relationship with a volunteer group from a local church. The volunteer group provides a variety of services such as transportation for transportation for the elderly, the GAO says. The GAO does not have the data to determine the extent of such partnerships. questions at this time. Individuals making key contributions to this testimony included Emily Chalmers, Natasha Ewing, Alison Martin, John McGrail, Marc Molino, Lisa Moore, John Mingus, Paul Schmidt, and Julianne Stephens. For further information on this testimony, please contact David G. Wood at (202) 512-8678. Section 502 Rural Housing Loans (Direct) Section 502 Direct Housing Natural Disaster Loans Section 502 Guaranteed Rural Housing loans Section 504 Rural Housing Repair and Rehabilitation Loans Section 515 Rural Rental Housing Loans. In Plain City, Ohio, residents of a Section 515 property receive meals five times a week in the community's senior center. A local hospital donates the food and a nursing home facility prepares it. The senior center uses the funds collected from the lunch for its activities. The United Way provides most of the funding for the senior center in Plain City. In In Plain City,. Ohio, the. group provides a variety of services such as transportation for the residents. The.group provides a. variety ofServices such as transport for theResidents. provides most of the funding for the senior center. Some elderly residents of public and federally subsidized housing may also obtain health-related services through programs run by HHS. For example, HHS’s Public Housing Primary Care Program provides public housing residents with access to affordable comprehensive primary and preventive health care through clinics that are located either within public housing or within the public housing system. In Guthrie, Oklahoma, Guthrie Properties—also a Section 515 property— has established a relationship with the local Area Agency on Aging. The agency assists residents in obtaining a variety of services. The Elderly/Disabled Service Coordinator Program has not provided new grants since 1995. The Program provides funding for managers of multifamily properties designated for the elderly and disabled to hire coordinators. Service coordinators can be funded through competitive grant funds, residual receipts (excess income from a property), or rent increases. According to HUD’s fiscal year 2003 Performance and Accountability Report, service coordinators were serving more than 111,000 units in elderly properties.. Elderly residents of public and federally subsidized multifamily housing can also receive supportive services through partnerships. state and local governments, educational institutions, private foundations, and corporations. The ROSS grant program links public housing residents with appropriate services. This program differs from the Service Coordinator Program in that it is designed specifically for public housing Residents. The program has five funding categories, including the Resident Service Delivery Models for the Elderly and Persons with Disabilities (Resident Services) The Elderly/Disabled Service Coordinator program is designed for public Housing Residents. It can be used to hire a project coordinator and assess residents’ needs for supportive services. The program awards grants to public and nonprofit private entities to establish the clinics. The organizations must work with public housing authorities to obtain the physical space for the clinics and to establish relationships with residents. Currently, there are 35 grantees, 3 of which are in rural areas. According to a program administrator, although clinics are not specifically geared toward public housing designated for the elderly, they can be established at such properties. Elderly residents of federally subsidized housing may also be eligible for the program's assistance. The Neighborhood Networks program encourages property owners, managers, and residents of HUD-insured and -assisted housing to develop computer centers. Although computer accessibility is not a traditional supportive service for the elderly, a senior HUD official noted that having computers available enhances elderly residents’ quality of life. HUD does not fund each center’s planned costs but encourages owners to seek cash grants, in-kind support, and donations from sources such as state and local governments, educational institutions, private foundations, and corporations. government strives to achieve require the concerted and coordinated efforts of two or more agencies. This shared responsibility is an outgrowth of several factors, including the piecemeal evolution of federal programs and service delivery efforts. Achieving results on public problems, such as the potentially large service needs of a growing elderly population, increasingly calls for effective interagency coordination. However, a number of barriers inhibit coordination among agencies. For example, the federal government’s system for providing assistance to low- income people is highly inefficient. system for providing assistance to low- income people is highly fragmented. Each federal assistance program usually has its own eligibility criteria, application, documentation requirements, and time frames. A review of federally assisted transportation services for “transportation- disadvantaged” seniors found that 5 federal agencies administer 15 programs. Service providers told GAO that certain characteristics of federal programs, such as what the providers view as burdensome reporting requirements and limited program guidance, are to blame. The GAO report was released on Tuesday. USDA does not have specific goals related to the elderly in its fiscal year 2004 Annual Performance Plan. As GAO has previously reported, virtually all the results that the federal government strives to achieve require the concerted and coordinated efforts of government agencies and private sector partners. USDA's goals include increasing the availability of affordable housing for the elderly, increasing the number of assisted-living units, and increasing elderly families’ satisfaction with their Section 202 units, according to the plan. The plan does not provide specific goals for assisted living or multifamily housing. residents of federally subsidized housing may also be eligible for the Medicaid Home and Community-Based Services (HCBS) Waiver Program. Through this waiver program, individuals eligible for Medicaid can receive needed health care without having to live in an institutional setting. HUD has identified these waivers as an innovative model for assisting the frail elderly in public housing. The Program of All-Inclusive Care for the Elderly (PACE) integrates Medicare and Medicaid financing to provide comprehensive, coordinated care to older adults eligible for nursing homes. Figure 1 provides information on the housing assistance programs that can use federally funded supportive services programs. In general, both HUD and USDA programs target families at lower income levels. Of these programs, 2 are intended for the elderly only, 3 target the elderly and disabled, and another 18 have special features for the Elderly. HUD has specific goals for increasing housing opportunities for the Elders, including one goal specifically related to supportive services. These programs do not reach all needy households, and waiting lists for many types of subsidized housing, including housing for the elders, are often long. The HUD Annual Performance Plan outlines these goals.  HUD administers four service-related programs that can be used in conjunction with subsidized housing programs. HUD’s Section 202 program subsidizes the development and operating costs of multifamily properties for elderly households with very low incomes. Applicants for Section 202 funding must demonstrate that services will be available at the development or in the community where new construction is proposed. The property owners typically obtain other funds, either from federal programs, local charities, and civic groups to provide supportive services or must ensure that appropriate services are available.