Food safety activities are divided into the following program functions. Monitoring/Surveillance: activities related to the monitoring of foodborne illness or disease. Inspection/Enforcement: activities to ensure compliance with agency food safety regulations. Education/Outreach: Activities related to communicating food safety- related information or guidance to the public, industry, or agencies’ other clients. Research: activities relating to the study of foodSafety-related topics, which support agency policy decisions. Risk assessment: activities that evaluate the likelihood and severity of an adverse event (e.g., illness or death) regulatory framework to enhance communication and coordination among the existing agencies. The Grocery Manufacturers of America said that the food safety system must be flexible enough to allow resources to be directed toward identifying and addressing serious food safety problems. Resources for the Future stated that the current food safety laws undermine a successful foodSafety system. Some stakeholders, including the Institute for Food Technologists, believe that modernizing the food Safety system could be accomplished by rewriting the foodSafety statutes. The Consumer Federation of America believes that a science- or risk-based system should consider not only the risk posed by the food but also the history of the plant. more effectively and efficiently control current and emerging food safety hazards. The stakeholders we contacted disagree on whether federal agencies’ food safety functions overlap, specifically with regard to inspections. The transition costs to a single agency would be higher in the short term, according to food safety experts. Some stakeholders, including the Consumer Federation of America, said that some congressional committees may be reluctant to lose jurisdiction over food safety function. The Congress has recognized this possibility in the Bioterrorism Act by authorizing FDA to commission other officials to conduct FDA’s inspections. Many federal agencies, as well as state and local entities, play a part in the U.S. food safety regulatory system. The federal framework for food safety is based on a patchwork of numerous laws. Table 6 lists the 30 laws that we have identified as the principal federal laws related to food safety. The table does not provide an exhaustive list of all food safety-related laws and amendments, nor does it detail all of the food safety provisions for those laws listed. It also includes laws that primarily deal with health claims or labeling, which we consider to be food-safety related. In commenting on a draft of this report, HHS raised concerns about our terminology regarding overlapping activities. We disagree with HHS comment that our report’s title should substitute the word duplication for overlap. Given the definitions we lay out in the report, if we modified the title as HHS suggests, we would risk implying that the agencies are undertaking many duplicative efforts. We are fully aware that under the current statutory framework the agencies do not exactly replicate food safety activities. The full report is available in appendix V. need for modernization also believe that these changes should be accompanied by consolidation of federal food safety programs into a single agency. Consolidation of functions could allow a single food agency to manage the safety of the whole food chain, not just its parts. The legislative changes needed to accomplish consolidation could also be used as the vehicle for modernizing the food safety statutes or establish a scientific basis for distributing food safety resources. The stakeholders we contacted also identified a number of roadblocks to changing the system, whether or not they supported such consolidation. which more than one agency performed similar activities. In some instances, the agencies estimated budget and staffing levels, or they were unable to separate budget data into specific categories. We believe that some economies of scale would be derived from combining overlapping activities, including those that our report highlights. We acknowledge that some elements of the 1999 interagency agreement on dual jurisdiction establishments have been implemented and that the agreement has enhanced coordination. However, we continue to believe that we could be better implemented. We further disagree that the report does not. different authorities, the activities they perform under these authorities are similar in nature. We question why the federal agencies must continue to spend resources on overlapping, and sometimes duplicative, food safety activities. We disagree with USDA’s assertion that the agencies’ inspection activities are vastly different. Our recommendations address specific areas where the agencies could improve coordination to better leverage resources, the authors say. They say the report examines inspection activities, not inspection authorities, and certainly does not identify “significant” overlaps in authorities. To identify overlaps that may exist in the federal food safety system, we collected fiscal year 2003 budget data for food safety-related activities from the U.S. Department of Agriculture. We defined overlaps as similar activities being performed by more than one agency, such as training food inspectors. In contrast, we defined duplication as essentially identical activities performed by many agencies. We used categories of food safety activities contained in the National Academy of Science’s 1998 report Ensuring Safe Food to group the agencies’ foodSafety activities. rule-making and standard-setting activities under their respective statutes. FDA estimates that it spent between $650,000 and almost $1 million to issue its seafood HACCP rule in 1995. NMFS officials said they spent $5 million to support the FDA rule by developing a model seafood surveillance project. USDA noted that in order for meat and poultry and egg products to be eligible for import to the United States, foreign food safety regulatory systems must employ equivalent sanitary measures that provide the same level of protection. USDA and FDA inspections. At jointly regulated facilities, USDA and FDA inspectors also verify that HACCP systems are in place. FDA could allow USDA inspectors, who are present every day at these jointly regulated. facilities, to inspect FDA-regulated food. In doing so, FDA could reduce overlapping inspections and redirect resources to other facilities for which it has sole daily presence at hundreds of these facilities, authors say. They say FDA could make more effective use of its resources if it redirected its inspectors to other sites for which FDA has sole jurisdiction. We have made minor modifications in the report to avoid confusion regarding HACCP principles and HAC CP plans. We indicate that different risks are associated with different food products and, therefore, require different HACC plans.products. In addition to those named above Lawrence J. Dyckman, Katheryn Hubbell, Jane Kim, Sara Margraf, Carol Herrnstadt Shulman, Michele Fejfar, Amy Webbink, and Katherine Raheb made key contributions to this report. FDA could leverage USDA’s efforts to ensure the safety of imported food by using information that USDA compiles in its determinations that exporting countries’ food safety systems are equivalent to the U.S. system. Currently, FDA visits foreign countries to inspect individual food-processing firms. USDA and FDA provide similar training to their inspectors. Both agencies train inspectors on sanitation requirements, good manufacturing practices, and HACCP. Agency officials agreed that the training programs have a when determining which countries to visit. USDA and FDA spent $884 million in fiscal year 2003 on inspection and enforcement activities. Neither USDA nor FDA has estimated the total costs associated with inspecting jointly regulated facilities. FDA spends about 7 times as much on import inspections because it is responsible for about 80 percent of the U.S. food supply, including imports from about 250 countries. USDA’s responsibility for inspecting imports that come from 34 countries is less than half that of FDA. Both agencies are not leveraging inspection resources at these ports of entry. USDA and FDA each visited Brazil, Costa Rica, Germany, Hungary, Mexico, and Canada last year. USDA spent almost $500,000, and FDA spent nearly $5 million, on its foreign country visits in fiscal year 2003. USDA and FDA officials said these agencies do not share information from each other. For example, FDA at times conducts inspections in the same countries that USDA has evaluated. The agency does not use that information when deciding which countries to visit, officials said. For more information, go to CNN.com/Heroes. would risk implying that the agencies are literally duplicating efforts in every instance. We disagree with HHS’s efficient use of both agencies’ resources—has not been maximized. We further disagree that our report inaccurately characterizes the Bioterrorism Act. As we state in the report, FDA is authorized under the act to enter into an agreement to commission other agency officials, including USDA officials, to carry out inspections on its behalf—for FDA-regulated foods. It also makes it clear that USDA and FDA inspections vary depending on whether the product is a USDA- or FDA- regulated food product. USDA and FDA are not making better use of each other’s inspection resources, authors say. The agreement was to reduce overlap and duplication of effort, they say. Depending on the type and layout of the inspection facilities, the amount of overlap can be much higher, they write. The authors conclude that the agreement has not been maximized to improve public health protection, they add. It was signed after the 2003 discovery of a cow infected with bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE) USDA appears to have misinterpreted the focus of this report, and we disagree with USDA’s characterization. This report examines overlapping activities rather than the regulatory framework that allows these activities. While we recognize that the agencies operate under different authorities, the activities they perform under these authorities are similar in nature, leading us to question why the federal agencies must continue to spend resources on overlapping, and sometimes duplicative, agencies’ split jurisdiction. We continue to believe that, because USDA maintains a daily presence at hundreds of these facilities, FDA could make significant savings. develop consumer guidance on chemical food contaminants such as pesticides, dioxin, and mercury. USDA and FDA each develop similar food safety guidance for (1) consumers on general topics and (2) industry on their HACCP regulations and sanitation and good manufacturing practices. These overlapping efforts, caused in part by the agencies’ divisions in jurisdiction, can be confusing to both consumers and industry representatives. USDA expressed serious reservations about the report, asserting that it oversimplifies food safety regulatory functions. The agencies’ food safety authorities stem from 30 principal laws related to food safety. As a result of this division of responsibility, the federal food safety system is fragmented. Both USDA and FDA inspect food-processing facilities that produce foods under the regulatory responsibility of each agency, referred to as dual jurisdiction establishments (DJE) DJEs are those that manufacture or process food products that contain ingredients regulated by more than one federal agency. The frequency of their inspections varies, but generally, USDA inspectors have a more regular presence at DJEs. To obtain the views of regulated industry and other stakeholders regarding opportunities to reduce overlap by consolidating federal food safety functions, we contacted a total of 35 stakeholders from food industry associations, food manufacturers, consumer groups, and academic experts. We conducted our review from May 2004 through March 2005 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. We asked agencies within USDA, FDA, EPA, and NMFS to provide all expenditures and staffing levels, in FTEs, for each facility. In selecting which food manufacturers to interview, we used Food Processing’s Top 100 Companies to identify the largest food manufacturers. USDA, FDA, EPA, and NMFS are involved in key program functions related to food safety. Examples of activities include inspecting domestic food-processing facilities and imported food items at U.S. ports of entry. Industry associations, food- processing companies, consumer groups, and academic experts disagree on the significance of overlapping activities in the federal food safety system. Most of these stakeholders agree that the laws and regulations governing the system should be modernized so that science and technological advancements can be used to more effectively control current and emerging food safety issues. Because of their split jurisdiction, each agency is responsible for inspecting different food products at these facilities. The agencies’ inspections have common key elements, including verifying the facilities’ compliance with sanitation standards or good manufacturing practices. Figure 5 summarizes some of the common elements of USDA and FDA inspections. At jointly regulated facilities, USDA and USDA are not leveraging inspection resources atThese ports. USDA officials told us that FDA-regulated, imported foods are sometimes stored in USDA- approved inspection facilities at these ports. Some FDA- regulated products may remain at the facility for some time awaiting inspection. FDA regulates an egg farm as a “food factory” within its area of jurisdiction. USDA regulates plants that process eggs into products such as powdered eggs. FDA’s inspections place more responsibility for food safety on the company, a plant manager says. The most effective inspection strategy would be to combine elements of both agencies’ inspections into a single inspection program, the authors say. They say this would be the most cost-effective way to ensure food safety in the U.S. Safety of food and therefore are not significant. Other stakeholders, including the U.S. Tuna Foundation and the American Meat Institute, reported that they do not think the federal agencies’ programs overlap because USDA and FDA have specific, defined areas of responsibility for their industries. The U.s. Poultry and Egg Association added that the regulatory delineations do not always make sense, citing the split jurisdiction between USDA and FAA over the regulation of eggs. The USDA inspects fruits and vegetables to be included in school lunches; and the companies, already subject to FDA inspections, incur additional. conduct risk assessments of foodborne pathogens that can contaminate food products under their respective jurisdictions. The agencies also conduct joint risk assessments when addressing the same pathogen or the same food product. In the case of eggs, regulatory responsibility shifts as eggs make their way from the farm to the table. In 2004, FDA issued a proposed rule that would require shell egg producers to implement measures to help prevent salmonella from contaminating eggs on the farm. However, the agencies have not issued a joint rule to help eliminate foodborne illnesses caused by salmonellas in eggs. USDA and FDA developed the “Fight Bac’ program to educate the public about safe food handling. FDA and EPA issued a joint consumer advisory about mercury in fish and shellfish for the first time in 2004. However, the joint advisory recommends different consumption levels, depending on whether the mercury is in the fish or the shellfish. and industry representatives to their consumer hotline about FDA-regulated food products. These agencies have made some efforts to reduce overlaps in their consumer education activities. Joint advisory recommends different consumption levels, depending on whether the fish is commercially caught (regulated by FDA) or recreationally caught. EPA said that the consumption guidance differs due to different mercury levels in recreationally and commercially caught fish. For fish purchased from a store, the guidance recommends up to 12 ounces per week. However, if the fish was caught recreationally, EPA recommends that women consume up to 6 ounces perweek. The FDA and USDA engage in rule-making and standard-setting activities under their respective statutes.  NMFS provided all expenditures and staffing levels, in FTEs, related to food safety activities they conducted in fiscal year 2003. EPA’s Office of Pesticide Prevention and Office of Water also provided data. To assess the reliability of the staffing and expenditure data, we questioned knowledgeable agency officials and reviewed existing documentation regarding the data and the systems that produced them. We determined that the data were sufficiently reliable for the purposes of identifying overlaps. As table 3 shows, inspection and enforcement-related spending accounts for most of these expenditures. determine what activities were linked to the expenditure and staffing data. We categorized expenditures and staffing and asked agency officials if they considered our categorizations to be appropriate. We adjusted our categorization when agency officials told us it was inaccurate. In some cases, the agencies’ preferred categorization of the same activity varied. For example, FDA considered inspector training as an education/outreach activity, whereas USDA considered it an inspection- related activity. These discrepancies are noted in appendix II. After we categorized the budget and staffing level data, we identified cases in which more than one agency performed similar activities. In fiscal year 2003, the four federal agencies spent nearly $1.7 billion on food safety-related activities. USDA and FDA spent $884 million in fiscal areas of food safety research and risk assessment, consumer and industry education, and rulemaking. USDA, FDA, and EPA spend more than $107 million on education and outreach on foodSafety. In some cases, these efforts target the same food safety topic. For example, USDA and EPA each develop consumer guidance on chemical food contaminants such as pesticides. safety policy decisions, development of regulations, and administration of regulatory review processes. We obtained actual expenditures and staffing level data in full- time equivalents (FTE) from the following USDA units: Agricultural Marketing Service, Agricultural Research Service, Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, Cooperative State Research, Education, and Extension Service. We also obtained data from theFollowing FDA units: Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition, Center for Veterinary Medicine, National Center for Toxicological Research, and Office of Regulatory Affairs. FDA data to inform EPA’s risk assessments on human exposure to pesticides. In 2003, FDA analyzed 11,331 food samples for pesticides and chemical contaminants to help estimate the dietary intake of pesticide residues. According to EPA officials, USDA data are their primary source of information. However, FDA provides additional information on a greater range of foods and chemicals that EPA also uses to form its decisions. USDA and FDA also both conduct risk assessments of foodborne pathogens that can contaminate food. The overlap in data collection and analysis adds value. until 30 days from the report date. This report will be available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. We are sending copies of this report to the Secretary of Agriculture, the Acting Commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration, and the Acting Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency. If you or your staffs have any questions concerning this report, I can be reached at (202) 512-3841, or robinsonr@gao,gov. FDA officials say they do not rely on NMFS inspections for two reasons. NMFS officials disagree with FDA’s viewpoint, stating that their fee-for-service structure does not affect their ability to conduct objective inspections. If FDA were to recognize the results of NMFS inspection findings in targeting its resources, it could decrease or eliminate inspections at facilities that NMFS inspectors find are in compliance with sanitation and enforcing pertinent statutes, the authors say. They say FDA is missing opportunities to leverage inspection resources and possibly avoid duplication of effort.  NMFS officials disagreed with FDA’s reasons for not using NMFS inspection results. FDA and NMFS may meet periodically and, when appropriate, with industry to promote better communication and understanding of regulations, policy, to inspect, and at what frequencies. Although FDA is not implementing the agreement, the agency has recognized the potential benefits of working with NMFS to leverage resources. NMFS readily provided us with a list of the firms it was inspecting when we spoke with officials during the course of our review.  NMFS inspectors verify sanitation procedures, HACCP compliance, and good manufacturing practices. FDA does not take into account whether NMFS has already inspected a particular facility minimum training on seafood temperature controls. FDA officials said the agency does not recognize the NMFS inspections as aiding FDA in enforcing pertinent statutes. As a result, FDA is missing opportunities, the authors say. They say USDA inspectors are capable of taking on FDA’s inspection responsibilities at jointly regulated facilities, given the proper resources and training. NOAA provided written comments and agreed with the report’s recommendations that pertain to NMFS. NOAA also commented that our report does a fair and thorough job of describing the food safety activities of NM FS. NOAA stated that the positions expressed in GAO's previous work continue to be germane to the issue of coordination with FDA on inspections of seafood. As agreed with your offices, unless you publicly release the contents of this report earlier, we plan no further distribution until 30 days from the report date. not want the company to paint its sterilization equipment because they determined that paint chips could contaminate the food. FDA inspector said it would be easier to identify sanitation problems on lightly painted equipment than on the dark-colored metal. The manager of the facility said the company had to paint and then remove the paint from equipment in order to satisfy both the USDA and FDA inspectors. In addition, at a seafood-processing plant that is inspected by both NMFS and FDA, the manager said that when FDA designed to reduce or eliminate duplication and overlaps, leverage existing resources, and enhance coordination efforts among the principal federal food safety agencies. We recommend that the Secretary of Agriculture and the Commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration work together to ensure the implementation of the interagency agreement. HHS agreed with three of the report’s seven recommendations, including identifying and inventoring all interagency agreements, and the need to evaluate and update the agreements. HHS disagreed with our recommendation regarding joint training of USDA and FDA food inspectors. The agreement has helped agency coordination and communication, officials say. USDA and FDA held 28 joint training sessions during the first year of the agreement’s implementation. No additional training has been provided since then, the report says. The report highlights several deficiencies, even as it gives the agencies credit for improved communication in times of crisis, such as during major recalls. inspectors are often the first agency staff to become aware of deficiencies at a plant. effective sharing of this type of information depends upon those inspectors being adequately trained. leverage inspection resources, as we are recommending. USDA’s comment that it shares the results of its overseas equivalency determinations contradicts what USDA and FDA officials told us during the course of our review. Any successful consolidation of inspectors’ training would of course require work. However, we continue to believe that there is merit in examining the feasibility of conducting joint training activities when workable commonalities can be found. Our findings are consistent with those of the Food and Drug Administration and the European Food Safety Authority. USDA spent $7.8 million, while FDA spent about $1.5 million, during fiscal year 2003 to train their food inspection personnel. FDA’s comparatively lower training costs reflect a contractual agreement with a private firm that has produced an online curriculum. A joint USDA-FDA training program could reduce duplication in developing training materials and in providing instruction, and potentially achieve some savings, experts say. Other federal agencies have consolidated training activities that have a common purpose and similar content. NMFS uses 74 of these online courses to train its own seafood inspectors. USDA officials said they are exploring the possibility of entering into an agreement with the company that developed FDA’s online curriculum. In addition to the costs associated with developing inspector training programs, USDA estimates that it costs about $1 million a year to run the training programs. The training includes courses that are specific to FDA's regulations and enforcement authorities.and good manufacturing practices, to courses that were developed for the FDA. The Center provides standardized programs for criminal investigators and uniformed police officers across the federal government. While standardizing basic training, the Center also offers specialized courses for individual agencies to address their particular needs. In addition, according to the Center, the interaction with students from other agencies promotes greater understanding of other agencies’ missions and duties, and therefore provides for a more cooperative federal law enforcement system. We identified overlapping activities in the areas of food safety research and risk assessment, consumer and food safety. Exchange of information will permit more efficient use of both agencies’ resources. The agreement was to be the first step toward allowing USDA’s FSIS inspectors to conduct FDA's inspections at DJEs. In 2000, USDA and FDA evaluated the agreement and concluded that the experience had been largely successful because the agencies learned about each other's operations. However, the evaluation also included recommendations to maximize use of federal resources without loss of inspection coverage for FSIS-regulated foods. It was developed in response to a 1997 report by the President's Food Safety Council, which recommended increased cooperation. redirect resources to other facilities for which it has sole jurisdiction. FDA officials said that they do not currently plan to pursue this option and have not conducted any analyses of the costs or savings associated with authorizing USDA officials to conduct FDA inspections at these facilities. USDA officials commented that their inspectors are fully occupied and that they would need to cooperate more effectively. Since the 2000 evaluation, officials at USDA and FDA said they have not again monitored the agreement’s effectiveness, nor have they implemented their recommendations. The agreement calls for the receiving agency to inform the notifying agency of the disposition of the notification, including any actions that it plans or takes, within 30 days. USDA and FDA field inspection personnel are not routinely communicating these findings to each other, the authors say. The authors found instances of major enforcement actions resulting from FDA’s notification to USDA of problems with products under its jurisdiction. They say the agreement is intended to improve coordination efforts between the agencies involved and improve food safety in 13 states. FDA field inspection personnel are not routinely communicating these findings of mutual concern. Because FDA inspectors visit DJEs less frequently than USDA inspectors, we believe that FDA staff could benefit from the compliance information that USDA inspectors collect. Third, the agreement calls for the agencies to explore the feasibility of granting each other access to appropriate computer-monitoring systems. However, the inspectors with whom we spoke continue to be largely unaware of a facility’s past history of compliance with inspection rules, the authors say. work or Internet searches. USDA’s Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service maintained a database that allowed it to readily identify all the agreements it was party to. The other agencies did not have such databases. EPA officials said that, without such tools, they had difficulty identifying the agreements they have entered into. Officials also said they are planning to develop an electronic system to identify and track these agreements. If developed, this system could offer one means of identifying and tracking these agreements, EPA said. again monitored the agreement’s effectiveness, nor have they implemented their own recommendations to realize resource savings. We found that the agencies are not systematically exchanging information about DJEs, as called for in the agreement. As a result, the agencies had great difficulty identifying the current number of DJEs to which this agreement pertains. In December 2004, FDA headquarters officials provided us a list of 1,451 known DJEs and the agency is verifying approximately 400 establishments that may be added to the list. largely unaware of a facility's past history of compliance with the other agency's regulations. Fourth, the agreement calls for the agencies to develop and provide appropriate training in the inspectional techniques and processes of each agency. In addition, the 2000 evaluation found that more training was needed, particularly at the field level, to achieve the results of the agreement. Although the agreement was signed in 2000, it has not yet been implemented in the U.S. because of a lack of congressional support. on inspection findings between agencies’ inspection personnel. Lack of a system to track and exchange information when each agency finds instances of noncompliance. Agency efforts to develop and provide training on each other’s inspection techniques and processes did not continue past the first year of the agreement. We continue to believe that the stated purpose of. the agreement—to facilitate an exchange of information permitting more efficient use of. both agencies' resources—has not been maximized. We also found that the agencies' efforts to. develop and provided training onEach other”s inspection methods and processes didn’t continue after the first. year. agreements have ceased to exist because of internal reorganizations. Agencies may not be actively monitoring the status and relevance of these agreements. Some agreements have not been updated to account for changes in a signatory’s responsibilities since they were signed. For example, NMFS and FDA on education programs to assist livestock and poultry producers in using animal drugs has not been modified to reflect the fact that USDA’S Science and Education Administration no longer exists. The agreement was signed in 1978. better implemented. We disagree that the report does not identify the distinct difference between FDA interagency agreements and memoranda of understanding. The report includes a footnote to indicate that FDA makes a distinction, which the other agencies do not. The footnote explains that, according to FDA, FDA memoranda. of understanding do not provide for exchanges of funds. FDA refers to agreements, while the report refers to memoranda, which are not interagency. agreements but are part of the same process. We acknowledge that, as used in our report, the term interagency agreement refers generally to Memoranda of Understanding, memoranda Of Agreement, and inter Agency Agreements. If developed, this system could offer one means of tracking and managing information related to, and contained in, interagency agreements. The weaknesses in tracking agreements may also affect the agencies’ ability to determine whether these agreements are still needed and whether specific provisions are still in effect. About one-third of the agreements we identified were created decades ago and may no longer be relevant to current needs. Technological and scientific advances have made some provisions of these agreements obsolete. Some agencies that were party to the agreements have ceased to exist. position on our recommendation for using the Bioterrorism Act authorities. HHS partially concurred with two other recommendations dealing with the implementation of two interagency agreements. EPA did not provide official comments, but it provided minor technical comments that we incorporated as appropriate. NOAA provided written comments and agreed with our recommendation on the use of the Bipartisan Policy Center’s information technology resources. NOAA also provided technical comments which we incorporated in our report, as appropriate, and our detailed response is contained in appendix VI. Of the 71 interagency agreements we identified, the largest proportion (43 percent) reflect the agencies agreement to increase cooperation on inspection and enforcement activities. Other agreements address activities such as education/outreach, food security, and monitoring/surveillance related to food safety and quality. 24 agreements specifically highlight the need to reduce duplication of effort by clarifying responsibilities, reducing overlaps, and/or making efficient and effective use of resources. In some instances, the agencies entered into multiple agreements to coordinate and ensure the safety of a single type of food. USDA, FDA, EPA, and NMFS do not have adequate mechanisms to track interagency food safety agreements. Agency officials did not agree on the number of food safety-related agreements they have entered into. Only 7 of the 71 agreements that we ultimately compiled were identified by all signatory agencies. Forty-one additional agreements were identified to us by only one of the multiple signatories. In addition, we found three agreements—through our prior work or Internet searches—that none of the agencies had identified. identified seven agreements that focus on seafood inspection and enforcement activities. Signatories to one or more of these agreements include USDA, FDA, NMFS, the Department of Defense, and the Interstate Shellfish Sanitation Conference. Agency officials also noted that they informally cooperate and a signatory’s responsibilities since they were signed. To strengthen management controls and maximize the effectiveness of interagency agreements, we recommend that the Secretary of Agriculture, the Commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration and the Under Secretary of Commerce for Oceans and Atmosphere identify and inventory all active agreements. In 1999, USDA and FDA signed an interagency agreement to facilitate the exchange of information about food-processing facilities that they both inspect. The agreement stated that the exchange will permit more efficient use of agency resources. We categorize the agreements according to primary program function. We also independently categorized the agreements using information from their introduction and/or background to ensure consistent categorization across the agencies. If the agencies’ categorization differed with ours, we considered their rationale and changed the categorization as appropriate. authorizing FDA to commission other agencies’ officials to conduct FDA’s inspection activities. Other avenues are open to the agencies as well. For example, the two interagency agreements that we examined in detail, could address problems in duplicative inspections if they were more effectively implemented. We are making seven recommendations designed to reduce or eliminate duplication and overlaps, leverage existing agreements and make the system more efficient and effective. For more information, go to FDA.gov/Inspections.