Liberty RadEx is set to take place April 26-30, 2010, in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. The exercise is to focus on technical recovery issues involving intergovernmental coordination. Draft guidance intended to outline the structure of, and responsibilities for the conduct of the optimization process as they pertain to EPA’s involvement in RDD or IND incidents is under review by the new Administrator. EPA added that it looks forward to the lessons to be learned from the upcoming Liberty RadEx exercise in 2010. Some federal agency officials question the need to improve the predictive capabilities of these plume models. EPA agreed that characterization of areas contaminated with radioactive materials from RDD or IND incidents would be challenging. NNSA officials informed us they are working with FEMA on a multiyear program to improve federal capabilities to model the release of material during a radiological or nuclear incident. However, they contend that plume modeling will never replace the need for actual measurements for radioactive contamination.purpose is only theoretical at this point. The current predictive capability of various plume models is not sufficient, and may never be sufficient to reduce the time necessary to fully characterize the extent of contaminated areas after RDD or IND incidents. According to a senior official at the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory’s Interagency Modeling and Atmospheric Assessment Center (IMAAC), the predictive capabilities of existing plumes models are not at the resolution necessary to produce this added value for urban areas. This official told CNN that modeling for this purpose is only theoretical at this point. In the Superfund program, EPA can bill the responsible party, if known. The issue is not only ownership, but where to put the radioactive debris and how to cover the cost of storage and disposal. The UK has a clearance rule for allowing very low-level radioactive waste to be disposed of in less expensive ways. The U.S. Government Decontamination Service is learning more about how to deal with the disposal of radioactive waste that has no known owner, which might be similar to the radioactive waste stemming from an RDD. restrictions on accessing possible disposal facilities for the radioactive debris stemming from such incidents. According to NNSA officials, DOE’s disposal sites currently can only accept low-level and mixed low- level radioactive waste from its own and DOD facilities. EPA is concerned about access to commercial radioactive waste disposal sites in the event of such an incident, according to an EPA decontamination expert. Currently, there is only one low-levels radioactive waste. disposal site located in Utah that could be used by most states for radioactive debris disposal. EPA determined that there was a significant capacity and competency gap in efficiently meeting the laboratory evaluation needs for an RDD scenario. Such an incident could contaminate 3,000 square miles and require potentially millions of samples for laboratory analysis. According to EPA documentation, the gap in laboratory capacity would result in the lack of timely, reliable, and interpretable data. EPA has documented that it is currently establishing an all-media Environmental Response Laboratory Network. It is also conducting a demonstration project to enhance the capacity and capability of public laboratories. There are some limitations in federal capabilities to complete laboratory validation of contaminated areas and levels of cleanup after applying decontamination approaches. FEMA’s proposed process for determining cleanup standards during the recovery phase for RDD and IND incidents has not been fully exercised, although there was a tabletop discussion among government officials in a June 2009 exercise. EPA and FEMA regional office respondents differed somewhat on the need for standard national guidance on the application of approaches for environmental cleanup of areas contaminated with radioactive materials. Many of the federal regionalOffice respondents mentioned the need to conduct recovery exercises that involve state and local governments. sufficient to effectively clean up from RDD or IND incidents because federal agencies have only carried out environmental cleanup of localized areas of radioactive materials. Some limitations exist in federal capabilities to help address the magnitude of the cleanup that would follow these incidents. The current DHS planning guidance for RDD and IND incidents recommends a framework for incident cleanup and recovery using a process called “site-specific optimization” for determining the level of environmental cleanup after RDDor IND incidents. In a recent research paper on disposal issues, the proper characterization of the quantity, properties, and level of debris contamination and decontamination residue can have significant impacts on cleanup costs and restoration timelines. magnitude of RDD or IND incidents. For example, DOE has invested hundreds of millions of dollars in research, development, and testing of methods and technologies for cleaning up and decommissioning contaminated structures and soils. Since the passage of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act (CERCLA), which established the Superfund program, EPA has undertaken significant efforts to study, develop, and use technologies that can address radioactive contamination. DOD has also played a major role in studying potential applications for innovative technologies for its Superfund sites. Experts say conventional use of high-pressure hosing to decontaminate a building is effective under normal conditions but could be the wrong cleanup approach for an RDD using cesium-137. In this case, the imbibing (absorbing) properties of some porous surfaces such as concrete would actually cause this soluble radioactive isotope to penetrate even further into surfaces. There are also limitations in federal capabilities to help address, in a timely manner, the magnitude of cleanup that would be associated with RDD or IND incidents. EPA has published inventories of radiological methods and technology guidance for contaminated sites, surfaces, and media. The cleanup technologies are generally grouped into chemical and physical technologies. EPA has also published guidance for its On-Scene Coordinators at each regional office to aid in their response to a radiological incident. This guidance addresses possible decontamination approaches for eight types of radionuclides that experts believe are most likely to be used in an RDD. As previously mentioned, federal agencies’ current approaches to analysis and environmental cleanup have only been applied in localized areas. its Superfund sites. As a result of federal agencies’ experience with radioactive materials, there is evidence that the agencies could effectively carry out the analysis and environmental cleanup of localized areas contaminated by these materials. In regard to analysis, DOE’s National Nuclear Security Administration (NNSA) has developed operational plans, orders, and publications on how to respond to a radiological or nuclear incident. NNSA has developed various FRMAC manuals to guide operational, assessment and monitoring activities. In addition, EPA's National Decontamination Team has published guidelines that provide a framework for how to develop sampling plans to support decontamination efforts. We spoke with subject matter experts at the National Nuclear Security Administration, EPA, and FEMA. We also observed a demonstration of the capabilities of the Interagency Modeling and Atmospheric Assessment Center at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory. In addition, we reviewed reports and reports and reviews of incidents and incidents.incidents in the U.S. and around the world. We spoke with experts at DOE’s Lawrence LiverMore National Laboratory, Idaho National Laboratory and EPA”s Andrew W. Breidenbach Environmental Research Center, National Air and Radiation Environmental Laboratory. Homeland Security Research Center: More research is needed to develop standard national guidance for their efficacious application in urban areas and to other RDD or IND incident scenarios. Expert: Without guidance and discussion early in the response phase, a contractor might use a decontamination technology during this phase for no other reason than it was used before in an unrelated situation. The expert told us that this situation has shown that without this guidance, the technology could be used in an unconnected incident in the future. Security experts have raised concerns that terrorists may try to smuggle radiological or nuclear materials into the United States to produce either an RDD or IND. Sealed sources are used throughout the U.S. and are commonly called a sealed radiological source. This radioactive material is encapsulated, or sealed, in metal, such as stainless steel, titanium, or platinum, to prevent its dispersal and is commonly known as a sealed Radiological Source (RDS) or dirty bomb. The RDD is a bomb made from a mixture of nuclear and radioactive materials. Sealed sources are used to diagnose and treat illnesses, preserve food, detect flaws in pipeline welds, and determine the moisture content of soil. Depending on their use, sealed sources contain different types of radioactive material. Chechen separatists placed a canister containing cesium-137 in a Moscow park in the mid- 1990s. Although the device was not detonated and no radioactive material was dispersed, the incident demonstrated that a dirty bomb could be planted in a city. The U.S. government has no plans to use sealed sources in the near future. The dispersal of the polonium by the perpetrators of the crime and the victim resulted in widespread contamination across London and even abroad. The decontamination activities at these sites spanned 19 days, involved a number of methods and technologies, and cost over $1 million. British investigators also identified over 1,000 people who might have been in various ways exposed to thePolonium. Health officials tested 738 of them and found that 137 had reportable levels of this substance, although few of these individuals turned out to have levels that warranted medical attention. In 2006, Alexander Litvinenko, a former officer of the Russian Federal Security Service, was poisoned with radioactive material. No radioactive material was dispersed, but the incident demonstrated that terrorists have the capability and willingness to use radiological materials as weapons of terrorism. In contrast, detonating an IND would require a terrorist group to obtain nuclear weapons material and to have highly sophisticated expertise and equipment to fabricate this material into a weapon. It would also take a group of highly skilled and experienced terrorists to carry out an IND. Within greater London, given the international nature of the event, even though the incident was classified as a hazardous materials event rather then a terrorist incident. According to the recovery planning process, the city selected a contractor from the Government Decontamination Service list of specialized contractors for the remediation work. This model contract contains allowable costs per unit, equipment charges, and charge out rates for the emergency response. Under the contract, the selected specialized contractor agrees to start off with nonaggressive, simple, and less expensive decontamination approaches. of terrorism. For large commercial concerns, the insurance industry offers terrorist insurance that is underwritten by the government. For smaller companies, terrorist insurance is offered for an additional 20 percent surcharge on an existing policy. Other funding is available for local governments if such an event would overwhelm their financial resources, such as applying for grants from the national government or European Union. In regard to its framework of specialized contractors, the service has identified three specialized contractors that have capabilities to address various decontamination scenarios. off with nonaggressive, simple, and less expensive decontamination approaches, and then apply more sophisticated approaches, if necessary, to meet the desired cleanup level. The actual payments for these services were made by the owners of properties, such as a hotel where the perpetrators of the crime had stayed, that were contaminated with polonium. The cleaning up of public premises was a responsibility of the local government. The national government has established ways to help cover the costs of such incidents. This includes insurance coverage for damages resulting from acts of terrorism. capabilities through testing. A specialized contractor is invited to visit the location, receives a briefing on the incident scenario, and is asked to develop a recommended decontamination strategy. The Government Decontamination Service assesses the contractor’s approach and recommendations to identify issues, strengths, and weaknesses. In addition, the service develops improvement plans, backed with exercises, to address identified performance gaps. For example, in December 2007, the government tested and evaluated the capabilities of one of its specialized contractors to analyze and clean up areas contaminated with radioactivity in downtown Birmingham. Established a Government Decontamination Service in 2005. This organization was created out of recognition that it would not be cost-effective for each entity to maintain the level of expertise needed for cleaning up chemical, biological, radiological, and nuclear materials, given that such events are rare. The service provides advice and guidance to local governments, maintains and builds a framework of specialized analysis and environmental cleanup contractors, and advises the national government regarding response capabilities. This service implemented its responsibilities by assisting the City of Westminster respond to the analysis and Environmental cleanup needs of the city. We examined the extent to which federal agencies are planning to help cities and states clean up areas contaminated with radiation materials from radiological dispersal device (RDD) and improvised nuclear device (IND) incidents. We interviewed cognizant officials from the Department of Homeland Security (DHS), Department of Energy (DOE), Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), Federal Emergency Management Administration (FEMA), and Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) In addition, we are providing information on actions taken in the United Kingdom to prepare for recovering from RDD and IND incidents. our survey to identify which federal agencies they would turn to for help in the analysis and environmental cleanup of areas contaminated with radioactive materials from RDD or IND incidents. They provided inconsistent responses and frequently listed several federal agencies for the same activity. These responses seem to indicate that there might be some confusion among city and state emergency management officials regarding federal agency responsibilities to provide assistance to them. We recommend that the Secretary of Homeland Security direct the Federal Emergency Management Agency Administrator to prepare a national disaster recovery strategy. GAO: States would need to rely heavily on federal government to recover from RDD, IND incidents. States' technical and financial resources would be overwhelmed by a large RDD incident, GAO says. GAO: Only half of respondents indicated they were getting sufficient intelligence information from law enforcement sources. U.K. has actual RDD and IND incidents; U.S. has potential, says GAO, through NNSA, states recover from these incidents, says U.N. official. rapidly the federal government could provide this assistance, despite the strengthening of some capabilities since the terrorist attack of September 11, 2001. One state was particularly concerned about current federal capabilities to handle multiple and simultaneous RDD incidents across the country. The National Science and Technology Council’s 2008 report also found that cities and states would need to rely heavily on a strong federal response to a radiological incident. This report identified similar limitations inFederal capabilities to rapidly characterize an incident site and contaminated critical. days, involved a number of methods and technologies, and cost more than $200,000. The estimated total cost of managing this incident, including law enforcement investigation, testing individuals, sampling materials, and cleanup, was $4 million. FEMA has not completed planning to help cities and states recover from RDD or IND incidents, the authors say. A faster recovery would help lessen the consequences of RDD and IND incidents. In fact, being fully prepared may also serve as a deterrent to those who would do us harm. Emergency management officials from almost all 13 cities and most of their 10 states indicated in our survey IND incidents, cities and states lack a framework for developing their own recovery strategies. The lack of recovery planning for RDD and IND incidents may be due, in part, to the relatively low priority given to preparing for them by city and state emergency management officials. Most respondents from cities expressed the need for greater planning interactions with the federal government and more exercises to test recovery plans. The majority of the EPA regional offices (6 of 10) and FEMA regional offices indicated that a national disaster recovery strategy was needed. annexes to the National Response Framework, such as its emergency support function annexes and nuclear and radiological incident annexes. In addition, after speaking with emergency management officials in San Francisco and comparable state officials near Sacramento, California, we developed a semistructured telephone survey instrument. We originally selected 13 high- and medium-risk cities and their 11 states to cover the mostly likely target cities for a terrorist attack and to ensure that that information was available to the public in a timely manner. The cities included Atlanta, Boston, Chicago, Dallas, Denver, Detroit, Houston, Los Angeles, New York, Philadelphia, San Francisco, Seattle, and St. Louis. While Washington, D.C., is considered a high-risk city, we excluded it from our survey because it is unlike other cities in its reliance on the federal government and agencies that would take over analysis and environmental remediation activities. Emergency management officials representing these cities and their states responded to our survey, except for Washington. expressed by many city, state, and federal regional office emergency management officials. FEMA’s National Exercise Schedule database was used to identify the location and types of RDD and IND response and recovery exercises. All EPA and FEMA regional offices responded to our survey, except FEMA region 8. We tabulated the yes and no responses to each pertinent question and conducted a content analysis of the explanatory statements accompanying many of the questions. For example, respondents from several cities told us that they were concerned about how rapidly the federal government could provide this assistance. cities, like those from their states, want the federal government to consult with them in the initial formulation of a recovery strategy. Respondents representing most cities (10 of 13) and states (7 of 10) also provided specifics on the type of planning guidance necessary. For example, respondents from some of the cities sought better guidance on monitoring radioactivity levels, acceptable cleanup standards, and management of radioactive waste. Most respondents from cities expressed the need for greater planning, including integration and clarification of responsibilities among federal, state, and local governments. cities and their states responded to our survey. Atlanta and the states of Georgia and Massachusetts were dropped from the list. Miami and the state of Florida were added to the list because they are in the same federal region. Because we decided to retain Boston despite receiving no response from Massachusetts, we ended up with 10 states. We also visited EPA regional offices in San Francisco and Denver, and the FEMA regional office in Oakland, to develop the list of cities and states that responded to the survey. The Post-Katrina Emergency Management Reform Act of 2006 requires FEMA to develop, coordinate, and maintain a national disaster recovery strategy. FEMA has not issued specific guidance and IND incidents. The lack of clearly communicated guidance on federal responsibilities and activities has left emergency management officials in the cities and states confused about which federal agency to turn to for assistance, according to the report. The federal government has placed a higher priority on developing a strategy to respond to domestic incidents, including RDD andIND incidents. Currently, the limited federal planning guidance related to the recovery from RDD and IND incidents can be found in a number of documents. There are several annexes to the National Response Framework that address, in part, federal agency responsibilities and assets to help state and local governments recover from these incidents. DHS is identified as the technical lead for recovery activities, but may request support from other federal agencies, for example, EPA and the United States Army Corps of Engineers. According to this annex, the federal government, in revising their operational plans for recovery. FEMA has not issued specific guidance describing how federal capabilities would be integrated into and support state and local plans for recovery from RDD or IND incidents. According to a senior FEMA official, the agency has delayed issuing this guidance pending the reevaluation of its planning approach by the new administration. FEMA is developing regional support plans, including for RDD and IND incidents, through its regional offices. The agency is already aware that its planning system does not fully recognize the involvement of state andLocal governments. together on this guidance in an attempt to clarify the processes for providing federal cleanup assistance following such an incident. DHS’s guidance was intended to cover the existing operational guidelines for implementing the protective action guides and other response actions, and to encourage their use in developing specific response protocols. In responding to a draft of this report, EPA informed us that DOE had convened an interagency workgroup to address gaps in DHS‘s guidance and had issued a preliminary report, for comment by September 30, 2009. This guidance describes the generic framework for multiagency response and recovery for all levels of government. The guidance emphasizes that recovery should be an integral part of response from the very beginning. No single approach could meet the needs of every affected area, so this guidance is not prescriptive or an operational manual. In 2005, the United Kingdom established a special Government Decontamination Service to address issues. The U.K. took the following actions: Enacted civil protection legislation in 2004;. Established a Government Deconsolidation Service in 2005. The United Kingdom has developed a comprehensive program to ensure an effective response to a range of disruptive emergencies. The country uses the term “resilience” as the ability of organizations to withstand or recover easily and quickly from hardships. The national government does not expect communities to directly track these risks, but rather to improve their own preparedness based on a community risk register. One of the risk categories is an actual terrorist attack using an explosive device. The UK government doesn’t expect communities. to directlyTrack these risks. incidents following passage of this act made it clear to the national government that these responders needed more comprehensive guidance than that contained in the 2005 guidance. One such event was the July 2005 subway bombing in London by a terrorist group that killed 52 people. This incident, in conjunction with other events in 2005, such as the Buncefield Fire and severe flooding, prompted the government in 2006 to form a National Recovery Working Group to address the need for additional recovery guidance for multiple risk scenarios. This working group was comprised of a In 2008, the government published a national risk register. This register provides information on the risks facing the country, including malicious attacks such as with an RDD. This threat information was previously held confidential by the government. The government reported that the release of this information is intended to encourage public debate on security and help organizations, individuals, families, and communities that want to prepare for these emergencies. The register is designed to complement community risk registers that have been published by local emergency planners since passage of the 2004 civil protection legislation. planners since passage of the 2004 civil protection legislation. The community risk registers are based on local judgments of risks, as well as from information contained in the national risk assessment. The government reports that while there have been very few examples of attacks such as the 1995 release of Sarin gas in a Tokyo subway, it still recognizes the need to prepare and plan for them. In March 2009, the Nuclear Emergency Planning Liaison group published a UK Nuclear Recovery Plan Template. This document provides generic guidance for a recovery strategy and structures needed to address a radiological release from a civil or defense nuclear reactor. a framework for addressing the release of radiological materials that prompted planning for the recovery from these events. This framework was primarily established through the 2001 Radiation (Emergency Preparedness and Public Information) Regulations and the 2004 Civil Contingencies Act. The regulations require preparation of on- and off-site emergency management plans for release of radioactive materials in the event of a nuclear power plant accident. In addition, the United Kingdom and the United States have agreed to increase the exchange of information and personnel regarding the research, development, testing, evaluation, and development of technical standards and operations. characteristics of an RDD incident, including testing hundreds of people who may have been exposed to radiation and a cleanup of numerous radiation-contaminated areas. The United Kingdom reported taking the following actions: establishing a government decontamination service. The UK Nuclear Recovery Plan Template considers recovery to be more than simply the replacement of what has been destroyed and the rehabilitation of those affected. The particular emphasis on recovery activities in the United Kingdom has been linked to decades of experience with the conflict in Northern Ireland, widespread contamination from the Chernobyl nuclear power plant accident. Westminster respond to the analysis and environmental cleanup needs following the November 2006 polonium poisoning of Alexander Litvinenko. Developed online national recovery guidance in 2007. This guidance reinforces and updates the early emergency response and recovery guidance. The guidance—reviewed every 3 months and updated as necessary—emphasizes the need for training recovery personnel on essential roles, responsibilities, and procedures to test competencies. This country has actual experience with recovery from a radiological incident in an urban area and was suggested to us by EPA officials as a country that is one of the leaders in recovery planning. statutory powers itself, nor does it directly provide analysis and environmental remediation services. Instead, it provides advice and guidance to local governments, maintains and builds a framework of specialized contractors to conduct these activities. In November 2006, the Government Decontamination Service was requested to respond to an incident involving the poisoning of Alexander Litvinenko with a milligram of polonium-210. This service was asked to assist the City of Westminster, within greater London, given the international nature of the event. a broader Strategic Recovery Coordinating Group during the recovery phase. The guidance requires that all high-risk cities in the United Kingdom prepare recovery plans. Recovering from RDD or IND incidents would likely be difficult and lengthy. Completing the analysis and environmental cleanup of areas contaminated with radioactive materials would be among the first steps in the recovery process after the initial response to save lives. The 2006 polonium incident in London showed the value of recovery planning, according to United Kingdom officials. They found that implementing cleanup plans in the poloniam poisoning incident and testing plans in a November 2008 recovery exercise have helped the UK better prepare for larger RDD and IND incidents. The aftermath of the 2006 polonium poisoning incident in London had many of the characteristics of an RDD incident, including testing hundreds of people. FEMA regional office respondents indicated that it would be beneficial to synchronize existing guidance from multiple and disparate sources to ensure that they are complementary and not competing. About half of the EPA regionalOffice respondents expressed the need for guidance on the application of existing approaches for RDD or IND incidents. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90 or visit a local Samaritans branch, see www.samaritans.org for details. Current handbooks, updated from the 2008 version, include management options for application in the prerelease, emergency and longer-term phases of an incident. Sources of contamination considered in the handbooks include nuclear accidents, radiological dispersion devices, and satellite accidents. Conducted a full-scale RDD recovery exercise in 2008. This exercise, involving several hundred participants, provided a unique developed for the United Kingdom. Member countries of the European Union are currently customizing their handbooks for use at national, regional, and local levels. The handbooks are intended to aid decision makers in developing recovery strategies for contaminated food production systems, drinking water, and inhabited areas. The handbooks were first published in 2005 in response to the Chernobyl nuclear power plant accident. The 2009 version of the UK Recovery Handbooks for Radiological Incidents is considered relevant to radiological releases from the nuclear and nonnuclear industry sectors. The European Union also supported the development of a series of generic recovery handbooks for use by other countries based on the structure, format, and content of the handbook developed for the United Kingdom. of comprehensive, state-of-the-art datasheets for around 100 management options. The handbooks can be applied as part of the decision-aiding process to develop a recovery strategy following an incident. In November 2008, Exercise Green Star tested government capabilities to recover from a terrorist attack based on the handbooks. The UK Recovery Handbooks for Radiation Incidents: 2009 can be downloaded for free from the UK Government's official website at: http://www.gov.uk/recoveryhandbooks. exercise, participants looked at immediate cleanup issues, including resource priorities and management responsibilities. On day two, participants considered the longer-term issues of environmental contamination, monitoring strategies, and financial considerations. The use of a real radioactive isotope within the exercise scenario ensured that participants were able to investigate their own and wider mechanisms for obtaining scientific advice. A scientific advisory group was put in place to expedite the recovery process by helping to manage scientific input into the decision-making process. An after-action report was prepared following this exercise to capture lessons learned. discussed during this exercise pertained to the transition of the leadership of FRMAC from the initial analysis of the contaminated area to the later cleanup phase. For example, there are unresolved operational issues regarding the level and quality of the monitoring data. According to EPA officials, while this transitional issue has been discussed in exercises dating back to the development of the Federal Radiological Emergency Response Plan in 1984, it has only recently be discussed in RDD or IND response exercises. Another unresolved issue is the level of monitoring data necessary for EPA to accept the leadership from DOE. concurred with the recommendations in the report. DOE, through NNSA, generally agreed with our report findings and provided technical comments. EPA did not agree or disagree with the report findings, but offered technical comments, which we incorporated as appropriate. If you or your staffs have any questions about this report, please contact me at (202) 512-3841 or aloisee@gao.gov. Contact points for our Offices of Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last page of this report. from other sources to obtain a better understanding of this system and how it might apply to the United States. Two officials from the United Kingdom who we interviewed during our site visit reviewed a draft of the information contained in appendix III for content and accuracy. We conducted this performance audit from October 2008 to January 2010 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives. Ned Woodward (Assistant Director), Nancy Crothers, James Espinoza, Tracey King, Thomas Laetz, Jay Smale, Vasiliki Theodoropoulos, and Keo Vongvanith are on the board of directors. The board is made up of seven members: the directors, the executive directors, and the chief operating officers. For more information on the Board of Directors, visit the board's website at: http://www.cnn.com/cnn/2013/01/29/politics/top-stories/topstories/stories/kennel-cnn-kenneline-kenny-lennon.html#storylink=cpy. Federal agencies and local jurisdictions have used existing federal guidance as a basis for planning RDD and IND response exercises and, to a much lesser extent, recovery exercises. According to DHS guidance, preparedness is the foundation of a successful national incident management system involving all levels of government and other nongovernmental organizations as necessary. The cycle of preparedness for prevention, protection, response, and recovery missions ends with adequate exercising, evaluation, and improvement, according to the DHS guidance. Our survey of city, state, and federal regional office emergency management officials found that many response and a few recovery exercises were conducted over the last 6 years. an RDD or IND response exercise has typically not occurred because of the time needed to fully address the response objectives of the exercise. The most recent RDD response exercise, based in Albany, New York, set aside 2 days (June 16-17, 2009) for federal, state, and local agencies to discuss operational recovery issues. One unresolved operational recovery issue discussed during this exercise pertained to the transition of the of RDD and IND response and recovery exercises. Because we determined in our April 2009 report (GAO-09-369) that this database is unreliable, we asked each city, state and federal regional office in our survey to list RDD, IND, and recovery exercise that had taken place in their jurisdiction. intergovernmental coordination, such as setting environmental cleanup priorities and levels, as well as managing radioactive waste staging and disposal. The United Kingdom provides an example of another country’s efforts to prepare to recover from a terrorist attack using chemical, biological, radioactive, or nuclear materials. It is uncertain whether federal capability is sufficient to effectively clean up from RDD or IND incidents conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based in our audit. This working group was comprised of a wide range of government departments and agencies, as well as other stakeholders who had been involved in the recovery phase following these events. In 2007, the working group produced a National Recovery Guidance document. This online guidance covers 14 generic issues, such as recovery structures and processes, training and exercises, and a lessons learned process, which are reviewed every 3 months and updated as necessary. This guidance establishes a planning process for involving recovery stakeholders during the response phase to ensure that the potential impact of early advice and actions are explored and understood. Several hundred participants took part in the exercise. The lessons learned from this exercise were incorporated into the United Kingdom’s recovery strategy. One key lesson is the benefit of exercising the handover of government leadership during the response phase to leadership of the recovery phase. Established a recovery strategy for the UK in 2008. 2008. The U.K. launched a recovery plan for the country following the earthquake and tsunami of September 11, 2011. The United Kingdom has a long history of dealing with natural disasters. nuclear weapons and special nuclear materials in transit. It is also considered applicable to recovery from RDD and IND incidents. Among other things, it provides guidance on the formation of a Recovery Advisory Group and Science and Technology Advisory Cell early in the response phase. The Advisory Group would be charged with identifying immediate and high-level strategic recovery objectives. This advisory group would transition into a broader Strategic Recovery Coordinating Group during the recovery phase. It would include experts on health and welfare, environment and infrastructure, and monitoring response and recovery activities. destroyed and the rehabilitation of those affected. It is a complex social and developmental process rather than just a remediation process. The manner in which recovery processes are undertaken is thus critical to their success and, therefore, best achieved when the affected community is able to exercise a high degree of self-determination. The Strategic Recovery Coordinating Group would be supported by specific subgroups. These subgroups would include ones for finance and legal, communications, business and economic recovery, health and welfare, environment and infrastructure, and monitoring. cleanup of the physical infrastructure and natural environment. The guidance suggests that this subgroup consider forming task groups to, among other things, address waste management and disposal. The templates would be referred to throughout the recovery to ensure that the work of the Strategic Recovery Coordinating Group is focused and on track. In addition to the person named above, individuals who made important contributions to this report were Dr. Timothy Persons (Chief Scientist), Ned Woodward (Assistant Director), Nancy Crothers, James Espinoza, Tracey King,