Under the ACA, restaurants and similar retail food establishments (SRFE) that are part of a chain of 20 or more are subject to the requirements of Section 4205. The meaning of SRFE was not defined in the ACA. The FDA has proposed two options for the definition of "restaurants" to be covered by the rule. Some have argued that Option 1, as described in Table 1 , is too broad and that grocery and convenience stores should not be covered. Others have argued for a narrower definition of the term that does not include supermarkets as SRFE. Some Members of Congress, with support from the grocery industry, have expressed concern over Option 1. They have introduced legislation that would define SRFE as establishments that derive more than 50% of their revenue from restaurant-type food, similar to the proposed Option 2 in Table 1. Some members of Congress who advocate for a broader definition of SRFE note that Congress intended the law to include all establishments that sell restaurant-like food to consumers. They argue that Option 1 is too narrow, and that congressional intent was to encompass grocery and convenience stores, as well as movie theaters, bowling alleys, and bookstore cafes. exempt movie theaters, amusement parks, general merchandise stores with in-house concession stands, hotels, and transportation carriers such as trains and airplanes. The alternate definition (see Option 2 in Table 1 ) would also generally exempt these entities, as well as grocery and convenience stores. Other restaurants and SRFE that are not regulated under the proposed definitions may voluntarily register with an "authorized official" to be subject to the requirements of this regulation and would also be considered "covered establishments," according to the proposed rule. Under the FFDCA, FDA may deem foods misbranded unless health and nutrition claims are made according to FDA regulations. FDA relies on food companies to voluntarily recall misbranded products. FDA does not have mandatory recall authority for food that is deemed misbranded due to nutrition labeling. Although the FDA was allowed to enforce certain provisions in Section 4205 upon enactment of the ACA, it has proposed to refrain from enforcement until it has completed rulemaking. The FFD CA requires all food regulated by the FDA to bear labeling with the serving size, total calories per serving.  nutrition labeling requirements in the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (FFDCA) were established by the Nutrition Labeling and Education Act of 1990 (NLEA). The ACA provision required nutrition labeling for foods sold in chain restaurants and vending machines. Both were previously exempt from the FDA's nutrition labeling authority. The provision also has a section on federal preemption of state and local laws regarding nutrition labeling in restaurants and SRFE. The ACA required the FDA to promulgate regulations to carry out this new section of the FFDCA within one year of enactment. fast food company in the United States, announced in September 2012 that it would list calorie information on all restaurant and drive-thru menu boards. Federal responsibility for food safety and food labeling rests primarily with the FDA and the Department of Agriculture (USDA) The 1938 Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (FFDCA) granted FDA the authority to regulate food products and their ingredients. FDA's authority over nutrition labeling of those products was created by the FFDCA. FDA is responsible for ensuring that all domestic and imported food products, except for most meats and poultry, are safe, nutritious, and accurately labeled. The FDA has the authority to further specify requirements for the layout and design of the label to assist consumers. Infant formula and medical foods, which are subject to other labeling requirements, are exempt from the nutrition labeling requirements. The FFDCA has provisions regarding its preemption of state and local nutrition labeling laws. It also provides the Secretary the Authority to remove or otherwise change nutrient information requirements by regulation. It provides several exemptions from nutritionlabeling requirements, such as the exemption for infant formula. The proposed rule included definitions for a number of terms that were not defined in the law. It also listed the requirements of Section 4205 of the ACA. The proposed rule was available for public comment through July 5, 2011, and a final rule is expected by the end of the year. It set requirements for covered restaurants and SRFE to implement the rule, provided detail for voluntary registration of establishments that are not covered by the law but that elect to be subject to the requirements. It outlined enforcement mechanisms for establishments that fail to comply. public comment through July 5, 2011, and a final rule is expected by the end of 2012. The following sections present many of the terms that were defined in the statute and the proposed rule, and then provide a discussion of the issues raised regarding these terms. While some definitions are clear and straightforward, others have generated debate, including the FDA's determination of the scope of covered establishments, variation among establishments, and the cost of the rule. The report also describes the components of the proposedRule that have invoked concern or debate. The FDA published the preliminary regulatory impact analyses (PRIA) for restaurant menu nutrition labeling and vending machine calorie labeling in March 2011. The PRIA and proposed rules generated hundreds of comments from industry, Members of Congress, and the public. The FDA was further instructed to consider certain factors in rulemaking, including the standardization of recipes and preparation methods, variation in ingredients, serving size, and formulation of menu items. It also listed the requirements of Section 4205 of the Food and Drug Act. by human hands, and thereby subject to greater variation in preparation, making it more challenging to adhere to the 80-120 rule. Critics note that wide variation due to individual order preparation was one of the reasons the FDA exempted restaurant food from the NLEA regulations in 1993. The restaurant industry has argued that the six-month window for compliance is not enough time for their constituents to fully comply. Faced with the possibility of budget cuts, it is unclear if the FDA will have the funding to enforce a strict interpretation of calorie and other nutrition information. The FDA relies on food companies to voluntarily recall adulterated, misbranded, or otherwise unsafe products. In the proposed rule, the FDA provides a six-month window for restaurants and SRFE to comply with the final rule, once published. Industry representatives have requested a longer timeline of one year for full compliance. If the language regarding the 80-120 rule is finalized, the food will be deemed misbranded under allergen labeling regulations, according to the FDA. The FDA has the authority to order a recall of a misbranded food. uniform national policy) could have been much greater. FDA estimated that 27% of chain restaurants have already obtained nutrition information to comply with those state and local regulations. The Office of Management (OMB) is to review the regulations promulgated under the law to ensure, among other considerations, that they are consistent with Executive Orders 12866 and 13563. These executive orders require agencies to tailor their regulations to impose the least burden on society and to select approaches that maximize net net benefit to society. Obesity accounts for approximately 1% to 10% of a country's total health care costs. Obese individuals have medical costs that are 30% higher than individuals of normal weight. The true cost and savings from any obesity prevention policy is challenging to determine. In order to determine the effectiveness of an intervention such as menu labeling, researchers and policy makers may review the impact of these policies on individuals' behavior. The factors that contribute to obesity are complex, and researchers cannot isolate the effect of one specific policy relative to other interventions. burden on society and to select approaches that maximize net benefits. Researchers have projected that more than half of Americans will be obese by 2030. Increases in weight are linked to increased risk of type 2 diabetes, cardiovascular diseases, osteoarthritis, and several forms of cancer. obesity leads to decreased productivity, in terms of increased absenteeism as well as what researchers deem "presenteeism" (decreased outputs while at work). The estimated societal cost of obesity has been estimated in multiple studies; however, these estimates are not accurate.  obesity is associated with a number of other health problems, including diabetes and high blood pressure. These health issues disproportionately affect low-income individuals and certain minorities. At the population level, this has been reflected in indicators of decreased physical activity and increased calorie consumption. The federal government has sought to address these health concerns using a variety of approaches, including programs (e.g., the "Let's Move" campaign) and legislation that promote nutrition, healthy weight, and physical activity. The state and local level, lawmakers have also proposed a variety. of approaches. may review the impact of these policies on individuals' behavior and monitor changes in the obesity rate over time. Other factors that may also account for those changes, including the time needed for weight loss and obesity prevention programs to yield an effect, particularly on chronic disease costs, may also play a role in the decision to implement a policy. The government may also take into account other factors such as the cost of health care to the taxpayer, as well as the effect of the policy on the economy. Cost estimates for implementation of the proposed rule vary widely. FDA estimates the initial cost of compliance at $315 million and ongoing annual cost of the provision at $44 million. Industry estimates the cost will exceed $1 billion in the first year. FDA also notes that the potential cost to industry of complying with an increasing number of state and local regulations (in the absence of a uniform national policy) could have been much greater. The eventual public health benefit to society may also be weighed; quantification of this benefit can be challenging. stores have argued that posting calorie and other nutrition information on the Internet should be voluntary. Expecting all entities to comply in the same manner could impose the highest burden. The FDA and industry also differ on the estimated cost burden of providing the required information on menus and menu boards. Some Members of Congress and the restaurant industry have asserted that the FDA has misinterpreted the "reasonable basis" that restaurants and SRFE must have for nutrient disclosures in the proposed rule. The law requires that all nutrient content disclosures must have a reasonable basis. Studies have shown that the number of calories consumed by individuals in the United States has risen concurrent with rising rates of obesity. The number of overall calories consumed has increased from a daily average of 1,875 calories during 1977-1978 to 2,067 calories during 2005-2008. Increasingly, these calories are consumed outside the home. Calorie labeling on menus has been adopted as one approach to making consumers aware of the amount of calories they are consuming. In one study, lunchtime customers at a fast food restaurant underestimated the calorie content of their lunch by 23%. State and local regulations have resulted in variable and sometimes conflicting requirements. The restaurant industry has made it clear that complying with varying local laws and regulations is more burdensome than complying with uniform national standards would be. New research on nutrition labeling of menus and menu boards suggests this approach may be successful in helping consumers lower their overall calorie intake. In one study in New York City, one in six fast food consumers reported using the posted calorie information, and those customers also purchased 106 fewer calories of food than those who didn't use the information. Public health stakeholders have successfully advocated for policies on restaurant nutrition labeling at the state and local level. Businesses that must comply with these laws and regulations have grown supportive of a consistent national policy on restaurant menu labeling requirements. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention have deemed menu labeling a "winnable battle" McDonald's, the largest fast food company in the United States, announced in September that it would begin menu nutrition labeling in the U.S. under the Affordable Care Act (ACA) are required to disclose the number of calories in each item "as usually prepared and offered for sale," and provide a statement on suggested total daily caloric intake "in a clear and conspicuous manner" The law also requires restaurants and SRFE to provide calorie information adjacent to self-service food. According to the proposed rule, calorie information must be provided adjacent to the name of the menu item so that it is clearly associated with that item. Menu boards must also have a prominent, clear, and conspicuous estimates range as high as $1,500 per menu board. The proposed rule would require that covered establishments declare calories on menus and menu boards to the nearest 5-calorie increment up to and including 50 calories. The FDA proposes use of the "80-120 rule" that is currently the standard for prepackaged food. In the proposed rule, the FDA requested comment and consumer research on five different options for disclosing the calorie and nutrient content for standard menu items that come in different flavors, varieties, or combinations. Using an average or a range; using slashes to separate calorie disclosure when there are only two varieties; and either a range or an average. The FDA proposes that the term "primary writing" be interpreted from a customer's vantage point. This would include drive-through menus, take-out and delivery menus, and information posted on the Internet. The nature and use of primary writing may vary depending on the type of restaurant or SRFE. The written nutrition information must include the same nutrition information that is currently required by law on food package labeling. For example, pizza companies have argued against in-store menu and menu board labeling, as 90% of their business is driven by phone and online ordering. Foods with insignificant amounts of more than one-half the required nutrients may use a simplified labeling format. Foods offered by an individual who has grossed less than $500,000 from food sales are exempt from the nutrition labeling requirements. Foods in packaging that is too small to comply with the required information are also exempt. Food with insignificant amount of all the nutrients required to be listed is exempt. Foods with insignificant Amounts of All The Nutrients required to Be Listed are exempt, as well as foods that contain less than half of the required amount of nutrients. to determine due to varying portion sizes. In grocery stores, foods that are "packaged and prepared for immediate consumption" are not always pre-portioned. Pizza companies have argued against "whole pie" labeling, because they feel it is not an accurate representation of what an individual would typically eat in one sitting. In restaurants, SRFE, and other establishments, are served as a whole (e.g., pizza, buckets of fried chicken) Some feel that these should be labeled as per portion, rather than whole item. information adjacent to self-service food (i.e., salad bars, buffet lines, and cafeteria lines) Section 4205 required that nutrient content disclosures have a "reasonable basis," such as nutrient databases, cookbooks, or laboratory analyses. The law specifically required the FDA to promulgate regulations for the following issues: standards for determining and disclosing the nutrient content for standard menu items that come in different flavors, varieties, or combinations, that are listed as a single menu item. Rules for registration of establishments that are not otherwise subject to the law's requirements to voluntarily provide nutrition information. use a simplified labeling format. Prior to passage of the ACA, two other categories of food were also exempt from nutrition labeling requirements. Some have argued that congressional intent in drafting the provision that was eventually enacted was not to broaden the scope of those laws. But as many grocers and other business owners have increased their share of the market in sales of restaurant-type food, one question for policymakers is whether the inclusion of supermarkets and convenience stores is instrumental to the effectiveness of the menu labeling law. Under the ACA, covered establishments are required to provide calorie and nutrition information for "food that is a standard menu item" In anticipation of the final rule, some establishments have moved forward with menu labeling. The proposed definition of restaurant-type food would mean that grab-and-go items, such as sandwiches or meals prepared, would also be regulated. Grocers argue that the FDA's estimate would be accurate if the rule only applied to restaurant food, which would include many self-serve and deli items.