EA-6Bs are included in all aircraft carrier deployments and support the Air Force’s Aerospace Expeditionary Forces. Because of its limited numbers and high rate of use, DOD designated the EA-6B as a “low density, high demand” asset. The Navy is currently taking action to remedy EA- 6B wing fatigue and engine failures. However, because wing fatigue has continued to grow, the Navy has been unable to meet some of its training and exercise requirements. The Navy grounded over 50 engines until they could be overhauled. Premature failure of certain engine bearings caused some engines to fail. The constant deployment of this “low density” EA-6B fleet for contingency operations has contributed to its deterioration and to other maintenance- related problems. Even if problems are remedied, the Navy says it will be unable to meet force structure requirements in 2009, and 2009 and 2010. The Navy took spare parts and personnel from nondeployed squadrons to maintain readiness of squadrons deployed to Kosovo. The Navy plans to replace a total of 67 wing center sections to remedy the problem. The Navy will spend $4.4 million each for such replacements for 17 aircraft in the fiscal year 2002 budget. In 2001, the Navy also began experiencing problems with the EA-6B’s engines. Premature failure of certain parts of the aircraft could lead to groundings, a Navy official says. The U.S. Navy is programming funds for 10 more wing replacements for each year in the Future Years Defense Plan. for closing the gap in capabilities. Specific locations we visited are listed in appendix I. We performed our review from October 2001 through August 2002 in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards. As you know, the head of a federal agency is required under 31 U.S.C. 720 to submit a written statement of actions taken on our recommendations to the Senate Committee on Governmental Affairs and the House Committees on Government Reform not later than 60 days after the date of the report. The agency’s first request for appropriations should be made within 60 days of the release of our report. Committees on Appropriations with the agency’s first request for appropriations made more than 60 days after the date of the report. We are sending copies of this report to the Secretaries of the Army, Air Force, and Navy; the Commandant of the Marine Corps; and interested congressional committees. We will also make copies available to others on request. The report will be available at no charge on the GAO Web site at http://www.gao.gov. If you or your staff have any questions, please contact me on (202)512-4841. Joint Chiefs of Staff, Air Force, Army, Marine Corps, and Navy meet in Washington, D.C. Defense Intelligence Agency also meets in Washington. Defense Secretary Leon Panetta is expected to attend the meeting. The meeting will be followed by a joint statement from the White House and the Joint Chiefs. The Joint Chiefs will also hold a joint meeting with the Defense Department next week to discuss how to improve the intelligence community's ability to detect and thwart threats to U.S. national security. The Navy has been upgrading its EA-6B electronic warfare equipment. The modification program, known as the Improved Capability Program (ICAP) III, provides improved radar locating and jamming capabilities. The Navy expects ICAP III to reach initial operational capability in 2005 and to be installed on allEA-6Bs by 2010. As of January 2002, according to DOD, air defense threats. were about 94 percent complete, and the modification began testing on the first aircraft in November 2001. Congress asked DOD to conduct Airborne Electronic Attack Analysis of Alternatives. The analysis was limited to assessing options for replacing the EA-6B. The Navy and the Air Force have proposed options to replace the aircraft. These options range in estimated 20-year life cycle costs from $20 billion to $80 billion. The services formed a Joint Requirements Coordination and Oversight Group to coordinate operational requirements for airborne electronic attack, review ongoing and planned production programs for the mission, and exchange information among the services. attack needs through the coordination of complementary systems agreed to by the services. The Navy proposed to replace the EA-6B with an electronic attack version of its new F/A-18E/F fighter and attack aircraft. The Air Force proposed adapting the B-52H bomber for standoff suppression by adding jamming pods to it, plus a stand-in suppression capability. The services see these proposals as a coordinated, effective solution to the near- and far-term needs for airborne electronic attack. system or a combination of systems to operate at a distance from enemy targets. A stand-in system that would provide close-in suppression protection for attacking aircraft where the threat is too great for the standoff systems. The analysis established the capabilities of the EA-6B upgraded with ICAP III as the foundation for any future system. It presented the Navy and the Air Force with detailed models of estimated costs and capabilities of 27 mixes of new and/or upgraded aircraft to consider for follow-on electronic attack capabilities. The F-16C/Ds will be modified to carry the HARM Targeting System. The Advanced Target Pod will enable them to deliver precision-guided munitions. Once 31 additional systems are delivered in 2002, the F- 16CJs will have a total inventory of 202 systems, short of the Air Force’s original goal of 1.1 systems per aircraft, or about 240 systems. The Air Force completed the R-6 upgrade on fielded systems in December 2001 and systems subsequently produced will have it. The upgrade provides better and faster targeting information to the missile. The Air Force is procuring 30 additional F-16CJ suppression aircraft to meet force structure requirements for the Air Force’s Aerospace Expeditionary Forces. In all, 219 F- 16CJ aircraft will be available. The Air Force also plans to increase the capability of the latest model F/16C/Ds (block 40) to be used for both attack and suppression missions. To accomplish this, they will be modified to carry the EA-6B jammer pods. in 2003, and plans to fully fund the upgrade in the 2004 budget cycle. The Air Force is also upgrading the capabilities of the EC-130 Compass Call Aircraft, which perform primarily communications jamming missions. The upgrades are intended to improve the aircraft’s jamming capabilities, reliability, and maintainability. TheEC-130 is another “low density, high demand” asset with a total of only 13 operational aircraft, of which 11 are being upgraded. It is a ‘low density’ asset, with only a small number of operational aircraft. Navy projects that the declining EA-6B inventory will be insufficient to meet DOD’s needs beyond 2009. F-16CJ still lacks some of the capabilities of the F-4G, the aircraft it replaced. Air Force and Navy have improvements underway for other systems such as the EC-130 and antiradiation missiles but face funding challenges. U.S. fighter aircraft and helicopters must rely on self-protection equipment to suppress enemy air defenses, but some of this equipment is unreliable. of only 13 operational aircraft, of which 11 are being funded for upgrade. Gaps in the services’ air defense suppression aircraft make it essential that other aircraft have the ability to protect themselves. The services have already identified serious reliability problems with current self-protection systems on U.S. combat aircraft. Most of the current systems use older technology and have logistics support problems due to obsolescence. Also, as we reported last year, the self- protection systems on strike aircraft may have more problems than the services estimate. The Miniature Air Launched Decoy (MALD) is supposed to mimic an aircraft and draw enemy air defenses away from the real aircraft. MALD had been funded by the Air Force for an initial small procurement of 300 decoys, with potential for further procurement. After experiencing technical problems, MALD did not meet user needs, and its procurement cost estimates increased. The Air Force canceled the MALD program after it was found to not meet its needs and cost estimates were increased. For more information on MALD, visit: www.mald.org. overall gaps between suppression needs and capabilities. The Navy took the lead on the joint analysis with participation by all the services. The analysis, completed in December 2001, concluded that the services needed a standoff system or a combination of systems to operate at a stand-off. It was only intended to address the airborne electronic attack aspect of the suppression mission. It did not address the acknowledged problems with aircraft self-protection systems or the technical and funding challenges of other service programs such as the Navy’s ITALD program. F-18C aircraft previously believed to be fully mission capable were subsequently found to have one or more faults in their self-protection systems. Coupled with the problems in the suppression aircraft, these shortcomings could create survivability problems for the aircraft should they encounter significant enemy air defense capabilities in some future conflict. The services have some programs underway to improve self- protection capabilities such as the joint Navy and Air Force Integrated Defensive Electronic Countermeasures (IDECM) system and the Precision Location and Identification (PLAID) system. have more problems than the services estimate. For example, 41 of 44 F-15C aircraft and 10 of 10 F-18C aircraft previously believed to be fully mission capable were not. The faults ranged from the identification of parts needing to be replaced inside the electronic combat systems, to the wiring, antennas, and control units that connect the systems to the aircraft. The Joint Service Electronic Combat System Tester was developed by the U.S. Air Force and the European Air Force in the 1990s. its procurement cost estimates increased. The Air Force canceled the procurement and restructured MALD to address deficiencies highlighted in the demonstration. The Navy has been developing its own decoy, the Improved Tactical Air Launched Decoy (ITALD), but it has procured only part of its inventory objective. Despite recurring congressional increases for the past several fiscal years, the Navy has not submitted budget requests for ITALDs or procured units to complete the inventory objective because of competing priorities. Also the Navy is upgrading the HARM missile used to attack shipborne and ground-based radars. The first phase of the upgrade improves missile accuracy by incorporating global positioning and inertial navigation systems into the missile. A second upgrade, the Advanced Anti-Radiation Guided Missile, will add millimeter wave capability to allow the missile to target radars that have stopped emitting.and ground-based radars. DOD has acknowledged the gap in U.S. air defense suppression capabilities for some time and has conducted several studies to identify solutions, but it has had little success in closing the gap.  suppression aircraft such as EA-6B and the now-retired EF-111 and F-4G played a vital role in protecting other U.S. aircraft from radar-guided missile systems. Strike aircraft were normally not permitted to conduct air operations unless protected by these suppression aircraft. According to DOD, countries have sought to make their air defenses more resistant to suppression. These efforts include increasing the mobility of their surface-to-air missiles and radar equipment, connecting radars together into integrated air defense systems. EA-6Bs and EC-130s saw combat in Operation Enduring Freedom in Afghanistan. When the Air Force retired the EF-111 without a replacement, the EA-6B became DOD’s primary airborne radar jammer. High demand for the aircraft has exacerbated current wing and engine problems. Since our January 2001 report, the services have had some success in improving their suppression capabilities, but they have not reached a level needed to counter future threats, the authors say..to reduce risk from infrared missile threats. The Institute for Defense Analyses studied problems in acquiring electronic warfare systems. The Institute found several causes for the problems, including uncertainties in characterizing rapidly changing threats and systems requirements. While DOD has not established a coordinating entity to provide leadership for the suppression mission, it has to address the gaps that need to be filled in the enemy air defense suppression mission. The strategy should provide the means to identify and prioritize promising technologies, determine the funding, time frames, and responsibilities needed to develop and acquire systems. DOD has recognized a gap exists in suppression capabilities but has made little progress in closing it. DOD relies on individual service programs to fill the void, but these programs have not historically received a high priority, resulting in the now existing capability gap. DOD also stated that we were overly critical in our characterization of individual defense suppression systems and failed to acknowledge its full range of capabilities to suppress air defenses. We recognize that the services have substantial capabilities but remain concerned because there are insufficient aircraft to gap. a high priority, resulting in the now existing capability gap. We continue to believe that a formal coordinating entity needs to be established to bring the services together to develop an integrated, cost-effective strategy. A strategy is needed to identify mission objectives and guide efforts to develop effective and integrated solutions for improving suppression capabilities. We believe that creation of a comprehensive strategy and effective coordinating entity would strengthen DOD’s ability to compete for funding and address the gap. In addition, Congress intervened with guidance and increases to services’ budget requests for defense suppression to ensure that DOD addresses the capabilities gap. entity to provide leadership for the suppression mission, it has recognized the need for such entities in other cross-service initiatives. In October 2001, the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology and Logistics established a joint unmanned aerial vehicles planning task force. The task force will develop and coordinate road maps, recommend priorities for development and procurement efforts, and prepare implementing guidance to the services on common programs and functions. The air defense suppression mission continues to be essential for maintaining air superiority. Over the past several years, however, the quantity of UAVs has declined. Radar is the primary means used by enemy forces to detect, track, and target U.S. aircraft with missiles and guns. Aircraft focus on trying to neutralize, degrade, or destroy the enemy’s air defense radar equipment. Since the end of Desert Storm in 1991, suppression aircraft have been continuously deployed to protect fighter aircraft maintaining the no-fly zones over Iraq. More recently, these planes have been used to protect aircraft maintaining no- fly zones over Syria and Afghanistan. In 1999, during Operation Allied Force in Yugoslavia and Kosovo, these aircraft were extremely important for protecting strike aircraft from enemy radar-guided missiles. These aircraft were unable to destroy their integrated air defense system because Yugoslav forces often engaged in elaborate efforts to protect their air defense assets. Nevertheless, in two separate incidents, Yugoslav forces managed to shoot down an F-117 stealth fighter and a F-16CG. In addition to the two losses, the inability of the United States to counter Yugoslav air defenses that included radar and infrared guided missiles made it necessary for U.S. forces to fly thousands of dedicated suppression missions.