Piracy threatens tankers transiting one of the world’s busiest shipping lanes near key energy corridors and the route through the Suez Canal. The vast areas at risk for piracy off the Horn of Africa, combined with the small number of military ships available for patrolling them, make protecting energy tankers difficult. From January through June 2011, 100 tankers were attacked, an increase of 37 percent compared to tankers attacked from January to June 2010. In addition, tankers are fetching increasing ransom demands from Somali pirates. Media reports indicate a steady increase in ransoms for tankers. The U.S. Maritime Administration and the Coast Guard have issued guidance for commercial vessels to stay 200 miles away from the Somali coast. pirates have adapted and increased their capability to attack and hijack vessels to more than 1,000 miles from Somalia using boats and helicopters. The pirates are based in the Somali port city of Kismayo, about 1,500 miles from the coast of Somalia, according to reports. The Outer Continental Shelf (OCS) contains an estimated 85 million barrels of oil. The Louisiana Offshore Oil Port (LOOP) is responsible for transporting about 10 percent of imported oil. Unlike OCS facilities, deepwater ports enable tankers to offload oil or liquefied natural gas for transport to land by underwater pipelines. In 2007, we assessed Coast Guard and FBI efforts to ensure the security of energy tankers and respond to terrorist incidents involving energy Tankers. The Coast Guard seeks to mitigate many kinds of security challenges in the maritime environment. About 49 percent of the nation’s crude oil supply was transported by tanker into the United States in 2009. The remaining oil and natural gas used in the U.S. comes from Canada by pipeline or is produced from domestic sources in areas such as offshore facilities in the Gulf of Mexico. The United States’ economy and security are heavily dependent on oil, natural gas, and other energy commodities, the authors say. The authors say the government needs to do more to ensure the safety and security of the country. Energy tankers face risks from various types of attack, FBI says. Coast Guard has issued guidelines for U.S. vessels operating in high-risk waters. Offshore energy infrastructure may face security risks because it is many miles away from Coast Guard. FBI shares responsibility with the Coast Guard for preventing and responding to terrorist incidents in the maritime environment, including incidents involving energy tankers. The FBI has recently completed work involving Coast Guard efforts to assess security on offshore energy infrastructure, the agency says. tankers face from terrorist attacks and attacks from other criminals, such as pirates. Terrorists have attempted and in some cases carried out attacks on energy tankers since September 11, 2001. To date, these attacks have included attempts to damage tankers or their related infrastructure at overseas ports. In 2002, terrorists conducted a suicide boat attack against the French supertanker Limburg off the coast of Yemen. In 2010, an incident involving another super tanker, the M/V M. Star, in the Strait of Hormuz is suspected to have been a terrorist attack. Three main places in which tankers may be at risk of an attack: foreign ports; in transit, especially at narrow channels, or chokepoints; and at U.S. ports. For example, foreign ports, where commodities are loaded onto tankers, may vary in their levels of security. Tankers remain at risk upon arrival in the United States because of the inherent risks to port facilities, the authors say. In addition, while tankers are in transit,. they face risks because they travel on direct routes that are known in advance. Energy tankers often depart from foreign ports and are registered in countries other than the United States. The U.S. has limited authority to oversee the security of such vessels. Offshore energy infrastructure also presents its own set of security challenges because some of this infrastructure is located many miles from shore. The FBI shares responsibility with the energy tankers and respond to terrorist incidents involving tankers.. The Coast Guard visits foreign exporting ports to assess the effectiveness of the anti-terrorism measures in place. The Houston Ship Channel Security District was established to increase preparedness and response capabilities. There are two main types of offshore energy infrastructure that the Coast Guard oversees for security. The first type are facilities that operate on the OCS. The second type are deepwater ports, which are fixed or floating manmade structures used or intended for use as a port or terminal for the transportation, storage, or handling of oil or natural gas. If a facility of this type meets or exceeds any one of three thresholds for production or personnel, it is subject to 33 C.F.R. part 106 security requirements. MSRAM assessments for all 50 of the OCS facilities that are subject to federal security requirements in 2011. Coast Guard officials generally agreed with our finding and they have since incorporated these 12 facilities into MSRAM and completed the required risk assessments. While the Coast Guard plans to updaterequired risk assessments, the current set of policies and procedures do not call for an updated list of OCS. facilities to be provided to MSRAM analysts to assess the security risks to such facilities annually. Improvements in security could help to prevent a terrorist attack against this infrastructure, such as those resulting from the Deepwater Horizon incident. and other measures to better secure OCS facilities and deepwater ports. We will continue to work with the Coast Guard to develop solutions to ensure that inspections of OCS facility are completed as required. I would be happy to respond to any questions you may have. The testimony was written by Christopher Conrad, Assistant Director; Neil Asaba, Analyst-in-Charge; Alana Finley; Christine Kehr; Colleen McEnearney; Erin O’Brien; Jodie Sandel; and Suzanne Wren. The Coast Guard uses a tool called the Maritime Security Risk Analysis Model. The tool assesses security risks to about 28,000 key infrastructure in and around the nation’s ports and waterways. The Coast Guard has coordinated efforts with the intelligence community and key stakeholders. Based on the assessments of threats, vulnerabilities, and consequences, MSRAM produces a risk index number for each OCS facility and deepwater port. According to Coast Guard officials, OCS facilities are not considered to be high-risk targets. Coast Guard may recommend conducting more research on the vulnerability to and consequences of attack scenarios. The Coast Guard initiated this study in the fall of 2010 after the Deepwater Horizon incident. Gaining a fuller understanding of the security risks associated with MODUs could improve the quality of program decisions made by Coast Guard managers on whether actions may be needed to ensure the security of this type of facility. According to Coast Guard’s quality of the output from MSRAM, MSRAM does not assess systemic or network risks because it is not designed to do so. The Coast Guard does not have data on the ability of an OCS facility to withstand an attack. The Coast Guard has limited not be used where the consequences of a terrorist attack are mainly interruption to land or water transportation. Coast Guard officials added that they are working with DHS’s Office of Risk Management and Analysis in studying ways to improve how it assesses secondary economic impacts. They expect to issue its report in the fall of 2011. and that these challenges are faced by others in the homeland security community involved in conducting risk assessments. risk to a facility. The Coast Guard has limited data for assessing secondary economic impacts from an attack on OCS facilities or deepwater ports. Coast Guard analysts stated that gathering these data is a challenge because there are few models or guidance available for doing so. During the course of our review, the Coast Guard started using a tool, called “IMPLAN,” that helps inform judgments of secondary economic impact. The tool, however, has limits in that it should not be used where the consequences of a terrorist attack are unclear. U.S. Maritime Security: Updating U.S.-led Counterpiracy Action Plan Gains Urgency as Piracy Escalates off the Horn of Africa. Homeland Security Review: 2010 Reports Addressed Many Required Elements, but Budget Planning Not Yet Completed. Maritime security: Federal Efforts Needed to Address Challenges in Preventing and Responding to Terrorist Attacks on Energy Commodity Tankers. Homeland security: DHS Progress and Challenges in Key Areas of Port Security. DHS progress and challenges in Key areas of Port security. were directed to the Secretary of Homeland Security and the Attorney General. The departments concurred or partially concurred with all of the recommendations. The Coast Guard and the FBI have made progress in implementing these recommendations. Two have been implemented, and the Coast Guard is in the process of implementing a third. But actions have not yet been taken to address the remaining two recommendations. See table 2 for a summary of our findings, recommendations and the current status of agency efforts to implement our recommendations. For confidential support call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org for details. of agency efforts to implement our recommendations. DHS is in the process of revising this document and did not have further information regarding whether or how the spill and terrorism response annexes may be revised. Further, the FBI has not taken independent action to implement this recommendation, in part because it did not concur with the need to develop a separate operational plan. In the event of a terrorist attack, the Coast Guard and the FBI will work together to develop an operational plan that integrates the different spill and terror sections of the National Response Framework. goal of improving security and safety for facilities, employees, and communities surrounding the Houston Ship Channel. The security district has installed technology, such as night vision and motion-activated detection equipment, and conducts patrols on land and in the water. We also reported on challenges that remained in (1) making federal agencies’ protective actions more effective and (2) implementing plans for a response to an attack, if a terrorist attack were to succeed despite the protective measures in place. We made five recommendations in our 2007 report, three of which were directed to the Secretary of Homeland Security. In 2009 DHS issued an updated version of the 2006 National Infrastructure Protection Plan which describes the department’s strategic approach to infrastructure protection. The plan placed an increased emphasis on risk management and it centered attention on going beyond assessments of individual assets by extending the scope of risk assessments to systems or networks. The Coast Guard has taken a number of actions assess systemic or network risks because, according to Coast Guard officials, these types of assessments are beyond the intended use of MSRAM. Examining how such vulnerabilities create strategic opportunities for intelligent adversaries with intelligent adversaries. collectively identified and assessed threat scenarios as well as the potential consequences and vulnerabilities of each scenario. Based on this assessment, stakeholders identified and agreed to carry out security measures to mitigate the risks, such as installing camera systems and increasing radar coverage. The Coast Guard recognizes these challenges and generally has actions underway to study or address them. Coast Guard officials noted that some of these challenges are not unique to the Coast Guard’s risk assessment model and that they are faced by others in the military. The Coast Guard assesses security risks as part of its responsibilities for ensuring the security of OCS facilities and deepwater ports. Performance measures would allow DHS to set priorities for funding on the basis of reducing overall risk, thereby helping ports obtain resources necessary to respond. The Coast Guard has taken steps to implement prior GAO recommendations to enhance energy tanker security, and it continues to work towards implementing the three outstanding recommendations. The threat of terrorism against energy tankers and offshore energy infrastructure highlights the importance of the Coast Guard having policies and procedures in place. need to develop a separate operational plan. In the event of a successful attack on an energy tanker, ports would need to provide an effective, integrated response. Clearly defined and understood roles and responsibilities for all essential stakeholders are needed to ensure an effective response, the authors say. DHS has begun to revise its grant programs, but it is still too early to talk about emergency response capabilities, they say. The authors say DHS should develop performance measures for emergency response capability. They say the agency should also look at the role of ports in the emergency response effort. Mobile offshore drilling units (MODUs) do not generally pose a risk of a terrorist attack. There is a brief period of time when a drilling unit strikes a well, but the well has yet to be sealed prior to connecting it to a production facility. The Deepwater Horizon was in this stage when it resulted in such a large oil spill. Such risks could involve the reliability of blowout preventer valves—specialized valves that prevent a well from spewing oil in the case of a blowout. How the Coast Guard assesses offshore infrastructure within the broader set of networks is important. For example, knowing what damage a malicious adversary could achieve by exploiting weaknesses in an oil-distribution network offers opportunities for improving the resiliency of the network within a given budget. The report noted that “complex systems almost always fail in complex ways” and cautioned that attempting to identify a single cause for the Deepwater Horizon incident would provide a dangerously incomplete picture of what happened. How such vulnerabilities create strategic opportunities for intelligent adversaries with malevolent intent is central to this understanding. could change each year. For example, some facilities may drop below the production or personnel thresholds described earlier in this statement, thereby falling outside the scope of 33 C.F.R. part 106. Standards for Internal Control in the Federal Government state that policies and procedures enforce management directives and help ensure that actions are taken to address risks. In addition, internal control standards state that such control activities are an integral part of an entity’s planning, implementing, reviewing, and accountability for stewardship of government resources. is not subject to copyright protection in the United States. The published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission from GAO. However, because this work may contain copyrighted images or other material, permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately. For confidential support, call the Samaritans on 08457 90 90 90, visit a local Samaritans branch or see www.samaritans.org. For support in the U.S., call the National Suicide Prevention Line on 1-800-273-8255.