In 2012, the EU 27 produced more than the United States—16.2 million vehicles compared to 10.3 million. The remainder of EU production was exported, much of it to the U.S. market. Unlike some consumer goods, such as computers and apparel, most vehicles are sold in the region where they are produced. Germany is by far the largest auto producer within the EU (see Figure 2 ). The five top countries—Germany, Spain, France, United Kingdom and Czech Republic—manufacture more than 76% of all vehicles produced in the EU. U.S. sales, and about 17% of sales in the EU. In some cases, a vehicle that is entirely legal in one country may not be sold in another due to differing fuel efficiency, safety, and emissions standards. For example, Ford Motor Company's ECOnetic high-efficiency diesel engine, made in Great Britain, gets up to 71 miles per gallon (mpg) of fuel. This engine is not sold in North America because it does not comply with U.S and Canadian emissions standards, according to Ford. Ford has determined that expanding its Mexican engine plant to make a redesigned version of the ECOnetic for North America would cost $350 million. Increasingly, auto manufacturers and their parts suppliers have sought to organize their production on a global basis. The German automaker BMW, as an example, produces sport utility vehicles for markets worldwide from a plant in South Carolina. Greater commonality in regulation would make it easier for automakers and parts makers to coordinate production across major markets. This is consistent with individual automakers. coordinate production across major markets. Automakers are developing global vehicle platforms that will reduce the number of models sold around the world. For example, the new Jeep Cherokee and Dodge Dart are based on Fiat's Compact Wide platform. The Ford Focus was developed in Europe but is built with similar components in the United States, China, Germany, Russia, and Thailand and sold in 130 countries. Joining forces to meet tightening world emission standards is one of the key ways to reduce carbon emissions in the future. Many countries, including the United States, have adopted new standards that will be costly for manufacturers to meet. Many automakers believe that offering diesels will be necessary to meet higher U.S. fuel efficiency and greenhouse gas emissions standards. Having similar standards for diesel engines in the two regions could reduce design and manufacturing costs. BMW and Toyota have agreed to jointly develop fuel cell technology. The processes by which the U States and the EU establish vehicle safety, fuel efficiency, and emission standards have evolved in different ways. steps, an industry alliance has contended, would "increase trade, lower costs, create jobs and improve the international competitiveness of the industry" The alliance estimates that current non-tariff barriers on vehicles are equivalent to a 26% tariff on vehicle imports. Safety, fuel efficiency, and emissions standards differ between the two regions (see Table 1 ), due to historical historical differences. It projects that elimination of tariffs and just 10% of non-Tariff barriers could raise U.S. vehicle and parts exports to the EU by over 200%. The United States and the EU have different standards even for an item as simple as a seat belt. Some of these differences may reflect past efforts to protect domestic vehicle industries against foreign competition. Others may result from different legal traditions or divergent views as to the best way of achieving goals such as cleaner air and reduced oil consumption. Past auto agreements have been effective in leading to a more globalized auto industry. The U.S. and EU have a long history of working together on auto issues. U.S. and European automakers have identified occupant crash protection, side impact protection, child restraint systems as priorities for selective mutual recognition. A fourth option would be to forge an agreement on emerging regulations, such as those dealing with electric and fuel cell vehicles. Under this approach, the United States and the EU would commit to jointly develop standards covering new issues or technologies. The pending free trade agreement between the EU and Canada may influence the direction of TTIP.. Congress could play an important role if a TTIP agreement contains significant provisions related to auto safety, emissions and fuel economy regulations. The formal TTIP negotiations began in July 2013. Motor vehicle safety and emissions standards are areas where the United States and the EU could break new ground. The 1965 motor vehicle agreement between the U.S. and Canada and the 1994 North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) removed barriers to trade and cross-border trade in autos. TTIP represents another effort to extend these regional templates to encompass a greater share of trade and investment. The Trans-Pacific Partnership, a separate negotiation involving the United states and 11 other Pacific Rim countries, could have a similar effect. In November 2011, President Obama and leaders of the European Union (EU) named a High Level Working Group on Jobs and Growth to recommend steps to broaden transatlantic economic ties. In its final report, issued in February 2013, the working group called for a new bilateral agreement to govern transatlantic trade and investment. Such an agreement, the group urged, should provide for "the promotion of more compatible approaches to current and future regulation and standard-setting" One month later, Obama notified Congress that the United States would enter into negotiations. About 10% of NHTSA and EPA standards are based on work SAE has already done. Many address manufacturing processes, not auto safety or emissions. IEC standards related to motor vehicles concern charging system architecture, lithium batteries, and other aspects of electric vehicles. Various other private-sector advocacy groups are engaged in identifying and publicizing new vehicle standards. In the United States, in the past five years, about 2,000 motor vehicle standards have been issued or updated by the U.S. government. In Europe, a system of governmental control over autos was more prevalent, first in each country and later through the EU. EU directives passed by the European Parliament have the force of regulations. In contrast to the U.S. system of self-certification, the comparable EU vehicle system is based on government regulatory approval in advance of manufacturing. The European vehicle regulatory regime now includes both EU directives, which must be implemented by all member states, and standards promulgated promote a single European market in motor vehicles. The rule-making process is already lengthy, and the need for international coordination could make it even longer. This raises the prospect that technologies that could reduce accidents may be delayed in reaching the market. The EU acknowledges that if vehicle standards become international, there could be less room for legislative scrutiny and for involvement by regional and national interest groups. U.S. consumer advocacy groups have raised similar concerns, writing U.N. and EU leaders in July 2013 that vehicle standards should be made international. In 1995, President Clinton signed an action plan which sought to move the United States and Europe toward regulatory conformity. This initiative, resulting in the creation of the World Forum for Harmonization of Vehicle Regulations, has resulted in agreement on only 13 global technical regulations to date. Simultaneously, there has been a transatlantic dialogue on autos since the mid-1990s through the U.S.-EU High-Level Regulatory Cooperation Forum. A similar bilateral regulatory initiative has been under way since 2011 with Canada. European, U.S. and Japanese auto industry groups sought common regulatory ground in 1996. They proposed that the United States, the EU, Japan, and UNECE harmonize regulation of five vehicle components, including windshield wipers, defoggers, and seat belt assemblies. The regulatory bodies did not agree to any changes, however, because the data-driven review process made it difficult to prove functional equivalency of even a standard component such as a seat belt. An alternative approach was developed in the 1998 UN agreement on global technical regulations. There are different ways in which the United States and the EU could address convergence of automotive regulations under TTIP. Harmonization need not mean having identical rules in both regions. A car certified as compliant with U.S. safety, emission, and fuel efficiency standards would be accepted as compliant in the EU, and vice versa. This approach is how the EU certification process works. It would identify certain major standards for which TTIP could provide mutual recognition, rather than providing mutual recognition of all standards. Since 1970, the EU has used the Whole Vehicle Type Approval system. The EU agreed in 2007 that the UNECE regulations would be incorporated into the EU type-approval procedure. Once an EU member state approves a new vehicle, it can be marketed throughout the EU. Some European automakers "preferred to limit the extension of standards to those that would create obstacles to the invasion of foreign vehicles into their national markets," the European Commission said in a statement on Monday. The European Commission's Directorate of Enterprise and Industry leads legislative work at the EU level. 1958 agreement on vehicle construction and two related agreements which were adopted by some European countries to promote EU-wide integration of vehicle design, construction and safety. UNECE standards deal with vehicle safety, environmental protection, fuel efficiency, and anti-theft performance. Signatories to the 1958 U.N. agreement commit to mutual recognition of approvals for vehicle components, so that a component approved for use in one signatory country will be automatically approved in all others. WP.29's voting members are limited to government representatives, but automakers, trade associations, and other nongovernmental organizations also proper authority. The United States did not sign the 1958 UNECE agreement because it would require mutual recognition of standards generated outside the United States. After U.S. self-certification began in 1967, the UNecE approach was seen as incompatible with the U.N. process. The United States signed a 1998 UNECe agreement which establishes global technical regulations (GTRs) The World Forum for Harmonization of Vehicle Regulations promulgates regulations affecting vehicle safety, environmental protection, energy efficiency, and anti-theft performance. In 1952, the United Nations established the Working Party on the Construction of Vehicles. The objective of WP.29 is to "initiate and pursue actions aimed at the worldwide harmonization or development of technical regulations for vehicles"WP.29 administers a 1958 agreement on vehicle construction and two related agreements which must be implemented by all member states. The standards are promulgated through a United Nations (UN) organization, which may be implemented at the discretion of a national government. WP. 29 is a subsidiary body of the Inland Transport Committee of the UN Economic Commission for Europe. frequencies of starts and stops—all factors which significantly affect the data returned by the tests. The U.S. standard regulates all the GHG emissions from the vehicle (e.g., CO 2 , NO x , CH 4 ) in terms of CO 2 -equivalents; the EU regulates only carbon dioxide emissions. In general the EU GHG standards—and by extension, fuel economy standards—return a greater sales-based and fleet-wide emission reduction than those in the United States. The EU does not issue fuel economy standards similar to the U.S. CAFE standards. Instead, it sets standards for GHG emissions in terms of the mass of CO 2 , measured in grams, emitted from a vehicle's tailpipe per kilometer driven (g/km) The first carbon dioxide emission targets for new passenger cars in Europe were set in 1998-99 through voluntary agreements between the European Commission and the automotive industry. The regulation established a fleet-average CO 2 emission target of 130 g/km by 2015 and defined a long-term target of 95 g /km by 2020. The EU does not set fuel economy standards for vehicles directly in terms of vehicles with CO 2 emissions below 50 g/km. Certain flexibilities are available for manufacturers, including credits for technology innovations, pooling between manufacturers, and exemptions for low-volume manufacturers. Emission limits are set according to the mass of vehicle using a fleet-average limit value curve. The United States regulates the fuel efficiency of each manufacturer's new-vehicle fleet through the CAFE fuel efficiency standards. It separately imposes standards for GHG emissions from new mobile sources. CAFE and GHG emission certification is typically based on fuel economy and emission data provided by vehicle manufacturers. The regulation also includes a system of averaging, banking, and trading (ABT) of credits, based on a manufacturer's fleet average CO 2 performance. Credit trading is allowed among all vehicles a manufacturer produces, both cars and light trucks, as well as between companies. Further program flexibilities include Air Conditioning Improvement Credits, Advanced Technology Credits, Off-Cycle Innovative Technology Credits and Flex-fuel and Alternative Fuel Vehicle Credits. The combined standards call for fleet-average passenger car and light truck GHG emissions of no more than 163 grams per mile by 2025. This translates to average fuel economy of 54.5 mpg. The standards are based on CO 2 emissions-footprint curves, where each vehicle has a different CO 2 compliance target depending on its "footprint" value. No specific vehicle must meet a specific target, but a manufacturer's fleet average must be below the sales-weighted average of the targets. Current EPA emissions standards for vehicles (referred to as "Tier 2" requirements) regulate CO, NO x , PM, and HC emissions. Under the Tier 2 regulation, the same emission standards apply to all vehicle weight categories. Anyone wishing to sell an engine or vehicle within the United States must demonstrate compliance with the CAA and all applicable EPA regulations. EPA announced proposed Tier 3 standards on March 29, 2013. In addition to exhaust emission standards, U.S. regulations address many other emission-related issues. The evolution of EU exhaust emission standards for light-duty, gasoline- and diesel-fueled vehicles is traced in Table A-2 of the Appendix. Surveillance testing, mandatory emissions system warranties, recall campaigns, and other features of U.S. emissions regulation are not incorporated in the European regulatory structure. A key difference between the EU and the United States is the test procedure, in particular the drive cycle that a car has to go through on a roller bench while the exhaust gas is being collected and analyzed. The most common testing procedure used by EPA is the Federal Test Procedure, as mandated by the Energy Tax Act of 1978. Tests are based on the Urban Dynamometer Driving Schedule to reflect typical driving patterns. Currently, EPA uses a three-tiered compliance strategy for light-duty vehicles: (1) pre-production evaluation to certify vehicles prior to sale; (2) a production evaluation on the vehicles; and (3) a post-production test on the cars that will be sold. uses the Federal Test Procedure (FTP) Differences between the two include distance, duration, and vehicle speed. Some observers have noted that the European emission standards have historically lagged behind the U.S. standards. This lag may be attributed to the complex, consensus-based approach to standard setting originally used by UNECE and by the difficulty of obtaining agreement among so many individual countries. With the recent shift in standards, European emissions standards are now morestringent than in the past.  Directive 70/220/EEC covered CO, NO x , PM, and HC emissions from gasoline-fueled light-duty vehicles. Council of Ministers of the European Council adopted the Consolidated Emissions Directive (commonly referred to as "Euro 1") under which exhaust emission standards for all passenger cars, including diesels, were certified. Euro 6 standards are scheduled to be implemented in September 2014 (strengthening NO x standards for diesel vehicles) The 2012 CAFE and GHG vehicle standards call for combined passenger car and light truck greenhouse emissions. Vehicle emissions standards established by the EU and the United States are not directly comparable because of the differences in the testing procedures and approval processes. Both the European and the U.S. systems of compliance are based on a version of "type approval" However, in the EU, emission standards only apply when the vehicle is produced (conformity of production) Once the vehicle leaves the factory and enters service, the manufacturer has no liability for its continued compliance with the standards. In June 1991, the Council of Ministers of the European Council adopted the Consolidated Emission Standards. country retained authority to adjust the UNECE standards as it saw fit. The member states signed the Single European Act (SEA) in 1985 with a goal of unifying the European market by 1992. Under the SEA, auto emissions regulations were harmonized across Europe in 1987. Initially, the harmonized standards were less strict than US standards. Similar to the 1970 U.S. Clean Air Act proviso for California, the SEA allows member states to enact measures more stringent than those enacted by the EU. Between 1962 and 1964, Congress passed three safety bills into law, including a seat belt regulation. The most significant change in U.S. vehicle safety regulation came with the National Traffic and Motor Vehicle Safety Act of 1966. Senator Abraham Ribicoff, one of the advocates of the new legislation, said "this problem is so vast that the Federal Government must have a role" The legislation was passed unanimously by both houses of Congress and signed by President Johnson. It mandated that each state put in place a highway safety. automobile, U.S. vehicles were lightly regulated by a combination of state and private sector standards. While one industry magazine called for national motor vehicle standards as early as 1902, it did so mainly to reassure would-be buyers of the structural integrity these new, little-understood machines. Regulating either driver conduct or vehicle design at the national level did not conform to existing political ideas about the appropriate federal division of responsibilities or to contemporary jurisprudential understandings of the federal government's constitutional power to regulate interstate commerce. The only useful and politically acceptable action Congress might take was to help the states and localities construct more and better roads. The Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) became the primary source of vehicle safety and emission rules for many decades. State governments often used SAE recommendations to enact requirements for vehicle equipment, such as dual brakes, headlamps, and windshield wipers. The first step toward a nationwide system of vehicle regulation came in 1926, when a voluntary Uniform Vehicle Code was drafted to regulate interstate commerce. 1926, when a voluntary Uniform Vehicle Code was drafted to replace the many different state rules. Among other things, the code specified the types of lighting, reflectors, brakes, mirrors, and tires that cars should have. By 1946, 30 of the then 48 states (plus the District of Columbia) had adopted the Uniform Vehicle code. With the start of the Interstate Highway system in the 1950s, greater automobile travel, and rising highway deaths, the interest in vehicle safety grew. Between 1962 and 1962, 13 states implemented portions of the code; only six had taken no action. responsibly and in such a way as to achieve a substantial improvement in the safety characteristics of vehicles. The law also makes manufacturers responsible for testing of vehicles and liable for recalls and penalties if they are later found not to meet NHTSA's standards. After a new model is in the market, NHTsa buys vehicles from dealers and tests them at its own facilities to determine whether they comply with current standards. The agency neither approves motor vehicles or parts as complying with its standards nor collects information from manufacturers as to compliance. The National Traffic and Motor Vehicle Safety Act of 1966 directed the Secretary of Commerce to issue safety standards for all motor vehicles. A National Traffic Safety Agency was established to carry out the provisions; it was renamed the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) in 1970. Senator Warren Magnuson, chairman of the Commerce Committee, argued that Congress was implementing a limited type of regulation. The committee is not empowering the Secretary to take over the design and manufacturing functions of private industry, he said. Programs to address air pollution in the United States originated in the first half of the twentieth century and were accelerated after World War II. Independent analysis in the mid-1950s identified the automobile as a key source of ground-level ozone. Research has since demonstrated that cars and other mobile sources are responsible for a variety of other air pollutants, including carbon monoxide (CO), hydrocarbons (HC), nitrogen oxides (NO x), particulate matter (PM) and greenhouse gases (GHG) The United States first issued vehicle fuel economy standards in response to the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) oil embargo of 1973. From 1975 to 1988, the average fuel economy of new automobiles increased 81%, from 15.8 to 28.6 mpg. Under the Energy Independence and Security Act of 2007 (EISA) Congress granted NHTSA broader authority to establish and modify CAFE standards. In 2009, the Obama Administration, some state governments, and the federal government agreed to raise the standards to at least 35 mpg by 2020. The federal government first addressed air pollution in 1955 in the Federal Air Pollution Control Act. In 1959, California became the first state to address pollution from cars. Congress's provision for national emissions standards was included in the 1965 Motor Vehicle Air Pollutions Control Act of 1965. This act engaged the federal government for the first time in the actual regulation of vehicle emissions. The act adopted both the California crankcase and tailpipe emissions standards for 1968 model-year vehicles. For example, California required the control of crankcase emissions in 1961and set the first HC and CO emissions regulations in 1964. Congress strengthened federal authority in 1967 by explicitly preempting states from adopting or enforcing new motor vehicle emission standards. This preemption provision (with California as the sole exemption) remains in effect today as Section 209(a) of the Clean Air Act (CAA) At present, the federal government manages vehicle emissions controls, although the state of California remains a major force in shaping national legislation and regulations. Emission standards for engines and vehicles, including emission standards for greenhouse gases, are currently established by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. California is the only state vested by the CAA with the authority to develop its own emission regulations. The evolution of U.S. emission standards for light-duty, gasoline-fueled vehicles is traced in Table A-1 of the Appendix. If the TTIP effort to obtain mutual recognition or harmonization affects agencies' authority or changes the ways in which automotive regulations are developed and implemented, Congress may well be asked to modify the underlying statutes that govern motor vehicle safety, emissions, and fuel efficiency. agreement among so many individual countries. In the United States, establishing fuel economy standards is a function of direct statutory authority from Congress. A comparison of current emissions standards for selected pollutants is shown in Figure 3. For a more detailed survey of the standards in each region, see the Appendix . In the U.S., NHTSA administering the congressionally established standards. The European Commission has been able to adopt more stringent emission standards due to the shift to decision procedures requiring less-than-unanimous agreement.